Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
4P
ADPCG
AGRITEX
AIMS,
AMA
APG
ARDA
AWPB
BDS
CAADP
CC
CLPE
CMT
COI
COMESA
COSOP
CSA
DDF
DOI
DSF
ECSMP
EHRF
EIA
EIRR
EMA
EMP
ENPV
ENRM
EOI
ERR
ESIA
ESMS
FM
FMFCL
FPIC
GAP
GALS
GCF
GDP
GEF
GEWE
GHG
GNI
GOZ
GVC
HDC
HDI
Public-Private-Producer Partnerships
Agricultural Development Partners Coordinating Group
Agricultural Technical Extension Services
Agricultural Information Management System
Agricultural Marketing Authority
Agriculture Producer Group
Agricultural Rural Development Authority
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Business Development Services
Comprehensive Africa Development Programme
Climate Change
Country-Level Policy Engagement
Country Management Team
Core Indicators
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
Climate Smart Agriculture
District Development Fund
Department of Irrigation
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
Environmental, Climate and Social Management Plan
Export Horticultural Revolving Fund
Environmental Impact Assessment
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Environmental Management Authority
Environmental Management Plan
Economic Net Present Value
Environmental Natural Resources Management
Expression of Interest
Economic  Rate of Return
Environment and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management System
Financial Management
Financial Management and Financial Control Arrangements Letter
Free Prior and Informed Consent
Good Agronomic Practices
Gender Action Learning System
Green Climate Fund
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Fund
Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
Greenhouse Gas
Gross National Income
Government of Zimbabwe
Global Value Chains
Horticultural Development Council
Human Development Index
HEEP
HGRP,
ICB
IFAD
IFR
ILO
IMF
IP
IPRM
IPSAS
ISO,
JICA
JMU
KM
MCCRA
METH
MFI
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Programme
Horticultural Growth and Recovery Plan
International Competitive Bidding
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Interim Finance Report
International Labour Organisation
International Monetary Fund
Indigenous People
Integrated Project Risk Matrix
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
International Organisation for Standardisation
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Joint Management Unit
Knowledge Management
Multi Country Climate Risk Assessment
Ministry of Environment, Tourism and Hospitality
Microfinance Institution
MLAFWRD
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture Fisheries, Water and Rural Development
MG
MIS
MOFED
MSME
Matching Grant
Management Information System
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
Micro, Small, Medium Enterprise
MWACSMED
Ministry of Women Affairs, Community, and SME Development
MYSR
NAPF
NDC
NDS
NPMU
OPEC
PCN
PCR
PCU
PDO
PDR
PFI
PFMS
PIM
PMU
PP
PRAZ
PRIME
PRM
PS
PSC
PWD
RBZ
RC
RDC
Ministry of Youth Sport and Recreation
National Agricultural Policy Framework
National Determined Contributions
National Development Strategy
National Programme Management Unit
Organisation  of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
Project Concept Note
Project Completion Report
Project Coordination Unit
Project Development Objective
Project Development  report
Private Finance Institutions
Project Finance Management System
Project Implementation Manual
Project Management Unit
Procurement Plan
Procurement Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe
Programme in Rural Monitoring & Evaluation
Project Risk Management
Permanent |Secretary
Project Steering Committee
People With Disabilities
Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
Resident Coordinator
Rural District Council
RPMU
RTGS
SACCO
SACP
SADC
SBCC
SDG
SDR
SEA
SECAP
SHEP
SHF
SIRP
SME
SO1
SO2
SP
SSTC
TOC
TOR
TOT
UNDP
UNICEF
UNSDCF
US$
VAT
VC
VHG
WASH
WB
WCDI
WEAI
WFP
WUO
ZIMRA
ZINWA
ZTSP
Regional Project Management Unit
Real Time Gross Settlement
Savings and Credit Cooperation Organisation
Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Programme
Southern African Development Commission
Social Behaviour Change and Communication
Sustainable Development Programme
Special Development Rights
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
Social Environment and Climate Assessment
Smallholder  Horticulture Empowerment and Promotion
Smallholder Farmer
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalisation Programme
Small-to-Medium Enterprise
Strategic Objective 1
Strategic Objective 2
Service Provider
South-South Technical Cooperation
Theory of Change
Terms of Reference
Training of Trainers
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children's Fund
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
United States Dollar
Value Added Tax
Value Chain
Village Horticulture Garden
Water Sanitation and Hu=hygiene
World Bank
Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation
Women Empowerment in Agriculture Index
World Food Programme
Water User organisations
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority
Zimbabwe National Water Authority
Zimbabwe Transitional Stabilisation Programme
ZUNDAF
Zimbabwe United National Development Assistance Framework
In line with IFAD mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender Transformative ☐ Youth Sensitive ☑ Nutrition Sensitive ☐ Persons with Disabilities ☐ Indigenous Peoples ☑
Climate Finance ☑ Adaptive Capacity
1/27
Executive Summary
Economic and social context. Although Zimbabwe is classified as a low middle-income country, it is among the top 15 most fragile
countries in the world in 2022[1], driven by policy volatility, corruption, a low capacity to deliver basic services, as well continued
impact from COVID-19 and more recently the Ukraine crisis. It also classified amongst the countries with high levels of institutional
and social fragility in 2022[2]. Its gross national income (GNI) per capita in current dollars recovered from a post-independence low in
2008 of US$330, moving to US$1,390 in 2015 and 2016, and declined to US$1,210 in 2019 and US$1,140 in 2020, before increasing
to US$1,400driven by the good agricultural season[3]. According to World Bank Outlook (2022), inflation slowed down from 828 per
cent in July 2020 to 60.7 per cent in December 2021. Public indebtedness has worsened with external arrears and external debt of
US$14.5 billion. Poverty prevalence remains a rural phenomenon and is increasing, with an estimate of 40 per cent in 2022 as
compared to 22 per cent in 2011. While food security situation improved in 2021 due to the good season, the gains will be eroded by
the 2021/2022 season drought. The COVID 19 pandemic affected production across all sectors, with some improvement due to
relaxation of restrictions and the good levels of vaccination. The GDP is projected to grow by 3.7 per cent in 2022 but will slow down
due to the contraction in agricultural output, global price increases due to global disruptions (as a result of Ukraine crisis), the
uncertainty about the COVID 19 pandemic[4], drought, and the instability likely to be brought about the upcoming general elections in
July to August 2023.
Horticultural Sector. In the 1990s, horticulture exports were rapidly expanding, and at their peak, worth over US$100 million,
representing over 5 per cent of total exports. These exports were driven by large-scale commercial farming, with SHFs contributing
about 10 per cent of supply. Due to the decline in commercial farming since the fast-track land reforms, and an adverse business
environment, horticultural exports are currently about US$10 million, less than 0.2 per cent of total exports. The Government of
Zimbabwe (GoZ) views the revival of horticultural sector as a key element in export and employment generation and expansion of
agricultural GDP.  Altogether, the GoZ anticipates that the horticultural economy will grow to $1.2 billion annually by 2025, and that
this will open opportunities for SHFs able to participate in horticultural sector, supplying local, regional, and international markets.
Smallholder Agricultural Policy. The GoZ strategy to uplift SHFs is contained in the National Agriculture Policy Framework which
includes: (i) organising SHFs into groups and converting them into small and medium enterprises (SMEs); (ii) connecting farmers and
groups to profitable value chains (VCs) and markets; (iii) facilitating contract farming; (iv) developing SHF business skills; (v)
revitalising marketing and agro-processing hubs; and (vi) promotion of climate smart agriculture. The Horticultural Recovery and
Growth Plan (HRGP)has two pillars: (i) The Conventional pillar aims to strengthen the horticultural production base and improve
production and profitability through mainstreaming SHFs in sustainable partnerships with VC partners and (ii) the Presidential pillar,
which focuses on village-based interventions on nutrition, food security, and markets.
Lessons learned. Key lessons learned from IFAD and other development partner experience in Zimbabwe include (i) Public sector
driven interventions to improve productivity have been costly and had limited success (ii) Well-managed private-firm led and SHF
production-based VCs have shown good results and impact (iii) the loss of skills and lack of liquidity in financial markets has
constrained the ability of the financial sector to finance inclusive development.
Project rationale. Both IFAD and the GoZ share the vision that to transform SHFs from a precarious, subsistence-oriented cereals-
based existence to market-led high value horticulture production requires an inclusive, partnership-based approach that creates
incentives for the alignment of all stakeholders. IFAD’s innovative and tested 4P approach will be used to identify and develop these
partnerships.
Goal and development objective. The project goal is to “increase incomes, food security and empowerment for SHFs engaged in
profitable and sustainable horticulture value chains”. The Project Development Objective is “Support increased and sustainable
horticultural production and sales by SHFs and MSMEs engaged in horticulture value chains”.
Project area. HEEP will take a two-pronged approach to geographic targeting based on a combination of (i) poverty and nutritional
status and (ii) potential for commercial horticultural development. First, the Village Horticulture Garden (VHG) activities will be located
in 20 districts in the arid and semi-arid areas of Matabeleland South, Manicaland, Masvingo, and Midlands Provinces. Second, 4Ps
will draw from SHFs in areas on a nationwide basis, selected based on market conditions and agricultural potential, and further
screened based on the expected impact on poorer rural households in these areas.
Target groups.  HEEP’s direct beneficiaries will be SHFs who are organised in Agricultural Producer Groups (APGs) in either Village
Horticultural Gardens (VHGs) or in 4Ps linked to anchor firms/farms. These consist of APGs i) in the Village Horticulture Gardens ii)
in irrigation schemes, and iii) outside the irrigation schemes. HEEP will promote youth and women led horticulture MSMEs linked to
anchor firms and service providers to provide employment to young people, especially women.
Components and Activities. The project has two inter-related activity components and an institutional development/project
management component. Component One, VHG and 4P development, will build the capacity of SHFs to produce horticultural crops
and products for commercial sale to generate income and support livelihoods, and increase household consumption to improve
nutrition. HEEP will also support value chain actors to improve their competitiveness, focusing on inclusive participation by SHFs. This
will be provided by a combination of capacity building, matching grants, and provision of public infrastructure to leverage the impact of
value chain actors’ investments. Component Two, Access to Finance, will improve access to finance by the horticultural value chain
actors through provision of an export line of credit provided by partner financial institutions for financing inclusive hub and spoke 4Ps,
complimented by capacity building in the financial sector to improve the development and delivery of appropriate financial products for
the SHFs.
2/27
Component 1: Village Horticultural Garden and 4P Mobilization and Development
Sub-component 1.1: Village Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development. The expected results are 620 VHGs providing
increased income and nutritional outcomes to 31,000 poorer rural households.
Sub-component 1.2: 4P Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building. The expected result is to link 20,000 SHF to 20 4Ps,
and build their capacity through technical assistance and training.
Sub component 1.3: 4P Matching Grants (MGs) and Public Infrastructure. The expected results is:(i) 20 4Ps serving 20,000 SHF
households with an increased ability to produce and market high value horticultural products using climate-resilient and innovative
technologies and (ii) public sector infrastructure that will enhance economic returns for 4P partners, leveraging the private investments
made by 4P members and providing economic and social benefits for non-4P SHFs, MSMEs, and rural residents in the 4P areas.
Component 2: Access to Finance.
Sub component 2.1: Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF). The expected result is to provide short- and long-term finance
to anchor firms and other partners of 20 4Ps that will enable them to improve and expand the production and marketing of high-value
horticultural produce.
Sub-component 2.2: Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending. The expected results is to increase the range
and coverage of appropriate financial services and products available to SHFs provided by at least four commercial banks
or MFIs.  
Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination.
Sub-component 3.1: Institutional Support. The expected result is to improve the production and marketing information for the
benefit of public sector policy makers and private sector investors, and to improve the governance of contract farming/hub and spoke
arrangements to ensure a fair distribution of risks and benefits to all parties.
Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination. HEEP will be managed by a PMU, with some functions supported by or subsumed
under the Joint Management Unit (JMU) of MLAFWRD is creating for SIRP, SACP, and HEEP. The HEEP PMU will be headed by a
Project Coordinator who report to the Permanent Secretary of MLAFWRD, with MLAFWRD Permanent Secretary the chair of the
Project Steering Committee. The national PMU will be headquartered in Harare, and regional PMUs will be established in Mutare,
Masvingo and Bulawayo.
Social, Environment and Climate Assessment. HEEPs preliminary environmental and social categorisation is Substantial. The
project will include environmental sustainability and sustainable natural resource management activities, which will enhance global
environmental benefits. The project will be guided by policies, and legal and institutional frameworks that support environmental
sustainability and social inclusion. The preliminary climate risk classification is Substantial. To address the impact of CC, the project
will support climate resilient infrastructure and equipment to reduce SHF climate vulnerability.
Project costs and financing. The project investment and recurrent costs during the eight-year implementation period are estimated
at US$ 66.5 million. The IFAD loan will finance US$37.14 million accounting for 56 per cent of the total project costs. The OPEC Fund
for International Development will finance US$ 15 million (22 per cent)[5] of the total project costs. Co-financing from participating
financial institutions is estimated at US$ 8.1 million, covering 12 per cent of the total project costs. Private sector contribution is US$
3.1 million (4 per cent). Domestic financing from Government of Zimbabwe and beneficiaries is budgeted to cover US$ 6.2covering
9 per cent of the total project costs.
Financial and economic analysis. The base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for HEEP is estimated at 25 per cent with
a positive net present value (NPV) of US$ 31.9 million which justifies the project investment. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.9.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans. A draft Project Implementation Manual, a draft AWPB for the first 18 months of
project implementation, and a draft procurement plan for the first 18 months have been prepared as part of the HEEP design process.
These documents will help ensure that the project implementation starts as scheduled, without unnecessary delays during the first
project year. The Joint Project Management Unit already created for SIRP and SACP will also expedite project start-up
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
Socioeconomic context. Zimbabwe’s land area is 390,757 square kilometres with a population of 14.9 million[6]. The urban and
rural populations are 32.2 per cent and 67.8 per cent respectively. The population is projected to grow to over 30 million by 2050.
Of the 39.6 million hectares (ha) of land, about 41 per cent is utilised for agriculture[7]. Approximately 365,000 ha are suitable for
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
irrigated agriculture, but less than half is currently equipped with irrigation facilities.
3/27
Zimbabwe is a low middle-income country (LMIC), and is among the 15 most fragile countries in the world[8], driven by policy
volatility, corruption, a low capacity to deliver basic services, climate shocks as well continued impact from COVID-19 and more
recently the Ukraine crisis. It is also forecast to have one of the highest levels of institutional and social fragility in 2023[9]. Its
gross national income (GNI) per capita recovered from a post-independence low of (current) US$330 in 2008, moving to
US$1,390 in 2015 and 2016, but then declining toUS$1,210 in 2019 and US$1,140 in 2020, before increasing to US$1,400in
2021, driven by the good agricultural season[10], despite the economy contracted due to COVID-19 and a protracted drought.
Increasing food prices and rapid expansion of the money supply have contributed to annual inflation levels over 100per cent.
In 2021, economic activity recovered with GDP of 5.8 per cent, reflecting outstanding agricultural output, increased mining and
energy production, construction, manufacturing, and increased infrastructure investment. Real GDP is expected to grow by about
3.7 per cent in 2022[11].Droughts and inadequate management of water resources could cause a decline in Zimbabwe’s 2030
GDP of over 2 per cent  based on simulations over 2020-2030 span[12]. Exports are driven by gold (US$1.72 billion), tobacco
(US$438 million), ferroalloys (US$231 million), nickel (US$ 229 million) and diamonds (US$221 million).Zimbabwe's 2019 Human
Development Index was 0.571, ranking the country 150th out of 189 countries. Extreme household poverty increased from 16.2
percent in 2011 to 21.9 percent in 2017, 41 per cent in 2021 and 40 per cent in 2022[13]. About 76 per cent of rural households
and 38.2 percent of urban households are poor, and 12.9 per cent of the adult population are affected by HIV/AIDS.
After years of using the US dollar and the South African rand as the de facto local currency, the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
(RBZ) reintroduced the Zimbabwe dollar in2016. The Zimbabwe dollar was originally pegged 1:1 to the US dollar but has rapidly
lost value and its use for exchange or savings is rapidly decreasing.[14] Most business transactions are made in US dollars. The
large difference between official and parallel exchange rates has created substantial opportunities for rent-seeking by well-
connected individuals that have access to foreign currency at official rates. With poor harvests, constrained GoZ’s capacity to
reach the rural poor with adequate social safety nets, and increasing inflation, the purchasing power of incomes will be eroded
putting more rural and urban people in or at risk of poverty.
Zimbabwe’s economic policy is laid out in the "National Development Strategy 1 – 2021 to 2025" (NDS1), which outlines 14
national priorities. The most relevant ones for HEEP are the Food Security and Nutrition, and Value Chains and Structural
Transformation. Zimbabwe is classified as being “in debt distress”[15], with unsustainable external debt, and large external
arrears with the World Bank, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the European Investment Bank (EIB). Settlement of
these arrears would require major economic and political reforms far beyond those laid out in NDS1. In 2015 IFAD's Executive
Board approved a five-year Debt Rescheduling Plan for SDR 17.69 million which has been successfully completed.  Since
January 2021, Zimbabwe is free of arrears with IFAD.
Agriculture sector. Agriculture underpins Zimbabwe’s economic growth, food and nutrition security, as well as poverty
reduction. Approximately 70 per cent of the population depend on agriculture as a source of livelihood. Zimbabwe has 1.3 million
smallholders (SHFs) and about 18,000 medium to largescale farmers[16]. Following land redistribution, SHFs occupy
approximately 70 per cent of agricultural land,[17] with nearly 70 per cent deriving their livelihood from less than 2ha of land.
Agriculture’s contribution to GDP in 2021 was 19.9 per cent, from a peak of 21.2 per cent in 2007. Livestock accounts for 35-
38per cent of agricultural GDP[18]. Agriculture's contribution is highly dependent on rainfall, input use and support and producer
prices.
Zimbabwe's food security is defined by adequate production of and access to maize, the country’s staple food. The impact of the
Ukraine crisis has resulted in a sharp increase in maize prices, leading to increased food insecurity. Maize is grown by over 90
percent of households but due to dependence on rainfed agriculture, small farm size, limited use of inputs and poor access to
markets, most households cannot meet their subsistence requirements and remain net buyers of maize. The recurrent droughts
as well as the fall army worm (FAW) impact on maize and small grains have affected the performance of the sector. Good
harvests do not solve this problem as they often lead to low maize market prices, low purchases by the national grain buyer, and
large post-harvest losses at household level, as farmers cannot or do not want to sell their maize. This period of excess is soon
replaced with low maize supply, with an associated higher maize price, making it unaffordable for most households. To transform
the agriculture sector and rural people’s livelihoods, there needs to be a transition from low value cereal production to higher
value agriculture and a change to farming as a business. Horticulture is one of the GoZ priority areas for this transformation.
Horticulture sector. In the 1990s, exports from the horticultural sector were rapidly expanding, and at the peak, worth over
US$100 million, representing over 5 per cent of total exports. Horticultural exports were driven by large-scale commercial
farming, with SHFs (mostly on irrigation schemes) contributing about 10 per cent of supply.[19] Due to the decline in commercial
farming since the fast-track land reforms[20] and a highly adverse business environment, horticultural exports are currently about
US$10 million, less than 0.2 per cent of total exports.[21].The GoZ views the revival of horticultural sector as a key element in
export and employment generation and expansion of agricultural GDP. Altogether, the GoZ anticipates that the horticultural
economy will grow to US$1.2 billion annually by 2025[22].This will open substantial opportunities for SHFs, who are able to
participate in the horticultural sector, supplying local, regional, and international markets. The revival of the horticultural sector will
require a higher rate of participation from the SHF sector, analogous to the transformation of the Zimbabwe tobacco sector from a
mostly large-scale crop to a largely small and medium scale farmer crop, with strong financial, technical, service, and input
support from anchor firms. 
9.
SHFs in the horticulture sector face many challenges: (i) poor understanding of and linkage to markets, (ii) climate change (CC)
4/27
related water scarcity; (iii) limited access to finance; (iv) high cost and scarcity of inputs; (v) pest and disease outbreaks; (vi) low
and unstable producer prices; (vii) unsupportive regulations; (viii) poor transport and market infrastructure; (ix) under-resourced
research and extension services; (x) low adoption of improved production technologies; (xi) gender and age disparities in land
allocation; (xii) land tenure insecurity; and (xiii) declining soil fertility. These factors have contributed to low horticulture
production, low returns on investment and a lack of competitiveness in national, regional, and overseas markets. Due to
increasing abandonment of the Zimbabwe dollar as a usable medium of exchange, foreign currency financing is essential for
almost all horticultural sector inputs and equipment. Access to foreign currency finance is mostly only available to direct
exporters, and even then, rarely for a term longer than three months. Opportunities to improve SHF ability to support and benefit
from the horticulture sector include: (i) mobilizing and linking SHFs to export and domestic markets through partnerships with
anchor firms; (ii) access to improved inputs and services; (iii) adoption of improved climate smart technologies/practices; and (iv)
better physical access to adequate storage and market facilities.
10.
Agricultural and Horticultural Policy and Transformation. The Government strategy to improve agriculture development and
sustainable commercialization is outlined in the Vision 2030 document (2019). This is further elaborated in the National
Agriculture Policy Framework (NAPF) 2018-2030, which contains the strategy to commercialise smallholder agriculture. The
strategy includes: (i) organising SHFs into groups and converting them into small and medium enterprises (SMEs); (ii) connecting
farmers and groups to profitable value chains (VCs) and markets; (iii) facilitating contract farming; (iv) developing SHFs business
skills; (v) revitalising marketing and agro-processing hubs; and (vi) promotion of climate smart agriculture. In addition, Zimbabwe
policies are aligned to the Food System Summit pathways to sustainable land-use and food systems.
11.
MLAFWRD’s horticultural strategy is based on the Horticultural Recovery and Growth Plan (HRGP). The Conventional
Horticulture pillar strengthens the horticultural production base and improves production and profitability through mainstreaming
SHFs in sustainable partnerships with VC partners. The Presidential Horticultural Scheme pillar focuses on nutrition, food
security, and supply to local markets. It aims to supply all villages with at least one borehole, a nutrition garden, and a fruit
orchard. HEEP will support both the Presidential and Conventional pillars of the HRGP.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
12.
13.
14.
Gender. Zimbabwe’s Global Gender Gap Index for 2022 is 0.734, positioning it at 50th out of 156 countries in the world.
Approximately 80 per cent of women in Zimbabwe live in communal areas where they constitute 61 per cent of the subsistence
farmers and provide 70 per cent of the labour, while 35 per cent of households are female-headed[23]. The prevalence of poverty
in these households is 70 per cent. Although women constitute 52 per cent of Zimbabwe’s population, several constraints
exacerbate gender inequality in  horticulture VCs; (i) lack of land ownership due to restrictive customary laws on inheritance[24],
(ii) high workload and unequal division of labour including household work; (ii) lack of market facilities, safety issues and low
producer prices; (iii) limited access to inputs and irrigation infrastructure; (iv) male dominance in asset ownership, decision
making processes (except diets) and increasing levels of gender-based violence (GBV) (v) limited access to finance, and (vi)
limited capacity building opportunities. Women are also the most vulnerable to nutrition and climate change impacts. In the
horticultural sector, women tend to engage in production of low value crops for household or local market consumption. Women
currently provide most of the manual labour in agricultural activities while men prefer mechanised tasks. Therefore, investing in
women’s empowerment, through challenging the social norms, is key to gender transformation.
Youth. Zimbabwe is a youthful country, with approximately 68 per cent of the population below the age of 35 years[25]. Youth
unemployment is estimated to be 84 per cent of the total unemployed[26]. Youth often do not have access to land, assets, and
finance. Other challenges faced by the youth include the lack of business, management and technical and leadership skills
relevant for running Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).Youth are also excluded from household and community
decision making. Few young women and young men participate in primary agriculture production since the majority do not have
access to land or prefer jobs outside agriculture that have quicker returns. Horticulture, however, is potentially more attractive to
youth as returns are usually larger and come sooner than traditional crops, and land requirements are less.
Nutrition. The latest Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee found 56 percent of rural households are food insecure,
with a significant drop in the proportion of women of reproductive age consuming minimum dietary diversity and only 10 per cent
of children 6-23 months receiving a minimum acceptable diet. Over 70 per cent of rural households are considered poor. These
households spend over half of their income on food, with many consuming a poor diet, and 33 per cent suffering from food
deprivation. Inadequate quality and quantity of food consumption among children, adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating
mothers, including poor infant and young child feeding and caring practices contribute to acute malnutrition. The prevalence of
child stunting is 27.1 per cent and wasting 3.3 per cent among children under five years. With 28.8 per cent of women in
reproductive age being anaemic, iron deficiencies and other micronutrient deficiencies remain a public health concern. Poor
dietary diversity and inadequate caring and feeding practices result from a lack of knowledge and practices regarding balanced
and healthy diets for children and adults. Promoting nutritionally adequate diets is vital to improve the health and wellbeing of
populations, and to foster social and economic development in the country.
15.
Environment. Environmental degradation is a significant challenge in Zimbabwe, mainly caused by illegal mining, unsustainable
agricultural and animal husbandry practices, and environmental pollution. A considerable amount of arable land (90%) in
communal areas is degraded, posing poor socio-economic growth in the smallholder sector. Poverty is a major driver of
environmental degradation. There is extensive wetland destruction and siltation, overgrazing, biodiversity loss, pollution of land
and water resources, land degradation, poor watershed management, and wildfires[27]. Zimbabwe is water stressed, with some
of the population relying on seasonal water sources, particularly in semi-arid and arid regions. Deforestation is caused by land
clearing for agriculture, fuelwood and pole collection. An estimated 300,000 ha of forest is lost annually to agricultural expansion
and other household uses such as energy supply, construction and food production[28]. Flooding and erratic precipitation,
combined with land use change, are also expected to increase soil erosion and the incidence of pests and diseases affecting
forests[29].Most soils in the country are already acidic and highly leached (Acrisols), requiring proper pH and soil fertility
management to maintain and enhance production[30].
5/27
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
Despite the rampant environmental challenges, the Government of Zimbabwe is committed to the sustainable management of
natural resources and has put in place the frameworks linked to international commitments. The main commitments include
designating Ramsar sites and putting in place regulation for wetland protection; protecting biodiversity through managing
protected areas; rehabilitating degraded lands and monitoring Greenhouse gas emissions. The Government has also made a
commitment through its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and strategic planning for climate change response.
Furthermore, livelihood diversification will reduce pressure on natural resources and adaptation to the impacts of climate change.
Climate Change (CC).Zimbabwe is among the most vulnerable and least adapted countries to CC, ranking 143 out of 182
countries on the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) Country Index[31]. Droughts will increase in frequency and
intensity. Mean annual temperature increase could exceed 3°C by 2050. Average rainfall is projected to decrease by 10 per cent,
but the intensity of extreme rainfall events is projected to increase, which may increase flood and cyclone events. The projected
increase in frequency of natural disasters will potentially hit the most vulnerable parts of the population, the smallholder sector,
pushing SHFs further into poverty[32]. CC exacerbates unsustainable land-use practices, resulting in loss of agricultural land and
biodiversity, sedimentation of water bodies, and loss of soil fertility. The vulnerability of the agricultural sector is accentuated by
the reliance on rain-fed farming by over 80 per cent of the rural population.
With CC, changes in crop yields across scenarios range from -40% to +20%by 2030 than would be expected in a future with no
climate change[33]. Zimbabwe has experienced droughts related to the El Nino phenomenon in the past decade; the more recent
droughts led to decreased agricultural output and left 2.8 million people food insecure[34]. Zimbabwe is susceptible to cyclones,
and in 2019 Cyclone Idai resulted in infrastructural damage of US$ 1 billion and displaced 60,000 people. The increased
incidences of droughts, as a result of CC, have led to changes in wetland conditions and habitat as well as loss of species.
The GoZ has developed strategies for climate adaptation included in the Zimbabwe’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).
The high-level priority adaptation measures elaborated in the NDC include: i) scaling-up of climate resilient agriculture solutions
and strengthening agricultural VCs and markets; ii) enhancing early warning and climate-related disaster risk reduction systems;
iii) climate resilient infrastructure development; and iv) promoting resilient and sustainable water resources management.[35]
Indigenous peoples (IPs). Around 2,500 San (Tshwa) people live nomadically around the area of Tsholotsho close to the
border of Botswana. The Doma (1,050 people) are found in Guruve, Mbire, and Karoi districts in Mashonaland. These are the
poorest groups in Zimbabwe. There is no specific policy on IPs in Zimbabwe, since the Government considers all Zimbabweans
to be indigenous. Where relevant, HEEP will proactively engage with their representatives, ensuring free prior and informed
consent (FPIC).
People Living with Disabilities (PWD) and other marginalised groups. There are an estimated 914,000 PWD in Zimbabwe
(7 per cent of the population).[36]. PWD have challenges in accessing employment, education, health care and they are also
vulnerable to food insecurity and accessing water and sanitation facilities. The prevalence of poverty among the PWD is 74.1 per
cent compared to 69.5 per cent for the non-disabled. Other marginalised groups include female headed households, child
headed households, households headed by the aged, uneducated, chronically ill as well as households belonging to the
apostolic religious sect. PWD and other marginalised groups will benefit through HEEP by: (i) integration into the agricultural
production groups (APGs) and Village Horticultural Gardens (VHGs); (ii) receiving nutrition sensitive education and (iii) increased
employment opportunities. This will complement the social protection interventions by WFP, UNICEF and other humanitarian
development partners.
Table 1. Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria
☒ Gender transformational
☒ Nutrition sensitive
☐ Youth sensitive
☒ Climate focused
Situation
analysis
☒ National gender policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
☒ Key livelihood problems and
opportunities, by gender
☒ Use(pro-WEAI)[37]
assessment for M&E baseline
☒ National nutrition policies,
strategies and actors
☐ National youth policies,
strategies and actors
☒ Key nutrition problems and
underlying causes, by group
☐ Main youth groups
☒ Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
☒ Challenges and
opportunities by youth group
HEEP has US$9
☒ Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
6/27
Theory of
change
☒ Gender transformative
pathways
☒ Policy engagement on
GEWE[38]
☒ Nutrition pathways
☒ Pathways to youth
socioeconomic
empowerment
☒ Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and impacts
☒ Youth inclusion in project
objectives/activities
233 000 million of
climate finance,
corresponding to
24.6per cent of the
total project costs.
All of this is
adaptation finance.
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
gender
Logframe
indicators
☒ Women are >40per cent of
outreach beneficiaries
☒ Pro-WEAI indicator[39]
☒ Outreach disaggregated by
gender, youth, indigenous
peoples
☒ Women reporting improved
diets AND/OR Persons reporting
improved nutrition knowledge
☒ Outreach disaggregated
by age
Human
and
financial
resources
☒ Staff with gender TORs
☒ Funds for gender activities
☒ Funds for Pro-WEIA surveys
in M&E budget
☒ Staff or partner with nutrition
TORs
☒ Staff with youth-specific
TORs
☒ Funds for nutrition activities
☒ Funds for youth activities
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
IFAD is a trusted long-term development partner for Zimbabwe and is considered to be a neutral broker linking stakeholders on
agriculture and rural development. IFAD has a comparative advantage in supporting Zimbabwe’s agriculture sector, building on
its extensive country experience. IFAD has expertise at the regional and global level in: a) commercializing smallholder
agriculture, through inclusive VCs and private-public-producer partnerships (4Ps)[40]; b) increasing climate resilient production
and productivity of farming; c) developing business and employment opportunities in rural areas, through inclusive VC
development; and d) ensuring that improved nutrition outcomes will result from increases in agricultural productivity and
household income. IFAD's experience and expertise place it in a strong position to support the GoZ to organize smallholders into
well-governed and well-functioning cohesive groups; connect them to profitable value chains and markets; develop SHFs’
capacity in climate resilient production and  marketing and business skills; develop rural access to finance and revitalize market
infrastructure.
HEEP is fully in line with the 2022-2027 COSOP’s transformation target[41] and its objectives of reducing poverty and improving
incomes, through better market access and climate-resilient and more effective production systems. The capacity building focus
and effective targeting will ensure that IFAD’s corporate priorities in CC, gender, and nutrition are mainstreamed. As increased
income itself does not necessarily lead to improved social outcomes, specific activities will ensure gender transformation, and
improved nutrition.
In its request to IFAD for HEEP,[42] MLAFWRD reaffirmed its commitment to transform horticulture through linking SHFs to
commercial buyers. The GoZ request identified measures to enhance productivity through rural finance, improved inputs and
services; linkage to markets; development of VC infrastructure and institutional strengthening. These approaches are at the core
of IFAD’s policies for SHF agriculture transformation.
To ensure sustainability, HEEP will use a 4P approach for commercially viable and climate resilient SHF development,
complemented by support for the poorest rural households through the climate smart Village Horticultural Gardens. HEEP will
leverage the investments by other development partners in SHF horticulture, most notably JICA's Smallholder Horticultural
Empowerment Promotion (SHEP).
HEEP is the third project in IFAD’s programmatic country program approach. HEEP will introduce the 4P approach to inclusive
horticulture VC development promoting also other innovative approaches. It will create opportunities for beneficiaries of the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Project (SIRP), who have rehabilitated irrigation infrastructure, and beneficiaries of the
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP) in agricultural clusters, as well as other SHFs. HEEP will also introduce an
access to finance activity, to address a crucial barrier to sustainable SHF empowerment. The implementation of the country
programme will continue to identify synergies and complementarities and also sharing of lessons learned to sharpen the
implementation approaches and strategies. 
B. Lessons learned
27.
The HEEP’s design has been informed by lessons learned and best practices from: (a) ongoing and previous IFAD experiences
in Zimbabwe; (b) results from IFAD projects in other countries in the region; and (c) similar projects, financed by the Government
or other development partners. Key lessons from the past and ongoing operations include:
7/27
Public sector driven interventions to improve productivity have been costly and had limited success, e.g. the large-scale
Command Agriculture input subsidy mechanism.[43] In response, HEEP will harness the efficiencies of the private sector for
service delivery, through a 4P service delivery mechanism, while relying on the public sector for improvements to the enabling
environment, and addressing specific market failures.
Well-managed private firm-led and SHF production-based VCs have shown consistently good results and impact. The key
lessons from these (e.g. provision of inputs and extension and aggregation of produce) are included in the4P strategy.
Loss of skills and lack of liquidity in the financial sector has constrained use of bank or MFI credit for inclusive value chain
development. There has been some success with the use of competitive grants for companies and other VC participants, such
as in the Rural Agriculture Revitalisation Programme “Matched Grant Facility”[44] and “Green Enterprise Challenge Fund”.
HEEP will utilize matching grants to leverage commercial credit, provide seed capital for export finance, and strengthen the
financial sector to serve SHFs.
Matching grants (MG) can be challenging to manage to ensure impact on target beneficiaries and avoid crowding out
commercial finance. Lessons from Cambodia, Vietnam, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, and Ghana have informed HEEP design. MG
programs for poorer farmers need to be targeted and structured to reflect their more limited ability to invest in high value crops.
A 4P approach, which incorporates both anchor firms and public and private service providers, can allow for a more targeted
and effective impact and a more rapid disbursement of project funds.
SIRP empirical evidence shows that the majority of youth do not wish to work in agriculture.[45] Most prefer to find an
alternative that offers less risk, less hard work, and quicker returns. Horticulture, supported by HEEP, will be an exception
because it requires less land, and offers higher and quicker returns than annual crops.
28.
SIRP demonstrated that IFAD technical assistance provided both remotely and in-country greatly improves speed of procurement
processes and quality of procurement documents prepared by the Project Coordination Unit (PCU). A correlated benefit of this is
an increased disbursement rate.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
29.
The project goal  is to increase incomes, food security and empowerment for SHFs, engaged in profitable and sustainable
horticulture value chains (VCs).
30.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is supporting increased and sustainable horticultural production and sales by SHFs
and MSMEs engaged in horticulture value chains. Geographic area of intervention. HEEP will adopt a two-pronged
geographical targeting approach, based on a combination of poverty and nutritional status and the potential for commercial
horticultural development:
Geographical Targeting for Village Horticultural Gardens (VHGs) interventions. The VHGs will be located in the four
provinces: Matabeleland South, Manicaland, Masvingo, and Midlands Provinces[46]. VHGs will be targeted towards the poorer
rural households with less immediate opportunities for commercial horticulture. The VHGs will be sited, using a hub-and-spoke
approach, in the wards adjacent to functional Agricultural Rural Development Authority (ARDA)-managed irrigation
schemes[47]. This will reinforce and deepen the impact of SIRP, which is also focused on these four provinces with substantial
arid and semi-arid regions. The hub-and-spoke approach will enable improved access to local markets, better management,
and timely provision of capacity building for VHG SHFs.
31.
HEEP will implement 620 VHGs in the four selected provinces, with 155 VHGs per province. In each province, five districts will be
targeted, with 10 wards selected per district. The criteria for district selection include: (i) poverty prevalence, (ii) proximity of
functional smallholder irrigation schemes; (iii) ability of ARDA to support aggregation (in wards with ARDA irrigation schemes, 3
VHGs will be clustered around each scheme).The selection criteria for the VHGs in the targeted wards will include: (i) potential for
eventual inclusion in commercially viable horticulture, (ii) areas vulnerable to CC, (iii) availability of arable land and water and
geophysical potential; (iv) poverty levels of surrounding area; (v) commitment of local farmers to joining an APG; (vi) commitment
of local farmers to participate fully in the nutrition and commercial.
Geographical Targeting of 4P and Access to Finance interventions. Selection will be based on market conditions and
agroclimatic potential, and selected through a competitive process. Therefore, the location of the 4P SHFs will depend on both
the demand from anchor firms and the interest and potential of SHFs. The 4P households will be located in: i) well-functioning
irrigation schemes throughout the country and ii) high potential regions of the Mashonaland Provinces and Manicaland, that is,
those that fall into Natural Regions 1 and 2A.Farmers selected will meet targeting criteria.
32.
Target groups. HEEP’s direct beneficiaries will be poor SHFs, who will be organised either in APGs in VHGs or as APGs in 4Ps
linked to anchor firms/farms. HEEP will also promote youth and women led MSMEs, which are linked to anchor firms or APGs as
service providers (SPs), and these will help provide employment to young people and women.
33.
The total direct target group will be 71,000 SHF households consisting of:
31,000 SHFs in VHGs, who will benefit from improved production, post-harvest handling, local market access and capacity
building
20,000 additional SHFs in 4Pswill benefit from improved production, post-harvest handling, improved market access and
capacity building
20,000 laborers[48], who will benefit from seasonal and part-time employment with anchor firms, service providers, or SHFs.
8/27
34.
Beneficiaries will include a minimum of 50 per cent women and 30 per cent youth (evenly split between women and men). The
project will target 2000PWDs identified through local community organisations working with PWDs.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
The total indirect target group is estimated to be 50,000 households that live in the direct vicinity of HEEP activities, but are not
members of VHGs or 4Ps.They will benefit from improved road access to district centres, marketplaces, health and education, as
well as long term indirect benefits of economic development as a result of HEEP activities.
In accordance with IFAD’s Targeting Policy, HEEP will focus on the rural poor who have the potential to take advantage of
improved access to assets and opportunities for agricultural production and income generating projects. In Zimbabwe, rural
households are categorised into four poverty groups (A, B1, B2 and C[49]) according to their access to land, other productive
assets and labour (see PIM for details). Specifically, HEEP’s target group focus will be on Category B1 and Category B2 farmers,
who constitute almost 80 per cent of supported households.[50] Category A farmers consisting of the poorest households,
including PWD, women, child and elderly headed households, will be supported to join VHG APGs as they are able, and will
have the opportunity to access employment at APG and rural enterprise operations.
Targeting Strategy. The geographical targeting strategy outlined above will ensure that poverty prevalence stands at a minimum
of 75 per cent among target groups. Within the targeted geographical areas, social targeting mechanisms will ensure adoption of
mainstreaming strategies and effective smallholder development. Self-targeting measures will ensure that project interventions
respond to the priorities of the APGs, SHFs and Anchor Firms. Community targeting will be applied for public infrastructure
development. The risk of elite capture will be mitigated through a triangulation of beneficiary targeting, identification and selection
process. The Government’s beneficiary classification system will be used, while identification will be through local independent
short-term technical SPs, in consultation with local communities, organized farmer groups and local authorities, will rebuild
confidence in state systems. Other measures include enhancing beneficiary access to project information, adoption of an anti-
corruption plan and a functional grievance redress mechanism.
Gender targeting. The project will adopt a gender transformation approach using lessons learned from SIRP and SACP
experiences on promotion of (i) economic empowerment, (ii) women’s representation in decision making (iii) equitable workload
balance and equitable access to economic and social benefits through Gender Action Learning System (GALS)[51] social
mentoring, and (iv) monitoring changes in norms and values around gender equality. Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture
Index (WEAI) survey results will inform the gender strategy as with SIRP[52]. The trainings will be conducted close to women’s
homes, with child-care arrangements to facilitate women’s participation. Direct targeting will ensure a 50 per cent quota for
women’s participation across project activities. A gender and social inclusion expert will be hired as Project Management Unit
staff.
Youth targeting. HEEP will seek to address the challenges faced by youth including: limited access to productive assets and
land, limited access to finance and inadequate skills. HEEP is targeting 30 per cent youth participation across project activities
and components. HEEP will promote access to services and productive assets for youth, through the provision of technical and
business capacity building including in Climate Smart Agriculture, finance, entrepreneurial skills, digital technology and life skills.
As a result of project interventions, decent jobs will be created for young men and women along the 4P horticulture value chain.
Youth will be empowered to access matching grants as beneficiaries of APG enterprises. Landless youth that do not have the
opportunity to use family land or lease surplus land will be encouraged to participate as MSME service providers, adding value by
providing such services as crop protection (spraying service providers), or land preparation and cultivation (mechanized service
providers). The project will discuss with traditional leaders on the possibility of land allocation youth groups.
40.
Nutrition targeting. HEEP will mainstream three nutrition related approaches into the value chain activities. The first approach
builds on increased income and better dietary intake to be associated with nutrition education and Social and Behaviour Change
Communication (SBCC) activities. The second approach focuses on the supply side and aims at making the value chains
selected for VHGs nutrition sensitive. The third approach uses women’s empowerment pathway to improve nutrition, since
women use their income for household food and energy expenditures to improve family nutrition.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
Component 1: Village Horticultural Gardens (VHGs) and 4P Mobilization and Development.
Sub-component 1.1: VHGs Mobilization and Development.HEEP will support the creation and capacitation of VHGs -an approach
introduced in the GoZ’s HRGP. The expected results of this sub-component are 620 VHGs providing increased income and nutritional
outcomes to 31,000 poor rural households. One VHG will be 1.25ha, with: (i) 1.0 ha dedicated to market-oriented production and sale
of commercial horticultural crops, and (ii) 0.25 ha dedicated to nutritious crops, with produce distributed to beneficiary households.
For each 1.25 ha VHG there will be an average of 50 beneficiaries[53]to ensure a minimum level of economic and nutritional benefits
per household.
Where possible, up to three VHGs will be clustered close to a fully operational ARDA-managed irrigation scheme. Clustering the
VHGs as ‘spokes’ around the ‘hub’ of an operational ARDA irrigation scheme will allow synergies in VHG management, with the
existing ARDA irrigation scheme manager supporting the VHGs. The clustering will also allow synergies/efficiencies in the provision of
capacity building and provide access to storage infrastructure and market linkages through the irrigation schemes and if relevant, 4P
anchor firms. The irrigation schemes can be used as learning centres for the VHGs, and in turn the VHGs may also be used for
learning centres for surrounding communities.
9/27
The VHGs will be sited, designed and managed by ARDA, who will be VHG project managers.ARDA managers are already receiving
capacity building from SIRP and will receive technical back up from the PMU. ARDA staff will be capacitated in technical and social
aspects of the project. ARDA will work with other MLAFWRD and GoZ departments in the design and operation of the VHG. These
include the Department of Irrigation and Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA) for irrigation infrastructure, Agricultural
Marketing Authority (AMA) for marketing, Agritex for climate resilient crop/variety selection, training farmers on good agronomic
practices (GAP), and environmental/natural resource management (ENRM).Women and youth will be empowered to take up
decision-making positions in the management committees of the VHGs. HEEP will provide capacity building and Training of the
Trainer-based capacity building for ARDA VHG managers and supporting Agritex staff in the business, technical aspects of VHG
management, CSA and GAPs.
The ARDA VHG managers will manage operations based on VHG business plans that generate sufficient income through commercial
sales of high value crops such as chillies, which has high demand from exporting firms, to ensure sustainable returns to beneficiaries
and covering all operations, maintenance, and equipment replacement costs. Profits from the 1.0 ha commercial plot will be
distributed to VHG beneficiaries after deductions of expenses. The produce from the 0.25 ha nutrition garden will be distributed to the
beneficiary households for consumption.
Nutrition education and SBCC will be implemented for each VHG and 4P APGs to ensure that households consume diversified diets
and that nutritional needs of adolescent girls and boys, pregnant and lactating women, children under age of five, are considered.
Nutrition education will be channelled through agriculture extension and through GALS. The capacity of project implementing partners
will be enhanced on nutrition-sensitive agriculture, which will help in monitoring and supervising interventions at community and
household levels.
Each VHG will be supported for land clearing, borehole siting and sinking, all necessary irrigation equipment (pumps,10ML plastic
tanks, drip irrigation system, solar panels, solar energy powered water pumps), basic administration and storage facilities. In addition,
water harvesting infrastructure will be provided for an average of five beneficiary households per VHG who are (i) poor farmers and (ii)
are a long distance from an accessible water source. This will include as needed a roof rain collection system, pipes, and plastic
storage tank[54]. This will provide these households with supplementary water supply for the fruit trees and household gardens
located at the homesteads.
VHG operational costs, including initial inputs (seeds (including improved varieties), household fruit trees, fertilizer, chemicals, etc.),
scheme management, and labor) will be provided through a combination of GoZ counterpart funding, VHG retained earnings, and if
appropriate commercial borrowing. After the second year of VHG operations, all project and GoZ counterpart contributions to the
VHGs will cease. At this point, the sale of horticultural crops from the commercial plot will cover all operating and maintenance costs. 
Sub-component 1.2: 4P Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity BuildingThe expected result from this sub-component is to
identify and build capacity of 20 4Ps serving 20,000 SHF households. Under HEEP, 4Ps will be cooperative agreements between a (i)
private sector anchor firm that provides a market to SHFs (and that passes IFAD due diligence), (ii) public sector entities helping co-
finance and facilitate the 4Ps, e.g. IFAD, the GoZ etc.; and (iii) the producers organized as APGs that will be supplying the anchor firm.
In addition, the HEEP 4Ps may have one or more service provider partners who are direct or supporting value chain actors that
provide critical services to other 4P partners (inputs, mechanization, extension, capacity building, climate smart agriculture (CSA),
crop protection, logistics transport, etc.). Service providers are identified by anchor firm, may be private sector MSMEs, public sector
government agencies, and non-profits.
The Zimbabwe horticultural sector has had a strong tradition of hub and spoke arrangements uniting anchor firms (the “hubs”) and
SHFs (the “spokes”), these generally have most of the elements of a 4P. The 4P model advances this Zimbabwe tradition by a
greater clarification of the role of the public sector as a provider of (i)catalytic start-up funds and technical assistance; (ii)
empowerment of SHFs to be more equal and profitable members of the 4P; and (iii) improvements in the enabling environment.
Identification.4P business plans will be identified through calls for Expressions of Interest (EOI), issued by the PMU. Based on the
guidelines, the 4P anchor firm will submit the outline of an inclusive business plan for the production and marketing of horticultural
produce and products to be sold in local, regional, and overseas markets. Anchor firms will generally be commercial businesses or
farms, but a relatively strong farmer trust or cooperative may also qualify, or take a leading role in 4P development.
The anchor firms will utilize the services of the Horticultural Development Council (HDC) Market Linkage Advisor (see C3.1) to
prepare 4P EOIs and proposals, and will use the local Agritex agents, horticultural officers, and ARDA irrigation scheme/VHG
managers to assist in identifying and mobilizing APGs/SHFs. If the 4P EOI is cleared by the PMU, the 4P partners led by the anchor
firm will be requested for full 4P business plan for final screening by the Technical Assistance Committee (review to include
adherence to IFAD’s safeguard policies) and then approval by the Project Steering Committee (PSC). When approved the 4P
inclusive business plan will be submitted for IFAD No Objection. 
4P Capacity Building. The 4P APGs/SHF members of the approved4P business plan will receive technical and business capacity
building. This capacity building should complement and be in addition to that which could be provided by: (i) anchor firms (ii) service
provider partners in the 4P business plan, (iii) Agritex, ARDA, AMA, ZIMTRADE, and other government agencies and parastatals.
Technical assistance and training may include farming as a business, group organization and dynamics, contract farming, crop
selection, climate-resilient agronomic practices, value chain logistics, conflict resolution, certification[55], agriculture processing,
quality control, etc. in addition to start up kits, youth will receive holistic approach to provide them with technical business,
entrepreneurial, financial and life skills.
Sub component 1.3: 4P Matching Grants (MGs) and Public Infrastructure. This aims to increase the ability of the selected 20 4Ps
to produce and market high value horticultural products using climate-resilient and innovative technologies. This sub-component
provides MGs to 4P partners to partially support both fixed and working capital investments necessary for the approved 4P business
plan, as well as investments in public infrastructure.
10/27
There are three windows of MG support available to 4Ps:
APG Core investments. This window will be limited to APG and SHF partners. The ‘Core’ window items include MGs for
start-up inputs, services, equipment, machinery, and climate proofing infrastructure. In this regard, 4P anchor firms and SPs
will not be eligible for core window support.
Climate Smart investments. This window will be open to all 4P partners, and is intended to provide MGs to cover the higher
upfront costs of using climate resilient technologies. The Climate Resilience MG window will include investments that fall into
clearly defined categories of climate-smart agriculture (e.g. drip irrigation, protected agriculture, and solar power).Emphasis
will also be given to investments on women relevant activities (post-harvest intervention like grading, packaging and simple
processing)
Innovation investments. This window is open to all 4P partners, and will provide MGs to cover the higher risks/costs of
adapting innovative technologies/processes. This could include investments that demonstrate institutional, product or process
innovations with the potential to enhance the 4Ps competitive position in horticulture, and that if successful would likely be up-
scaled nationwide. Innovations to be demonstrated include the introduction of new crops/varieties that are tolerant to heat,
drought or flooding, and offer higher yield and better nutritional value, agronomic methods/equipment, efficient utilisation of
water, climate resilient protected agriculture technologies and sustainable fertilizer options, the use of smart-phone based
farmer registration and extension systems, and new innovative processing techniques and labour saving technologies to
benefit women and youth. The 4P MG budget, target groups, objectives, scoring criteria and conditions are detailed Table 1
below.
Table 1: 4P Matching Grant eligibility and conditions
Category 1: APG Core Investments
Category 2:  Climate Smart
Investments
Category 3: Innovation
Investments
IFAD Budget
US$5.0 million
US$2.0 million
US$1.0 million
Target group
APGs and APG members in 4Ps
All 4P partners
All 4P partners
Objectives
Enhanced ability of APGs and APG
members to produce and market
horticultural produce and, products
Enhanced climate resilience for
all 4P partners primarily benefits
flowing to APGs
Introduction of potentially
scalable innovations by all 4P
partners with primary benefits
flowing to APGs.
Scoring Criteria
(i) technical feasibility, (ii) financial viability
and sustainability, (iii) benefits to
smallholders, (iv)  poverty reduction
impact, (v) nutrition outcomes, (vi)
youth30per cent and women50per cent
participation in APGs
(i) increased climate resilience
(ii) reduction of carbon footprint
(i) degree of innovation
introduced to Zimbabwe (ii)
likelihood of upscaling if
successful
US$ amounts
Average US$ 250,000 per approved 4P
(including one or more APGs)
AverageUS$100,000 per
approved 4P
Average US$ 50,000 per
approved 4P
Counterpart
contribution
Minimum 20per cent in cash or kind by
APG, may include commercial borrowing
APG/SHF investments:
10percent
Anchor Firm/Farm or Service
Provider Investments 30percent
APG/SHF investments:
10percent
Anchor Firm/Farm or Service
Provider Investments:30percent
Total IFAD &
Counterpart
contribution
US$ 6.25 million
US$ 2.50 million
US$ 1.25 million
Sub-Component3 will be managed by the PMU. The day to day operations will be the responsibility of the senior
4P/Partnership Specialist. An outline of the implementation steps follows (see the PIM for a full detailed description):
Step 1. During project start-up, the 4P Matching Grant Manual will be finalised based the approved SACP MG Manual.
Step 2.A 4P Technical Committee will be formed by the PMU and consist of (i) representatives of key horticultural stakeholders
including HDC, Agritex, and Farming Unions and (ii) key individuals within the PMU (i.e., the 4P/Partnership Specialist, the Senior
Horticultural Agribusiness Advisor, EHRF Portfolio Administrator, CSA Advisor, and the Sr Social Inclusion Specialist). The senior
4P/Partnership Specialist will act as the secretariat for the 4P Technical Committee, and will chair the meetings.
11/27
Step 3.At project start-up, the PMU will draft the EOI materials including a copy of the EOI template. The EOI materials package
should be submitted to IFAD for No Objection.
Step 4.The PMU will undertake a Call for EOIs.  This will be publicized through discussion events, mass media (including local and
national newspaper advertisements), direct contacts, business associations and project implementing partners.
Step 5.In response to the Call for 4P EOIs, prospective 4P players will form consortia to develop and submit an EOI. As mentioned
earlier, prospective 4P partners may seek assistance from HDC, government agencies such as Agritex and ARDA, and NGOs with
experiencing in organizing SHFs and operating contract farming/hub & spoke schemes.
Step 6.Successful EOI applicants will be invited to prepare full proposals. As with EOIs, applicants may be supported in development
of proposals by PMU-recruited technical staff, as well as by the HDC MLAFWRD, government agencies such as Agritex, and other
stakeholders such as NGOs with relevant experience.  
Step 7.Upon receiving the full 4P Proposal, the 4P Technical Committee will review the summary and proposal in detail, and prepare
comments dealing with the financial viability, market viability, technical quality, sustainability, poverty reduction impact and
applicability of the proposals. Within two weeks after the submission, the 4P Technical Committee will score all received proposals,
and make a recommendation to (i) award the grant as proposed, (ii) award the grant with certain specified modifications, or (iii) reject
proposal.
Step 8.A formal 4P Technical Committee meeting will be convened to discuss the proposals and recommendations, and
approve/reject them based on their evaluation. Proposals that are rejected can be improved and re-submitted.
Step 9.The approved 4P proposals will be submitted for IFAD No Objection, and to the PSC for information, with the transmittal
memorandum prepared by the 4P Partnership Advisor.
To further support the functioning of the 4Ps, as well as benefitting other households and MSMEs in the 4P catchment area, HEEP
will also invest directly in construction of public infrastructure. Examples of public infrastructure investments include climate smart
farm or feeder roads, community storage, power and water provision, renewable energy etc.
Public infrastructure investments will be identified in consultation with the Rural District Council officials, who will be responsible for
oversight of its construction, operation and maintenance. In addition, public infrastructure investments will be identified as part of
identifying and mobilizing 4Ps where such infrastructure will add value to their 4P investments. The need for public infrastructure
investments may also be identified during the course of implementation of an approved 4P business plan, in which case proposals
can be submitted independent of a 4P application. Feasibility studies for infrastructure will be required, and will include if required any
environmental impact analysis (EIA) and development of Environmental Social and Climate Management Plans (ESCMP).
Link between VHGs and 4Ps : The VHGs will firstly benefit from market linkages brokered through ARDA, as the VHGs will be
managed initially by ARDA employees and will be clustered near ARDA irrigation schemes or estates.  As the VHGs mature, some
will be in a position to join a 4P initiative as partner APGs.  Alternatively, VHGs may continue to work independently or through the
ARDA system to link with local markets, or they may participate in 4Ps indirectly as suppliers to ARDA.
Component 2: Access to Finance.
Sub component 2.1: Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).The expected result of this sub-component is to provide short-
and long-term finance to anchor firms and other partners of 4Ps that will enable them to improve and expand the production and
marketing of high-value horticultural produce.
The EHRF will provide working capital (term <1 year) and medium-term finance (term2-5 years) at commercially benchmarked rates
to 4P anchor firms and other partners with access to export markets (or as relevant domestic markets that pay in foreign exchange).
The EHRF will address the absence of short and especially medium-term finance in the market for the private sector, which is a
binding constraint to the development of the horticultural sector in general, and horticultural 4Ps in particular. The EHRF will be
managed by the RBZ and will be accessible by one or more qualified Private Financial Institutions (PFIs)which:1) are deemed by the
RBZ to be able to manage foreign exchange payments and receipts, and 2) that accept the stipulated terms and conditions of utilizing
EHRF funds. The RBZ will charge qualifying PFIs a concessionary rate currently set at 3per cent on all EHRF advances (30 per cent
 of the current benchmark) and 10 per cent interest rate to the 4P borrower(including the lending rate and the cost of any insurance
cover required by the PFI). Supervision missions will review these initial benchmark interest rates and may make recommendations to
the PMU to modify them based on market conditions. 
PFIs will draw down EHRF funds from RBZ and on-lend to approve4P partners. EHRF finance may be used by the 4P anchor firms
and other partners for any operation of the approved 4P business plan that directly benefits APGs/SHFs. This may include value
chain finance to provide inputs to SHFs (e.g. seeds, agrochemicals, and climate proofing the VC), in the form of in-kind credit, to be
repaid by the SHFs through deductions made from payments for their delivered produce. The EHRF may also be used for imported
service, inputs, machinery, and equipment essential to reach the 4P's export markets. The PFI carries the full credit risk for all EHRF-
financed advances to 4P partners, and therefore must use its own criteria and systems, and own terms and practices for credit terms,
collateral/security requirement, grace periods, etc. The average loan per 4P is projected at US$800,000, there is no minimum or
maximum loan size.
To help ensure that PFIs will be incentivized to advance EHRF funds to 4P partners, HEEP will support risk mitigation measures such
as insurance and credit guarantees for PFIs and for 4P partners. These risk mitigation measures will also reduce the level of collateral
or security needed. The insurance or guarantees will be issued as appropriate by both public and private sector domestic entities
such as the Export Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC), Zimnat, Credsure, First Mutual Limited, as well as international all risk,
maritime and credit insurers covering the shipment and payment risks.
12/27
Reflows from EHRF working capital loans to the PFIs may be lent again to qualified borrowers by the PFI under the same terms and
conditions. If PFI loan reflows are not used within 1 year of repayment, then the funds will be returned to the RBZ. The EHRF will be
financed initially by the IFAD loan, and RBZ will continue operation after project completion. The EHRF may be modified to accept
other like-minded investors over time who accept the terms and conditions of the fund, e.g. other development finance partners,
remittances from the diaspora, etc. The GoZ may choose to provide guarantees or other incentives to attract additional funding for the
EHRF. All PFIs will be required to prepare an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) consistent with SECAP
requirements, including developing an environmental and social policy, procedures and capacities for assessing, managing and
monitoring risks, organizational capacity and competency, and Grievance Redress Mechanisms.  The PIM provides more details on
the key features, the implementation arrangements of EHRF, including IFAD related clearances and No Objections.
Sub-component 2.2: Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending. The expected results of this sub-component are
to increase the range and coverage of financial services and products available to SHFs for at least four commercial banks
or MFIs. This sub-component will strengthen the capacity of financial institutions[56] to develop and deliver financial services in
commercial horticultural and/or those participating in 4Ps, including value chain, group, or individual financing instrument.This will
improve access to finance for SHFs, APGs, and MSMEs. Insurance companies will be assisted with the development of suitable
products for the horticultural sector. The PFI capacity building will be provided by HEEP-recruited specialists, directed and supervised
by the Access to Finance/Social Inclusion Specialist.
Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination.
Sub-component 3.1: Institutional Support. The expected result of this sub-component is to improve the production and marketing
information and policy relevant knowledge products on the horticultural sector and linkages to mainstreaming themes: for example,
case studies on women and youth in horticulture and access to land; smallholder horticulture and climate, nutrition nexus. The result
of this subcomponent will benefit public sector policy makers and private sector investors, and to improve the governance of hub and
spoke arrangements to ensure a fair distribution of risks and benefits to all parties.
This sub-component provides institutional support that complements the capacity building support for ARDA and Agritex in
Component 1.First, HEEP will support MLAFWRD’s Agricultural Information Management System (AMIS) project, which was
revamped in 2020 and collects production, productivity and marketing data on the different value chains in the agricultural sector
through annual surveys. Specifically, HEEP will support the carrying out of annual surveys in the horticultural sector, implemented by
the Division of Strategic Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation at MLAFWRD. HEEP will capitalize on the findings for its own planning
and M&E purposes as well as provide information for policy development. HEEP will also conduct an M&E training to strengthen
capacity of MLAFWRD staff responsible for M&E.
Second, HEEP will support a market linkage specialist consultant at HDC. The HDC represents export-oriented horticultural
producers, and has been designated by the GoZ to lead the “Conventional” pillar of the HRGP. The HDC is firmly committed to an
SHF-inclusive model of growing the horticultural sector, using well-coordinated hub and spoke models of production. The HDC market
linkage advisor (MLA) at HDC will (i) assist in the identification and mobilization of 4P arrangements (e.g. hub & spoke and contract
farming arrangements), (ii) develop clear and fair industry guidelines for fair 4P arrangements, adapting as appropriate Global
Accepted Agricultural Practices (GAAP) and other guidelines (iii) provide any other support to 4P partners to implement 4P inclusive
business plans.
Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination. The project coordination and management costs will be budgeted under this sub-
component, consisting of financing from both IFAD, GoZ and beneficiaries. HEEP will be managed by a PMU, with some functions
supported by or subsumed under the Joint Management Unit (JMU) MLAFWRD is creating for SIRP, SACP, and HEEP.  The JMU
will help programme integration, and promote more cost-effective and higher quality service provision. The PMU will be headed by a
Project Coordinator who reports to the Permanent Secretary of MLAFWRD. The Permanent Secretary is the chair of the Project
Steering Committee for HEEP.
E. Theory of Change
41.
The Theory of Change (ToC) is presented schematically in Annex 2. HEEP aims to support a transformational shift from risky
rain-fed low productivity cereal production and/or low-value horticultural production that does not fully utilize the potential of
irrigation investments. It aims to do this by developing horticultural value chains and addressing key barriers including low
agricultural productivity and investment, weak market linkages, limited access to rural finance, high climate vulnerability, and few
opportunities for women to engage in productive and remunerative agriculture. Women and youth are particularly affected by an
unorganized smallholder agriculture sector, structural gender inequality, an adverse enabling environment and lack of access to
affordable finance. Horticulture has been prioritised by the GoZ as one of the most effective value chains based on its high value,
potential for smallholder production (especially women and youth), potential for growth and climate resilience. Moreover,
horticulture will help diversifying livelihoods, sustaining food security and improving nutrition.
42.
Through Component 1 the project will address these barriers by increasing investment in smallholder climate resilient horticulture
production, linked to new and existing irrigated production areas and by connecting smallholder farmers with producer groups,
larger companies and other private and public sector players to increase the demand and supply for horticultural products from
smallholders, particularly women and youth and to support increasing investment in high-value climate-resilient horticulture crops
for sale and consumption. As part of this, the Component will provide matching grants to the anchor firms, MSMEs and producer
groups through 4P arrangements.
43.
44.
45.
46.
Components 1 and 2 further aim to stimulate the 4P clusters and to enhance the productive participation of smallholders and
MSMEs in these 4P arrangements by providing capacity building on production and marketing, including climate-resilient
production, as well as securing their access to key infrastructure (Component 1), and by securing access to finance for anchor
firms, and to SHFs and MSMEs themselves (Component 2). The two technical components ensure SHFs and MSMEs are able
to invest in more profitable climate resilient horticulture crops, maximised through mutually beneficial 4P arrangements, leading to
higher rural incomes, better food security and nutrition, and resilience.
13/27
To complement these efforts to increase food security and income, the project will also provide dedicated support to improve
nutrition, through behavioural change training and use of VHGs to produce nutritious food for home consumption through
Component 1.
A key approach to drive the growth of the 4Ps is to provide different financing options to the anchor firms. The mix of MGs
(Component 1) and commercial finance (Component 2) caters for the different scales of the 4P business plans and their
investments. While the MGs can be used to finance inputs, services, equipment, and infrastructure that benefit participants across
the 4P cluster, the financing can be used to support larger scale anchor firm investments, covering items that the MGs do not
Key mechanisms for increasing the inclusion of women and youth include the promotion of horticulture crops that are more
accessible and or often cultivated by women and prioritising young people’s skills development and access to the financing
instruments. The use of the GALS methodology will also help to address underlying gender norms that can also hinder women’s
economic and social empowerment, and avoid increasing workloads as part of the project activities. These impact pathways are
based on the assumptions of i) strong macro-economic conditions, no external shocks, and stable prices; ii) project services
being adequately tailored including addressing the barriers to empowerment and iii) export markets for horticultural value chain
remaining attractive.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
47.
48.
49.
Alignment with SDGs. HEEP is aligned to contribute to the achievement of the following SDGs: SDG1 (No poverty) and SDG2
(zero hunger), SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth) and SDG 15 (Life on land). This will mainly be achieved through
market-oriented crop choice, greater productivity of the horticulture sector, and linking targeted beneficiaries to markets. Further,
HEEP’s targeting approach relies largely on very active and beneficial participation of women and girls in all activities, including
co-investments in the HEEPAPGs and clusters SDG5 (Gender Equality). The project also directly promotes inclusive economic
growth and employment through SDG8 (decent work and economic growth) in the leading marketed crop sectors in the whole
implementation area and promotes sustainable agro-industrialisation in the targeted regions through SDG9 (Industry innovation
and infrastructure). Finally, SDG13 (Climate action), HEEP’s targeted interventions will increase adaptive capacity of
smallholders through new, climate smart farming methods and at the same time to generally improve the resilience of
households, through the improved household incomes and asset ownership.
Alignment with national priorities. HEEP is in line with GoZ’s core priorities in the National Development Strategy 1 (2021-
2025) and Agriculture and Food System Transformation (2021-2025) that seeks to improve horticulture development through the
implementation of the Horticultural Recovery Growth Plan (2021). The Plan seeks to transform the smallholder horticulture sub-
sector through the Presidential pillar as well as the conventional “hub and spoke” model. HEEP is in line with the National Food
and Nutrition Security Policy and the Zimbabwe National Nutrition Strategy. The gender parity in HEEP is in line with the National
Gender Policy of Zimbabwe (2017). The HEEP efforts to increase climate change resilience reflects the NDC priorities for CC
adaptation.
Alignment with IFAD’s policies and corporate priorities. At the corporate level, HEEP contributes to all three of IFAD’s
Strategic Objectives 2016-2025). The project also reinforces Zimbabwe’s 2020-2025 COSOP, which highlights two strategic
objectives: (i) SO1, Increased productivity and climate resilience of smallholder agriculture -  to enhance agricultural productivity
and achieve sustainable land and water management, food and nutrition security, and smallholder resilience; (ii) SO2, Improved
market access for SHFs of nutritious foods, by strengthening income pathways to nutrition, added value and improved market
access for SHFs while increasing rural employment opportunities.UNDSCF 2022-2026 is aligned to HEEP in promoting
interventions that focus on holistic rural economic environment and sustainable and inclusive food and agriculture supply chains. 
50.
Harmonization and Partnerships. HEEP will broaden the impact of the SIRP and SACP through focused support of the
horticultural sector, and will in turn build on SIRP infrastructure development support activities, the APG capacity building
activities of SACP and JICA’s support on Smallholder Horticulture Empowerment Promotion. HEEP’s 4P and access to finance
activities are designed to identify and capacitate SHF partnerships with private sector (anchor firms/farms), commercial banks
and other financial institutions.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
51.
The total investment and recurrent costs during the eight-year implementation period, including price and physical contingencies,
duties and taxes are estimated at US$ 66.5 million. This includes base costs amounting to US$ 64.7 million and estimated
physical and price contingencies in the amount of US$ 1.7 million (3 per cent of the total project costs). Estimated foreign
exchange expenditure is about US$ 4.6 (7 per cent of total project costs). Investment costs represent 84 per cent of the base
costs (US$ 54.2 million), with recurrent costs accounting for the remaining 16 per cent (US$ 10.5 million). Component 1 accounts
for 55 per cent (US$ 35.6m) of the total base costs, followed by 26 per cent (US$16.8m) for Component 2 and 19 per cent (US$
12.1 million) for Component 3.
52.
The summary of the total costs showing base costs and total including contingencies is presented in Table 3 below. Tables 4 and
5 below show the breakdown by expenditure category and component.
14/27
53.
Table 1: Summary of Costs by Components (Base costs and total including contingencies)
54.
Table 2: Summary costs by expenditure category (Base costs and total including contingencies)
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
55.
Out of the projected HEEP project costs of US$ 66.5 million, the IFAD loan is projected to finance US$ 37.14 million accounting
for 56 per cent of the total project costs. The IFAD loan includes US$ 17.2 million (47 per cent) for component 1. Component 2
constitutes of US$ 10.3 million ( 28 per cent) of the IFAD loan and US$ 9.5 million (26 per cent) for Component 3.The OPEC
Fund for International Development (OPEC Fund) will finance a total amount of US$ 15 million (23 per cent) of the total project
costs. Co-financing from PFIs is estimated at US$ 8.1 million, covering 12 per cent of the total project costs. This constitutes of
PFI contribution of US$ 5.0 million (8 per cent) and Anchor Firms’ contribution of US$ 3.1 million (4 per cent), of which much of
this will be financed through the profit reflows. Domestic financing from GoZ and beneficiaries is budgeted to cover US$ 6.2
covering 10 per cent of the total project costs. The breakdown by component and expenditure categories by financiers is
presented in Table 5, and by expenditure category and financiers in Table 6.
56.
Table 4: Project costs by component and financier 
15/27
57.
Table 5: Project costs by expenditure category and financier
c. Disbursement
58.
59.
The project cost includes an IFAD Loan of US$37.14 million; GoZ financing of US$5.3 million; OPEC Fund contribution of US$15
million; private sector contribution of US$8.1 million, comprising of US$ 5 million from PFIs and US$3.1 million Anchor Firms
contribution; and beneficiary contribution of US$1 million.
HEEP project duration will be 8 years with a total project cost amounting to US$ 65 million comprising of approximately US$ 51.7
million (79%) investment costs and US$ 13.4 million (21%) recurrent costs. The main categories of expenditures under
investment costs are civil works; grants and subsidies; and training & workshops; while under recurrent costs, the main
categories are salaries & allowances; and operation and maintenance costs.
60.
 Two designated accounts denominated in USD will be opened in the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe into which funds disbursed
from the IFAD Loan Account and OFID Loan Account will be deposited.
61.
Report-based disbursement will be the mechanism used for withdrawing funds from IFAD financings. Interim Financial Reports
(IFRs) package will be used as a basis of submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD. The IFRs package will be included in
the Financial Management and Financial Control Arrangements Letter (FMFCL) and the PIM. Project will be using the Revolving
Fund modality under the report-based disbursements during the implementation period. The first advance should be equal to or
less than the forecast amount of IFAD financed expenditures approved in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for the
period of six months. Further advances to the Designated Account will follow IFR report-based disbursement procedure.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
62.
Financial analysis and economic analysis: The objectives of the financial and economic analysis are to determine the extent to
which participation in the proposed project activities will be financially viable for the target group, calculate incremental production
that would result from project activities; and provide a basis for the economic analysis of the project. Nine (9) crop models were
developed to representative typical farm models of the Village Horticulture Gardens (VHG) in the project area, namely green
maize, sugar bean, tomatoes, butternut, hot chillies, carrot, rape, wheat and sweet potato. The representative crop models used
for the VHG and 4P models have been generated basing on available data on physical inputs/outputs, prices and related
variables obtained from successfully closed and ongoing projects of a similar nature in Zimbabwe like Smallholder Irrigation
Revitalization Programme (SIRP) to estimate “with” project scenario of crop gross margins per ha.
63.
Economic Internal rate of return (EIRR): Given the above analysis, the base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for
HEEP is estimated at 37 per cent with a positive net present value (NPV) of US$ 56.9 million which justifies the project
investment. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.9. The economic profitability indicators are summarised in table 2 below:
64.
Table 2: Economic profitability indicators
16/27
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
65.
66.
67.
Exit strategy. The HEEP focus on building profitable and sustainablebusiness relationships between SHFs, particularly women
and youth and private sector companies supporting horticulture value chains is at the heart to the exit strategy. From Year 2 of the
eight-year project these business relationships will be supported and developed, so that by the end of the project, they will be fully
independent and continue without project support. Project support is removed after Year 4, so that these business relationships
can continue through private sector financing and 4P arrangements before the end of the project. The HEEP exit strategy is
presented in more detail, by component, in Annex 10.
Sustainability. Sustainability of the HEEP benefits and results can be approached at different levels: the smallholder, the farmer
group/cooperative and the value chain. The HEEP exit strategy and its success is closely linked to results achieved at these three
sustainability levels. At the smallholder farmers’ and APG level, HEEP will support modernised, CSA-based production systems
that are suitable to local agro-ecological zones and climatic conditions. Long term environmental resilience and climatic
adaptation will be developed through the HEEP investments. At the same time the long-term approach to mentoring and training
in business and technical skills will significantly improve smallholders’ potential to sustain the benefits from HEEP interventions.
Capacity building in nutrition-related subjects and environmentally sound HEEP interventions in irrigation, water systems and
infrastructure all build household and community sustainability.
The HEEP will train group and cooperatives to professionally conduct their business and develop into fully independent,
financially robust and self-managing partners in the value chain operations. Being successful in this area will be one of the key
factors for sustaining the HEEP results and benefits in the period after the project closure. For Anchor Firm/Farms, APGs, and
service providers in the 4P, the HEEP approach is a rolling process of action-oriented brokering, dialogue and investment
facilitation among the key actors of each VC, to catalyse investments and remove bottlenecks to increase growth, trade and
profitability of horticulture VCs. In total, the combination of the project impact on farmers, groups/cooperatives, the enterprises and
the whole value chain, as well as the private sector focus of the project, will lead to long term sustainability of the HEEP benefits.
68.
The infrastructure built will have three pathways to sustainability, leading towards a successful project exit. First, the infrastructure
is demand driven, prioritising the horticulture VC infrastructure that best serves the needs of the community; second, the owners
and beneficiaries of the infrastructure will contribute at least 10 per cent of the required financing in cash; and third, the
management arrangements for the infrastructure will be competence-driven, with users paying for services.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
69.
A selection of keys risks that could affect project implementation and mitigation measures are presented below, with a
comprehensive Integrated Risk Framework in Annex 5.
70.
Country context: The overall country context risk is high. The deepening economic crisis exacerbated by COVID-19, high inflation
has led to considerable public discontent. The country faces macroeconomic instability, rampant corruption, lack of investment in
infrastructure and poor economic and financial governance that increases risk for investments in agriculture. The Ukraine crisis
has caused increases in fuel, fertilizer and commodity prices. Zimbabwe is included in the 2022 list of fragile countries[57] by the
World Bank. This in line with indicators on governance, political situation, economy, security, human development and
environment. Fragility in Zimbabwe is driven by policy volatility, corruption, and a low institutional capacity to deliver basic
services. HEEP will encourage stakeholder dialogue to build confidence on GOZ market-based solutions proposed under the
Ministry's Horticultural Framework. HEEP will ensure adherence to IFAD procurement and anti-corruption rules, and competitive
recruitment of a HEEP key staff to ensure good project governance. HEEP’s focus on horticulture for export is aimed at reducing
71.
72.
the vulnerability of the poor to macroeconomic shocks.  HEEP will help address fragility by assigning the private sector a greater
role in promoting inclusive agricultural development. CLPE and Government engagement are promoted. IFAD’s participation in
UN coordination offers a platform for dialogue in priority topics. Stakeholder dialogue will be adopted to build confidence on
Government of Zimbabwe market-based solutions. Competitive recruitment of staff, binding agreements, private sector
involvement and promoting an effective implementation system.
17/27
Environment and Climate Context: Overall environment and climate context is substantial. The country is highly vulnerable to
climate change (droughts, intermittent floods, prolonged dry spells). Projections estimate an increase between 1 to 1.5 degrees
by 2040. This will have negative consequences on crop yields, food security, and nutrition—incidences will increase due to
climate change.HEEP will promoteclimate-resilient agriculture techniques to enhance environmental sustainability. Water use
efficiency will be promoted in the irrigation schemes. Sustainable land use, including the use of renewable energy, will contribute
to reducing GHG emissions. Climate-resilient infrastructure will secure production and reduce the risk of low yields. The
promotion of good climate-resilient agricultural practices will address drought, flooding, pests, diseases incidences, and land
degradation
Institutional Capacity for Implementation & Sustainability: Overall institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risk
is considered substantial. Limited capacity of the PMU and the Ministry to manage matching grant investment pipeline
generation, prioritization, investment decisions, and disbursements, procurements, accounting and reporting on the fund
utilization and counterpart contributions. This may lead to delays in the expected implementation schedule of the project and/or
missing information in the project financial and progress reports. HEEP will provide capacity building to PMU and relevant
institutions engaged in the implementation of HEEP. Programmatic matching grant approach in IFAD-financed value chain
projects in Zimbabwe (i.e. HEEP, and ongoing SACP) enables coordinated capacity building support, by IFAD to ensure effective
matching grant implementation. The existing matching grant guideline, already developed under SACP, will be utilized for HEEP,
including for the process of pipeline generation, prioritization, investment decisions, disbursements, accounting and reporting. In
HEEP, additional procurement support by PMU staff will be provided to beneficiaries to ensure access to highest quality available
input materials and equipment, and affordable pricing. At HEEP, start-up phase, dedicated technical assistance will be provided
by IFAD to HEEP as well as SACP in the implementation and accounting of the matching grant manual.
73.
Financial management: Overall financial management risk is considered substantial. The Ministry has struggled with good
budgeting for the existing project (SIRP) resulting in low absorption. Squeeze on foreign currency could lead to unavailability of
funding for project activities when needed. The accounting systems/software allows adequate booking, sufficient reporting for
IFAD requirements. The absence of data back-ups for the accounting software exposes project to a risk of loss of financial data.
Proposed mitigation measures include: preparation of timely and realistic annual work plans and budgets in order to minimise
delays in implementation of project activities; training finance staff on preparation of interim financial reports to enhance quality
and reactivity in financial monitoring, including cash flow forecasting; and establishing back-up system for accounting data. If
mitigating actions are implemented the residual risk is expected to be moderate.
74.
Financial Management: The overall fiduciary control risk is assessed as Substantial. The implementation of proposed mitigation
measures will partially offset this risk and reduce it to Moderate. 
I. Environment and Social category
75.
HEEPs environmental and social categorisation is classified as Substantial. Although the main environmental and social risks
associated with the project, as outlined in the Preliminary SECAP review note in Annex 6, are reversible, they might result in
adverse impacts on the environment and humans if not properly mitigated. The project has developed an Environmental,
Climate, and Social Management Framework (ESCMF) and a generic ECSMP. The ECSMF was used to assess the
environmental, climate, and social contexts and identified opportunities to enhance positive impacts and mitigate adverse risks
during the design of HEEP. The ECSMP will be used as a monitoring plan that will include monitoring parameters, frequency of
monitoring, and responsibility for monitoring, timelines and costs. The costs for implementation of the ESMP are included in the
ESCMF, PIM and project cost tabs. Other documents that will guide implementation include a pesticide management plan,
stakeholder management, and a grievance redress mechanism. The project consists of environmental sustainability and
sustainable natural resource management activities, enhancing global environmental benefits. The project will be guided by
policies, and legal and institutional frameworks that support environmental sustainability and social inclusion.
76.
 HEEP will collaborate with the GoZ institutions and private sector partners to ensure that agronomic practices are compatible
with sustainable catchment management. Any agreement with private sector will require compliance with formal due diligence
process, which is co-ordinated by Global Engagement Partnership and Resource Mobilization Division. All activities to be
financed by the project including activities of 4P APGs will be monitored for compliance with GoZ and IFAD environmental
legislation. The GALS and capacity building, including in nutrition sensitive value chains will address and manage social problems
among the beneficiaries. Social risks incurred during implementation will be addressed grievance redress mechanism is
summarised in section K and the HEEP ESCMF.
J. Climate Risk classification
77.
Climate risk classification. The HEEP climate risk classification is Substantial. The selected provinces include agro-climatic
zones where periodic crop failures occur due to erratic rainfall. The beneficiaries risk droughts, intermittent floods, and increasing
temperatures. The low adaptive capacity of the targeted beneficiaries is exacerbated by poverty and constrained ability to invest
in climate change adaptation measures. A targeted adaptation assessment of sector and sub-sector impacts and vulnerabilities,
as well as the climate stressors and risks, was done to guide the design. It evaluates adaptation options and related costs and
identifies optimal opportunities for HEEP. An in-depth climate vulnerability analysis for Zimbabwe, with a value chain focus,
undertaken by the University of Cape Town informed the HEEP design. In addition, the IFAD CARD (Climate Adaptation in Rural
Development) tool simulations of the ISIMIP model, projections will be taken into account when choosing the value chains to
target IFAD interventions in Zimbabwe to ensure the resilience of these crops to the multiple impacts of climate change.
18/27
78.
These climate analyses show that the adverse effects of CC significantly affect agricultural production. The primary driver for
climate vulnerability in the smallholder sector is rainfall variability and intensity. The project will support climate resilient
infrastructure and equipment to reduce climate vulnerability to natural hazards, food insecurity and nutrition, and exposure to
climate change. Sustainable land use, including renewable energy, will reduce GHG emissions. Climate resilient infrastructure
(small-scale irrigation, protected agriculture etc.) will improve productivity and reduce the risk of low yields. Good climate resilient
horticulture production practices will be promoted to address drought, flooding, pests, disease incidences, and land degradation. 
79.
Additional resources will complement a need to increase climate finance to enhance climate change adaptation activities targeted
through the Global Environment Facility[58] or ASAP+. These resources will provide climate resilient infrastructure development,
renewable energy, increased access to water, diversified horticultural value chains, and research and development of locally
adapted drought-tolerant crops and varieties.
80.
Climate change adaptation: HEEP will mainstream climate resilience, and sustainable natural resource management in
horticulture production. The key activities to be promoted include: Access to water: provision of boreholes, water harvesting
equipment, irrigation water systems; Renewable energy – (solar powered water pumps); CSA based horticulture production
systems: protected agriculture, insurance,  improved crop varieties; improved agronomic practices, sustainable fertiliser options,
Climate resilient infrastructure: climate resilient irrigation schemes and feeder roads. This will contribute to IFAD’s strategic
objectives of “strengthening environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.”
Climate risks have been identified and appropriate adaptation and mitigation measures are proposed in the Environment Social
and Climate Management Framework and SECAP review note.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
81.
Project management and coordination
82.
83.
MLAFWRD will be the Lead Agency of HEEP, with Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry as the responsible officer.
MLAFWRD will establish a JMU that will include the functions of both the Project Management Unit of HEEP, the PCU of the
SIRP project and the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) of the new SACP. This unit will be responsible for the
management of the implementation of HEEP. The JMU arrangement is expected to bring synergies and focus to the
implementation of the IFAD country programme and provide broader and deeper expertise to tackle rural development
challenges of Zimbabwe. 
A joint Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted for SIRP, SACP and HEEP. The PSC will be responsible for
programme oversight and strategic guidance. The PSC is chaired by the MLAFWRD. The composition of the PSC and the roles
and responsibilities are presented in the PIM. A Project Technical Committee (PTC) will be responsible for reviewing 4P
proposals as well as other key technical proposals, and will make recommendations for PSC action. The PTC will meet bi-
monthly or as required and will be composed of members from the Horticulture Development Council, and representatives from
business organizations such as the Confederation of Zimbabwe Industries or Zimbabwe National Chamber of Commerce,
MOFED, Agritex horticulture branch, and MLAFWFRD.
84.
Project Management and Staff 
85.
The JMU staff will consist of a mix of dedicated staff for each project and shared officers working for SIRP, SACP and HEEP.
The staff will be either hired or seconded/attached. The JMU and the PMU of HEEP will be based in Harare.
86.
The HEEP National Coordinator, Chief Accountant, Senior Procurement Officer, Senior Horticultural and Agribusiness Advisor,
Senior 4P Specialist, Farming as a Business Advisor, and Senior Climate Smart Agriculture Advisor will be competitively
recruited. The recruitment process will aim to reach out to a wide range of interested professionals, including diaspora. HEEP will
shares offices and three staff members with SIRP and SACP, namely: Office Secretary, Senior Social Inclusion Specialist and
KM/Communication Specialist The list of staff and TORs are provided in the PIM. To manage the field operations, HEEP will
establish three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU), in Bulawayo, Mutare and Masvingo. In the 20 VHG districts,
AGRITEX extension and ARDA staff, will be responsible for implementation and working closely with 4P anchor firms, and other
stakeholders to assist SHFs.
19/27
87.
VHG activities (Sub-component 1.1) will be managed by ARDA, who will bring in other GoZ agencies and departments as
required for various tasks of implementation including AGRITEX, Department of Irrigation (DOI), ZINWA, and AMA. The
identification and capacity building of 4P actors will be managed by the PMU (for EoIs); PTC (for screening of eligible business
plans); and PSC (for approval of business plans). In addition, SPs will provide capacity building support to 4P/APGs/SHFs;
4Ppartner’saccess approved Matching Grant items procured by PMU, and 4P Anchor Firms eligible for applying for EHRF credit
from RBZ-approved PFI.
88.
The PMU will be responsible for implementing the MG component. Unlike SACP, there will be no cash transfers to grantees. 
Instead, all items in MG will be procured by the PMU and transferred/provided to grantees, this is not a service that can be
provided by a commercial bank. The use of other third-party institutions for managing the MG, such as an accounting firm, was
considered by the PDT, but viewed as likely to cause unnecessary delays and would significantly increase management costs.
89.
The public infrastructure will be guided by infrastructure specialist at the relevant RPMU, backstopped by the NPMU Senior
Infrastructural Specialist
90.
91.
The technical feasibility studies (under Component 2) will be undertaken by the department with the necessary competence for
the selected activity. The DoI will undertake irrigation feasibility studies, and District Development Fund will undertake the
feasibility assessment for roads and water supply systems. HEEP may recruit technical specialists to assist in this process. In the
screening for environmental and social risks, EIAs and EMPs will be elaborated with the support of the Environmental
Management Agency officers.
The EHRF will be managed by RBZ, under policy guidance from MOFED. With the assistance of the Export Finance Portfolio
administrator and the international finance specialist, RBZ will develop systems to: (i) solicit, screen, and approve applications
from commercial banks and building societies that are interested in becoming EHRF PFIs (ii) extend credit to PFIs for on-lending
to 4P anchor firms or service provider members (iii) report on all aspects of EHRF operations. HEEP will provide technical
assistance for the capacity building of commercial banks and MFIs, who are interested in expanding their lending activities to
SHFs, either directly or through value chain financing. This technical assistance will be provided by the Access to Finance
Specialist, as well as by PMU-recruited technical specialists.
92.
Institutional capacity building activities will be managed by the NPMU. Support to MLAFWRD for the horticultural surveys under
AMIS will be coordinated by the NPMU Senior Horticultural Advisor, who will also coordinate support to the HDC. In addition,
HEEP has budget allocations to recruit high quality local and international experts to conduct other institutional capacity building
activities.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
93.
94.
95.
The overall fiduciary control risk is assessed as Substantial. The implementation of proposed mitigation measures will partially
offset this risk and reduce it to Moderate. Below is the assessment of each of the main FM areas and proposed mitigation
measures.
Organization and Staffing: The main risk is the inexperience of staff with management of donor funds and IFAD procedures.
The day-to-day FM functions including budgeting, accounting, funds’ flow management, internal control, financial reporting, and
ensuring timely external audits will be the responsibility of the PMU Chief Accountant with required qualifications and experience,
who will be recruited and will report to the Programme Coordinator with dotted line of reporting to the Chief Accountant (of the
Ministry). The Chief Accountant shall be engaged under a performance-based contract as outlined in the job description. The
Programme Accountant will be supported by a dedicated Assistant Accountant. It will be essential that the finance staff recruited
for the project are trained on IFAD procedures and undergo continuous capacity building, covering among others, IFAD financial
management procedures and requirements. Prior to disbursement of project funds, the Ministry should provide evidence of
recruitment and contracting of suitable candidate to fill the position of Program Accountant to be directly responsible for HEEP.
Budgeting: Key risks arise from the current top–down budgeting at MLAFWRD, inadequate disclosure of grant funds, and
inadequate experience with IFAD budget requirements. As a Government Ministry, MLAFWRD follows the budget preparation
guidelines set out in the Public Finance Management Act (2009) and the annual budget guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Finance. The overall budget for HEEP will be decided between the GoZ and IFAD and outlined in the Financing Agreement.
Whereas the annual budgeting will be done in line with GoZ’s existing budget framework and timetable as part of MLAFWRD’s
regular budget submission, detailed HEEP Annual Work Plans and Budgets approved by the Project Steering Committee will be
submitted to IFAD for No Objection no later than 60 days before the start of the fiscal year. The AWPB, as may be amended
during the course the fiscal year, will strictly dictate eligible expenditures for that particular year. The budget line under which
IFAD funds will be allocated will be clearly identified and reported upon as part of MLAFWRD budget allocations, to ensure that
there are no overlaps or duplication of support to the Ministry.
96.
Funds Flow and Disbursement: The proceeds of the financing will be used for eligible expenditures as defined in the Financing
Agreement and will be in line with the allocations by disbursement category as specified in Schedule II of the Financing
Agreement. To ensure traceability of funds and mitigate potential misappropriation, proceeds of financing will be held in
segregated accounts to allow for full traceability at all times. Three disbursement procedures will be employed: (i) Advance of the
Designated Accounts; (ii) Direct Payments directly from the IFAD/OPEC FUND Accounts (exclusively for payments over US$
100,000); and (iii) Reimbursement of expenditures pre-financed by the Government of Zimbabwe (if any).
97.
The designated accounts will be operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with GoZ procedures and
regulations. IFAD will be responsible for loan administration on behalf of OPEC FUND.
98.
In addition to the Designated Accounts, one operational account, also denominated in US$, will be opened in a commercial bank
mutually acceptable to the GoZ and IFAD. The day-to-day expenditures incurred by the project will be settled from this account.
The operational account will be managed by the HEEP PMU. There are no anticipated transfers of funds to the provinces and all
transactions will be executed at the national level. Funds for implementation of programme activities at the provincial level (both
directly by programme staff and through implementing entities) will be advanced as imprest to be accounted for by the staff and
implementing agencies e.g. ARDA.
20/27
99.
The HEEP PMU will have the responsibility of coordinating and ensuring the smooth flow of funds so that funds are available as
and when necessary to meet programme financial obligations towards suppliers, service providers and contractors. This will
involve complying with funds management steps and actions that are further described in the PIM.
100.
In order to achieve proper implementation of disbursement methods and smooth tracking of funds, MLAFWRD will ensure that
under HEEP: (i) There is adequate training of staff on IFAD disbursement methods as documented in the FMFC Handbook; (ii)
the chart of accounts will be structured to facilitate recording and reporting of transactions by financier/source of funds, by
programme component and sub-component, and by expenses categories; and (iii) there is proper monitoring of utilisation of
financial resources and control of commingling of funds with any other funding source.
101.
Tax exemption: GoZ is contributing cash in local currency (LC), while VAT bills from supplier are in US$. Whereas the
government will refund the VAT in local currency, the Tax Authority (ZIMRA) requires suppliers to pay in US$. Suppliers are then
forced to purchase US dollar. The least expensive way to purchase US$ is at the official rate/channel, however, due to in-country
shortage of US$, process is lengthy and may cause the supplier to pay penalties to the Tax Authority (ZIMRA) for the delay. As
an alternative, the supplier can by US$ at the parallel market at a much higher cost to pay VAT on time. This practice represents
a challenge for suppliers and presents risk to the project. HEEP management through the Ministry should keep engaging the MoF
and ZIMRA in order to obtain exemption from tax (VAT) payment (GoZ co-financing will, instead, be recorded as in-kind
contribution); or allow HEEP suppliers/contractors to pay VAT in local currency.
102.
Accounting Systems, Policies and Procedures: The project will use the same accounting software currently in use by SIRP –
Sage Pastel Evolution accounting software. The software has been customised to produce IFAD-specific financial reports that
include reports by categories, components and sub-components, and by financiers. The software is not web-based but there may
not be need for such functionality since processing of all accounting transactions is centralised at the PMU. There are no back-
ups for the accounting software. The software service provider should be engaged to propose a technical solution to mitigate this
risk. The chart of accounts (CoA) will be developed in such a way to mirror HEEP’s structure in terms of its components, sub-
components, activities, financiers and expenses categories. HEEP should take advantage of the customization of the accounting
software that has already been done for SIRP.
103.
Financial Reporting Arrangements: The PMU will be required to prepare and submit separate quarterly Interim Financial
Reports to account for activities funded, no later than 45 days after the end of each quarter. The PMU will maintain adequate
filing system of all relevant supporting documentation. In line with IFAD’s requirements, documentation will be reviewed by
supervision missions and audits. The financial reports will be designed to provide relevant information to management, financiers
and other stakeholders monitoring the programme’s performance. HEEP’s internal controls including authorization and approval
processes will rely on the accounting and internal control guidelines documented in the PIM. Annual project financial statements
shall be prepared in compliance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS – Accrual). The financial
statements should include budget versus actual analysis for the year, statement of sources and uses of funds (by category and
component), designated account reconciliation, and statement of withdrawal applications.
104.
Internal audit: MLAFWRD’s internal audit unit will play a role in ensuring a sound control environment for transaction processing
and asset safeguarding. Due to its level of development, the internal audit unit may have limited capacity available to cover
HEEP activities as part of its routine oversight functions. As part of start-up, internal audit staff assigned to the programme will be
trained in IFAD procedures. Supervision missions will report on the activity of the internal audit with respect to HEEP by
reviewing their reports and assessing management’s responsiveness to any recommendations formulated as a complementary
measure. Adherence to the internal control framework will be verified during the annual internal and external audit exercises (see
below) and reported to IFAD in the form of an internal audit report and Management letter, in line with IFAD’s audit guidelines.
Compliance with the internal controls will also be part of the fiduciary checks performed during IFAD supervision missions and
external Audit.
105.
External audits: As provided for in the Government of Zimbabwe’s Audit Act, the Auditor General may undertake the external
audit of the IFAD grant funds together with the related co-financing and counterpart funding as part of their mandate. The office of
the auditor general has limited capacities in terms of manpower and equipment. As a consequence, the office is not able to fulfil
its mandate and as a result the existing IFAD project (SIRP) is audited by a private sector auditor. The potential of the office of
the auditor general is expected to be progressively achieved. This should be assessed during implementation to determine
suitability to conduct project audits. In compliance with IFAD’s General Conditions, the HEEP financial statements, prepared by
the PMU, will be audited annually and the audit report and related management letter submitted to IFAD no later than six months
after the end of each fiscal year. During the initial years of programme implementation, external audit of the programme will be
contracted out to private audit firms whilst IFAD continues to review capacities at the Office of the Auditor General. Appointment
of a private audit firm will follow IFAD procurement guidelines and the ToR for the engagement of the audit firm will be subject to
No Objection by IFAD.
106.
The overall fiduciary control risk is assessed as Substantial. The implementation of proposed mitigation measures will partially
offset this risk and reduce it to Moderate. Below is the assessment of each of the main FM areas and proposed mitigation
measures.
107.
Organization and Staffing: The main risk is the inexperience of staff with management of donor funds and IFAD procedures.
The day-to-day FM functions including budgeting, accounting, funds’ flow management, internal control, financial reporting, and
ensuring timely external audits will be the responsibility of the PMU Chief Accountant with required qualifications and experience,
who will be recruited and will report to the Programme Coordinator with dotted line of reporting to the Chief Accountant (of the
Ministry). The Chief Accountant shall be engaged under a performance-based contract as outlined in the job description. The
Programme Accountant will be supported by a dedicated Assistant Accountant. It will be essential that the finance staff recruited
for the project are trained on IFAD procedures and undergo continuous capacity building, covering among others, IFAD financial
management procedures and requirements. Prior to disbursement of project funds, the Ministry should provide evidence of
recruitment and contracting of suitable candidate to fill the position of Program Accountant to be directly responsible for HEEP.
21/27
108.
Budgeting: Key risks arise from the current top–down budgeting at MLAFWRD, inadequate disclosure of grant funds, and
inadequate experience with IFAD budget requirements. As a Government Ministry, MLAFWRD follows the budget preparation
guidelines set out in the Public Finance Management Act (2009) and the annual budget guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Finance. The overall budget for HEEP will be decided between the GoZ and IFAD and outlined in the Financing Agreement.
Whereas the annual budgeting will be done in line with GoZ’s existing budget framework and timetable as part of MLAFWRD’s
regular budget submission, detailed HEEP Annual Work Plans and Budgets approved by the Project Steering Committee will be
submitted to IFAD for No Objection no later than 60 days before the start of the fiscal year. The AWPB, as may be amended
during the course the fiscal year, will strictly dictate eligible expenditures for that particular year. The budget line under which
IFAD funds will be allocated will be clearly identified and reported upon as part of MLAFWRD budget allocations, to ensure that
there are no overlaps or duplication of support to the Ministry.
109.
Funds Flow and Disbursement: The proceeds of the financing will be used for eligible expenditures as defined in the Financing
Agreement and will be in line with the allocations by disbursement category as specified in Schedule II of the Financing
Agreement. To ensure traceability of funds and mitigate potential misappropriation, proceeds of financing will be held in
segregated accounts to allow for full traceability at all times. Three disbursement procedures will be employed: (i) Advance of the
Designated Accounts; (ii) Direct Payments directly from the IFAD/OPEC FUND Accounts (exclusively for payments over US$
100,000); and (iii) Reimbursement of expenditures pre-financed by the Government of Zimbabwe (if any).
110.
The designated accounts will be operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with GoZ procedures and
regulations. IFAD will be responsible for loan administration on behalf of OPEC FUND.
111.
In addition to the Designated Accounts, one operational account, also denominated in US$, will be opened in a commercial bank
mutually acceptable to the GoZ and IFAD. The day-to-day expenditures incurred by the project will be settled from this account.
The operational account will be managed by the HEEP PMU. There are no anticipated transfers of funds to the provinces and all
transactions will be executed at the national level. Funds for implementation of programme activities at the provincial level (both
directly by programme staff and through implementing entities) will be advanced as imprest to be accounted for by the staff and
implementing agencies e.g. ARDA.
112.
The HEEP PMU will have the responsibility of coordinating and ensuring the smooth flow of funds so that funds are available as
and when necessary to meet programme financial obligations towards suppliers, service providers and contractors. This will
involve: complying with funds management steps and actions that are further described in the PIM.
113.
In order to achieve proper implementation of disbursement methods and smooth tracking of funds, MLAFWRD will ensure that
under HEEP:(i) There is adequate training of staff on IFAD disbursement methods as documented in the FMFC Handbook; (ii)
the chart of accounts will be structured to facilitate recording and reporting of transactions by financier/source of funds, by
programme component and sub-component, and by expenses categories; and (iii) there is proper monitoring of utilisation of
financial resources and control of commingling of funds with any other funding source.
114.
Tax exemption: GoZ is contributing cash in local currency (LC), while VAT bills from supplier are in US$. Whereas the
government will refund the VAT in local currency, the Tax Authority (ZIMRA) requires suppliers to pay in US$. Suppliers are then
forced to purchase US dollar. The least expensive way to purchase US$ is at the official rate/channel, however, due to in-country
shortage of US$, process is lengthy and may cause the supplier to pay penalties to the Tax Authority (ZIMRA) for the delay. As
an alternative, the supplier can by US$ at the parallel market at a much higher cost to pay VAT on time. This practice represents
a challenge for suppliers and presents risk to the project. HEEP management through the Ministry should keep engaging the MoF
and ZIMRA in order to obtain exemption from tax (VAT) payment (GoZ co-financing will, instead, be recorded as in-kind
contribution); or allow HEEP suppliers/contractors to pay VAT in local currency.
115.
Accounting Systems, Policies and Procedures: The project will use the same accounting software currently in use by SIRP –
Sage Pastel Evolution accounting software. The software has been customised to produce IFAD-specific financial reports that
include reports by categories, components and sub-components, and by financiers. The software is not web-based but there may
not be need for such functionality since processing of all accounting transactions is centralised at the PMU. There are no back-
ups for the accounting software. The software service provider should be engaged to propose a technical solution to mitigate this
risk. The chart of accounts (CoA) will be developed in such a way to mirror HEEP’s structure in terms of its components, sub-
components, activities, financiers and expenses categories. HEEP should take advantage of the customization of the accounting
software that has already been done for SIRP.
116.
Financial Reporting Arrangements: The PMU will be required to prepare and submit separate quarterly Interim Financial
Reports to account for activities funded, no later than 45 days after the end of each quarter. The PMU will maintain adequate
filing system of all relevant supporting documentation. In line with IFAD’s requirements, documentation will be reviewed by
supervision missions and audits. The financial reports will be designed to provide relevant information to management, financiers
and other stakeholders monitoring the programme’s performance. HEEP’s internal controls including authorization and approval
processes will rely on the accounting and internal control guidelines documented in the PIM. Annual project financial statements
shall be prepared in compliance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS – Accrual). The financial
statements should include budget versus actual analysis for the year, statement of sources and uses of funds (by category and
component), designated account reconciliation, and statement of withdrawal applications.
22/27
117.
Internal audit: MLAFWRD’s internal audit unit will play a role in ensuring a sound control environment for transaction processing
and asset safeguarding. Due to its level of development, the internal audit unit may have limited capacity available to cover
HEEP activities as part of its routine oversight functions. As part of start-up, internal audit staff assigned to the programme will be
trained in IFAD procedures. Supervision missions will report on the activity of the internal audit with respect to HEEP by
reviewing their reports and assessing management’s responsiveness to any recommendations formulated as a complementary
measure. Adherence to the internal control framework will be verified during the annual internal and external audit exercises (see
below) and reported to IFAD in the form of an internal audit report and Management letter, in line with IFAD’s audit guidelines.
Compliance with the internal controls will also be part of the fiduciary checks performed during IFAD supervision missions and
external Audit.
118.
External audits: As provided for in the Government of Zimbabwe’s Audit Act, the Auditor General may undertake the external
audit of the IFAD grant funds together with the related co-financing and counterpart funding as part of their mandate. The office of
the auditor general has limited capacities in terms of manpower and equipment. As a consequence, the office is not able to fulfil
its mandate and as a result the existing IFAD project (SIRP) is audited by a private sector auditor. The potential of the office of
the auditor general is expected to be progressively achieved. This should be assessed during implementation to determine
suitability to conduct project audits. In compliance with IFAD’s General Conditions, the HEEP financial statements, prepared by
the PMU, will be audited annually and the audit report and related management letter submitted to IFAD no later than six months
after the end of each fiscal year. During the initial years of programme implementation, external audit of the programme will be
contracted out to private audit firms whilst IFAD continues to review capacities at the Office of the Auditor General. Appointment
of a private audit firm will follow IFAD procurement guidelines and the ToR for the engagement of the audit firm will be subject to
No Objection by IFAD.
119.
Procurement
120.
PRM Assessment. At its design phase, the project scores an INHERENT procurement risk of 2.22 which is considered moderate
risk. The weaknesses of the Zimbabwe procurement system lie mainly at the accountability and transparency stages and
contract monitoring stage. Specific and targeted corrective measures stipulated in the PRM and PIM should be followed to
improve performance and lower risk. These will likely improve risk from the higher end of medium risk to the lower end medium
risk.
121.
Procurement Regulations. HEEP procurement activities for commodities (Goods, Works and Services) will be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the country’s procurement regulations governed the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public
Assets Act no 5/2017 [Chapter 22:23]. These are published in the Government Gazette on 4 August 2017, and further clarified
by Statutory Instrument 5 of year 2018 (CAP. 22:23 Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (General) Regulations);
and by the Procurement Manual issued by the Procurement Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (PRAZ) on May 29th, 2019. The
Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act applies to the procurement of goods, construction works and services by
procuring entities and to all stages of procurement. The national regulations shall apply to the extent that such provisions are
consistent with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. For all types of
procurement contracts IFAD’s Standard Bidding Documents shall be used in lieu of national Standard Bidding Documents. The
execution of the first procurement plan activities will only start following the publication of the General Procurement Notice. As far
as is applicable, and to ensure smooth implementation throughout the project’s lifetime, similar activities will be packaged
together, following IFAD’s guidance on the matter. Similarly, the project will seek framework agreements for routine and iterative
purchases (works and services).
122.
Thresholds for the selection of the procurement methods under each commodity shall be those set out in the Procurement
Management Letter (PML) and as proposed in the PIM. The thresholds contained in the Zimbabwe Procurement Act and
regulations shall not prevail. Procurement oversight review will be established in accordance with the score obtained in the
Procurement Risk Matrix. Revisions related to the PP, including any new procurement arrangements, are subject to IFAD’s prior
approval. The Borrower will ensure the PP budgets under each respective activity are updated accordingly and reflect the
prevailing market situation. The estimated budgets, as approved by IFAD, will constitute a basis for determining the commercial
reasonableness of the actual cost.
123.
Institutional Arrangements. Procurement activities will be carried out by the PMU. The PMU will include one Procurement
Officer and one Procurement Assistant. They will be assisted by junior procurement officers at the three regional offices. The
PMU with the support of the regional offices will elaborate all technical documents necessary to prepare the solicitation document
management. Guidance to the PMU will be provided by the HEEP Project Steering Committee (PSC), whose members will be
drawn from government departments, parastatals, and the horticultural sector, including HDC.
124.
Governance Aspects and Anti-corruption Measures.  The Transparency Corruption Perception Index for Zimbabwe scores for
Zimbabwe scores 23 for year 2021 (ranked at the 157 position out of 180), which, although high, has remained relatively stable
since 2019. Strengthened efforts by the Government of Zimbabwe are required to ensure that IFAD’s procurement principles are
observed throughout the project lifetime. Therefore, strict compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption will
be required. Similarly, the project will ensure strict adherence IFAD’s policy related to preventing Harassment, Sexual
Harassment and Discrimination.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
23/27
125.
Planning. Planning and budgeting will be integrated in the GoZ processes based on Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs).
The consolidated AWPB will be submitted to the PSC for review and approval and then sent to IFAD for review and No Objection
at least 60 days before the start of the Programme year.
126.
The first AWPB is presented in Annex 6 and will be refined and validated after project start-up. Thereafter, the PMU will prepare
an AWPB based on the principles of results-based planning. Subsequent AWPB processes will offer the opportunities to the PMU
to reflect on lessons from the implementation experience of the previous years, and to propose activities and expenditures
required to achieve the intended project outcomes. The Project will have the possibility of revising the AWPB at any time of the
year, and any proposed adjustments will require approvals by both the GoZ and IFAD.
127.
The HEEP log-frame (Annex 1) will guide the development of the AWPB and the reporting and monitoring system. HEEP log-
frame indicators are aligned to those of the Zimbabwe 2020-2025 COSOP results framework and are in line with the data
requirements of the MLAFWRD.
128.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  HEEP will develop a robust M&E system in compliance with IFAD and the GoZ
requirements. The HEEP M&E system will generate timely and accurate information to support decision-making and adaptive
management. In particular, it will: (i) collect, analyse and update information on project outputs, outcomes and impact; (ii) support
NPMU and the Steering Committee in planning and making informed decisions on HEEP strategies and actions; (iii) maintain and
strengthen strategic partnerships with stakeholders; and (iv) create opportunities for learning and sharing results.
129.
The system will be participatory and gender sensitive. It will include beneficiary feedback and grievance redress mechanisms.
Data will be disaggregated by gender, by age, and – where possible – by PwD. Targets for outreach to PwDs have been included
in the HEEP log-frame and may be revised based on the findings of the baseline study which will provide more precise data on
the prevalence of disability in the targeted communities. HEEP will collect the views and opinions of the target group through
regular focus groups carried out during field visits, as well as through quantitative and qualitative information coming from the
Core Outcome Indicator (COI) surveys and from complementary studies. The Core Indicator measuring Empowerment will be
collected at baseline, at mid-line and at completion, and will give an indication on whether the project is succeeding in addressing
the barriers faced by the target group, in particular by women and youth.
130.
Data on activities and on outputs will be collected on a continuous basis on all project activities and beneficiaries. Data on
outcomes and impact will be collected on a sample of beneficiaries through baseline, mid-line and completion surveys. To ensure
quality and to allow IFAD to aggregate results at corporate level, the baseline, mid-line and completion surveys will align to the
IFAD COI guidelines. Qualitative thematic studies will be carried out if and as needed to shed additional light on specific findings
of the quantitative surveys. Data collection, verification and use will be a joint task by all project stakeholders. The primary
responsibility will lie with the M&E unit within the JMU. The unit will have a dedicated M&E officer and a KM officer who will
collaborate closely with the SACP M&E and KM functions. HEEP will build on data collected by the SIRP project on the HEEP-
targeted areas adjacent to the irrigation schemes rehabilitated by SIRP.
131.
M&E activities will be agreed on with the Director Strategic Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation and the Chief Director SP&BD at
MLAFWRD, who have the responsibility for overseeing the M&E of the HRGP that HEEP will be supporting. To ensure
harmonisation of reporting between HEEP and other Ministry activities, a list of indicators to be collected by HEEP has been
provided and is included in the M&E section of the PIM. As further detailed under subcomponent 3.1, HEEP will promote the
enrichment of MLAFWRD database and M&E system by supporting the implementation of horticultural surveys and by providing
M&E and digital capacity building to the Ministry’s M&E staff.
132.
The Programme will set up a Management Information System (MIS) to facilitate the storage, use and analysis of data. Geo-
referenced data will be systematically collected on all the indicators related to relevant locations and/or areas. Data collection will
be done digitally through portable electronic devices so as to speed up data entry, cleaning, and reporting as well as making
management decisions and disseminating the results rapidly at different levels. Thanks to the recent digitalization efforts carried
out at MLAFWRD and supported by SIRP, the large majority of extension officers in Zimbabwe have been provided with tablets
for digital data collection.
133.
HEEP will promote digitalisation also in the private sector and for smallholder farmers through the 4P MG innovation window. It
will promote the adoption by anchor firms of software solutions (e.g. Farmforce, Source trace, etc) built to facilitate contract
farming with smallholders. These solutions provide an overview of the production needs and outputs by different farmers/farmer
groups, and help providing the full traceability demanded by export markets and supermarket chains.
134.
The programme’s M&E plan will be refined as part of the first implementation support mission scheduled to take place within the
first six months of the programme approval. It will comprise: i) setting up an MIS to facilitate storage, analysis and use of data; ii)
providing clear details on the reporting requirements from different stakeholders; iii) developing standard reporting formats and
agreeing on the timeline and modality of reporting from the different implementing partners.
135.
Learning and knowledge management Capturing and documenting lessons and innovations through field data collection,
reports and thematic studies will be an integral part of the learning and knowledge management function of HEEP. KM activities
will have two main focuses: supporting policy engagement, and supporting the project’s mainstreaming themes.
136.
First, KM will aim at supporting the activities carried out under subcomponent 3.1. To develop clear and fair industry guidelines
for fair hub and spoke/contract farming arrangements. KM will support this effort by collecting best practices on different contract
farming models, as well as positive and negative lessons from HEEP implementation experience, supported by reliable evidence
and analysis. Stories from the field will present innovations and success stories on transformation of smallholders’ activities
towards deeper integration into the market economy. KM products will also showcase innovations implemented in the 4Ps.
Second, in line with HEEP mainstreaming themes, KM and Communications will place a particular focus on nutrition, gender, and
climate. In particular, KM will aim at improving knowledge around good nutritional practices, not only among project beneficiaries
but on a national scale.  Through TV and radio campaigns, KM will also play a role in raising awareness on climate change and
gender equity.
24/27
137.
The KM officer will work in close collaboration with the M&E officer to ensure that M&E findings on results are widely
disseminated. Synergies will be developed between KM and M&E, thereby ensuring that KM products are based on solid M&E
evidence and that the understanding and presentation of M&E data is enhanced by the development of knowledge products. The
JMU will facilitate strong collaboration between the HEEP KM officer and the SACP KM officer, who will jointly ensure the
visibility of the IFAD portfolio in Zimbabwe, as well as cross-learning between the two projects. Collaboration will be sought with
the University of Zimbabwe, from which an intern will be hired every year to work with the HEEP project and support KM
activities.
138.
KM activities will be guided by a robust KM strategy and plan. A draft KM strategy is presented in the PIM, and will be completed
and refined after the project start-up by the JMU with support from technical IFAD experts. Lessons learnt in implementation will
be actively shared between provinces, clusters and districts. Semi-annual review meetings with national and regional staff and
implementing partners will be organised by the PMU to discuss progress towards results in relation to each semi-annual progress
report, the format of which will explicitly include a focus on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc. To promote
transparency and coordination, all relevant MLAFWRD officers will be granted access rights to HEEP MIS. Project results will
also be accessible to the general public and be visible on the HEEP website. HEEP’s visibility will be enhanced also through
social media accounts such as Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.
b. Innovation and scaling up
139.
The introduction of the 4P methodology to inclusive agricultural growth is a significant innovation in Zimbabwe, advancing the hub
and spoke/contract farming partnerships to inclusion of the public sector for catalytic finance and improvements in the enabling
environment. In addition, HEEP will directly support innovation through the Innovation window of the 4P MGs. If successful, the
4Ps developed by HEEP will naturally scale as this would be in the economic interest of all 4P partners, anchor firms and SHFS
alike. This would provide a model for further private and public sector investment in the 4P and related models.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
140.
The main modalities for gathering SHFs priorities and needs will be the community interface consultations as part of the VHGs,
APG and microenterprise mobilisation under Sub-Component 1.1 and 1.2. Meetings will be organised through the local
community leadership and notices about meetings will be posted in public places, social media or radio. The purpose of the
meeting will be to raise awareness on the project components and objectives and encourage inclusive participation of youth,
women men, and people living with disabilities. Meetings will be organised at central venues, times that will allow for women and
PwDs to participate. Separate meetings for remote areas, will be held to reach communities in those areas. The organisers of
the meeting should consider child care facilities to allow women to participate. The meetings should be attended by at least 80
per cent of the community members to provide for wider consultation, transparency and ownership of the issues discussed. The
consultations will take the form of townhall meetings in each community where the project objectives and principles of
participation will be explained in local languages and feedback obtained from the communities including their expectations from
their participation in the project. Separate breakaway sessions will be organised for women and youth in order to allow them to
participate freely. The consultations minutes and records kept the community and project.
141.
Project services delivery will be monitored through quarterly reports from the APGs and VHGs in each cluster that will be formed.
Priorities for Sub Component 1.4 will be gathered through community consultations at the ward level as part of the participatory
infrastructure investment planning. At least two dialogues will be held in each community to inform the stakeholders about the
project, discuss the priority infrastructure and select specific investments based on an agreed criterion and consensus. Records
of the dialogue will be kept at ward and project level. The monitoring and feedback modalities will be monthly reporting by the
community oversight committees the Environment and Social Management Plans that will be developed and implemented in a
participatory manner.
142.
The feedback and reports from the VHGs, APGs, micro-enterprises and infrastructure oversight committees will be utilised by the
RPMUs to review the performance and progress being made. The feedback will inform the bi annual reviews and project
implementation planning process at the regional and central levels and enable the adaptive management and decision making by
the teams. The screened and selected investments will be publicly disclosed and originators of unsuccessful proposals informed
with reasons provided by the Technical Assessment and Investment Committees. Capacities of the VHG, APG committees,
community-based organisations and inclusive community oversight committees will be strengthened through the training by the
project teams particularly in social inclusion and implementation monitoring. The RPMU and the government agencies will
provide the technical backstopping at these meetings.
b. Grievance redress.
143.
HEEP’s GRM will be in line with norms of the communities as well as laws of the country and will build on the existing local
government structures from Village to national levels. The GRM will consist of three parallel systems which are; i) a community-
based system, ii) a formal system and iii) the IFAD Redress System.  Initially, grievances will be resolved at APG level
(VHG/Irrigation) by the responsible management committees with the help of AGRITEX, ARDA and DoI technicians on the
ground.  Any grievances that cannot be resolved at these levels will be taken through the local Government structures that
include the area Headman and/or Paramount Chief up to the District Administrator’s office in the RDC.  Beyond the District
Council, grievances will be addressed through provincial and national councils as necessary. The national and regional project
teams will provide information on the GRM available as well as convey the zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse
(SEA) as well as the preventing fraud and corruption policies. The information on the policies will be made available through all
HEEP contracts and on project documents such as leaflets and matching grants proposal templates. Project sites will have the
information on notice boards with local, regional and national contact details of responsible persons/offices where grievances can
be safely lodged. 
25/27
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
144.
Supervision. HEEP will be directly supervised by IFAD with annual supervision and implementation support missions organised
with the participation of the GoZ. Continuous implementation support will be provided as required. The supervision and
implementation support will be particularly intense during the 18 first months to assure the strategic approach and the correct set
up of financial management, procurement and M&E. Supervision will assess achievements and lessons jointly, and to reflect on
ways to improve the HEEP implementation and impact. The focus of these missions will be on: (i) assessing progress against
agreed indicators; (ii) joint identification of implementation challenges and solutions with implementers and beneficiaries, and
agreement on actions to achieve project objectives (particularly for the VHG sub-component); and (iv) ensuring compliance with
loan covenants, procurement and efficient use of project funds.
145.
Mid-term Review (MTR). As HEEP is an eight-year project, an MTR will be undertaken towards the end of fourth year of HEEP
implementation. The MTR will be jointly organised by the GoZ and IFAD in close collaboration with the other stakeholders.
146.
Project Completion Report (PCR). At the end of project implementation, the GoZ in collaboration with IFAD will undertake a
project completion review to report on the results and impact achieved. The PCR would need to be finalised before the project
closing date, which will be six months after the completion date. As part of the completion activities, a Beneficiary Impact
Assessment will be undertaken, and findings used to inform the PCR. The lessons documented in the impact assessment and
PCR will be used by both IFAD and the GoZ to improve the quality of the future project designs and implementation.
147.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans. A draft PIM, draft 18-month AWPB and a draft procurement plan for the first 18
months have been prepared as part of the HEEP design process. These documents aim to ensure that the project
implementation starts as scheduled, without unnecessary delays during the first project year. The JMU with SIRP and SACP,
with its experience and lessons learned and the shared professionals within the JMU with hands-on project planning and
implementation experience, is expected to speed project start-up. The comprehensive guidelines and detailed procedures
agreed for the VHG and 4P development activities also aim at a fast and smooth start of the HEEP implementation immediately
after the project effectiveness.
Footnotes
[1] fragilestatesindex.org
[2]https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/fragilityconflictviolence/brief/harmonized-list-of-fragile-situations
[3]https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD?locations=ZW
[4]https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/zimbabwe/overview
[5] Negotiations, to provide loan co-financing for HEEP, between GOZ and OPEC Fund have been initiated and could be finalised in
the second half of 2023.
[6] 2020 data from World Bank https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=ZW
[7] FAOSTAT for 2019
[8] 2022 data from fragilestatesindex.org
[9]https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/fragilityconflictviolence/brief/harmonized-list-of-fragile-situations
[10]https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD?locations=ZW
[11] World Bank https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/zimbabwe/overview
[12]Benitez, P., Boehlert, B., Davies, R. and van Seventer, D. (2018). Assessment of the Potential Impacts of Climate Variability and
Shocks on Zimbabwe’s Agricultural Sector.  World Bank Report.
[13] World Bank https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/zimbabwe/overview
26/27
[14] As of July 2022, the official RBZ auction rate is 380 to the US dollar, and the parallel rate is 750 to the US dollar.
[15] "List of LIC DSA's for PGRT-Eligible Countries", IMF, April 2022
[16] Scoones, I., Mahenehene, J., Marongwe, N., Mavedzenge, B., Murimbarimba, F., & Sukume, C. (2010). Zimbabwe's land reform:
myths & realities
[17] Zimbabwe National Agriculture Policy Framework 2018-2030
[18] "Zimbabwe at a Glance", FAO in Zimbabwe, accessed online May 2022
[19] Zimbabwe Horticultural Sector, Abt Associates, 1995, Zimstat 2022.
[20] Farm occupations began informally in 1998, and the process was formalized with the Land Acquisition Act of 2002.  See "The
Fast-Track Land Reform and agrarian change in Zimbabwe" Review of African Political Economy, Vol 46, issue 259, 2019.
[21] Horticultural Development Council, 2022.
[22] "Horticultural Recovery and Growth Plan, 2021" GoZ
[23] ZIMSTAT (2012) General Census
[24] In SIRP, women irrigation plot holders are 37% and men 63% yet women form the majority of the people working on the land and
producing most of the food
[25] ZHDR, 2015, Zimbabwe Dimensions of Poverty
[26] Wageningen, Climate adaptation measure for nutrition co-benefits in IFAD investments in Zimbabwe
[27]Zimbabwe environmental 2. Outlook https://www.ema.co.zw/agency/state-of-the-environment-report
[28]Template (climatelinks.org)
[29] UNDP. 2017. Zimbabwe Human Development Report 2017
[30] Ibid
[31] Rankings // Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative // University of Notre Dame (nd.edu
[32] Hallegatte et al. (2017): Unbreakable: Building the Resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters. URL: https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25335
[33]World Bank Document
[34] Zimbabwe environmental 2. Outlook https://www.ema.co.zw/agency/state-of-the-environment-report
[35]Zimbabwe Revised Nationally Determined Contribution 2021 Final.pdf (unfccc.int)
[36] ZIMSTAT, 2019
[37] Project level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
[38] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
[39] To be provided by ECG.
[40] 4Ps involve cooperation between government, firms, and small-scale producers, who
agree to work together to reach a common goal or carry out a specific task while jointly assuming risks and
responsibilities, and sharing benefits, resources and competencies.  For further information on 4Ps, see "How to do Private Public
Producer Partnerships in Agricultural Value Chains" IFAD 2016.
[41] While at the time of the 2022-2027 COSOP formulation, a livestock pipeline project was identified, from this time, the GoZ
specifically requested IFAD to support a horticultural project instead because of its potential for rapid rural transformation and
contribution to the national economy. This commitment to horticultural is reflected in HGRP, and confirmed in the NDS1.
[42] "Smallholder Horticulture Export Programme under IFAD 12", December 2021
[43] See: (i) World Bank Public Expenditure Review with Focus on Agriculture Sector, Zimbabwe, 2019, (ii) IMF Staff Monitored
Programme, 2019
[44]https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/rarp_commercialising_smallholder_farming.pdf
[45]https://www.unicef.org/esa/sites/unicef.org.esa/files/2019-04/Investment-Case-for-Youth-in-Zimbabwe-per cent282016per
cent29.pdf
27/27
[46] Provinces were selected on the basis of high level of poverty food insecurity, presence of IFAD funded project, climate
vulnerability, potential for horticulture development
[47] ARDA is a government parastatal responsible for rural development and provided business managers to manage smallholder
irrigation schemes and village horticulture gardens... The irrigation schemes are not limited to those rehabilitated by the GoZ, through
the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalisation Project (SIRP).
[48] Each of the 20 anchor firms will employ 800 to 1000 or more labourers who work in grading and packaging. The labourers consist
mainly of youth who are mostly unemployed.
[51] A household methodology used to address the norms and values consisting of the root cause of gender inequalities between men
and women.
[52] SIRP carried out Abbreviated WEAI; by carrying out pro-WEAI, HEEP is expected to give specific guidance to project
intervention.
[53]   Selection of VHG beneficiaries is from category A, B1,including women, youth and PWD
[54] The full bill of materials for VHG is contained in the PIM.
[55] British Retail Consortium certification schemes, Global Good Agricultural Practices, International Standard Organisation, organic,
etc.)
 [56] Details on the capacity strengthening is included in the PIM
[57] Fragility assessment for Zimbabwe has been updated in COSOP 2020-25
[58]A GEF project identification form will be completed by the first quarter of 2023
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Logical Framework
1/7
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Project is able to
implement annual
workplans without
interference
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Non-Indigenous people
Total number of persons receiving
services
Persons with disabilities
0
0
0
0
0
17750
35500
17750
35500
10500
21300
35500
71000
1000
2000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Households
0
35500
71000
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
MIS
MIS
Household members
0 177500 355000
Targeted households reporting an increase in incomes
Survey
Households
0
20000
40000
Project Goal 
Increased incomes, food security and empowerment
for SHFs engaged in profitable and sustainable
horticulture value chains.
Monthly
PMU
Monthly
PMU
PMU/outsourced
Baseline,
midline and
completion
Improved
macroeconomic
conditions, no
external shocks,
stable prices
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
2/7
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Development Objective 
Support increased and sustainable horticultural
production and sales by SHFs and MSMEs engaged in
horticulture value chains.
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW)
COI survey
Women (%)
Women (number)
Households (%)
Households (number)
Household members
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
25
30
10650
21300
25
30
10650
21300
53250 106500
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in
empowerment
COI survey
Total persons
Total persons
Females
Females
Males
Males
0
0
0
0
0
15
25
8946
17750
12.5
25
4473
8875
12.5
25
4473
8875
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
COI survey
Household members
0 142000 284000
Households (%)
Households (number)
0
0
40
80
28400
56800
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making
of local authorities and project-supported service providers
COI survey
Household members
Households (%)
Households (number)
142000 284000
40
80
28400
56800
PMU/outsourced CI 1.2.8 - Increased
Baseline,
midline,
completion
incomes are partly
used to diversify
household diet I.E
2.1 - Project
services adequately
address the barriers
to empowerment.
Targeting strategy is
correct and
operationalised SF
2.1 - Project
services are in line
with target group
needs SF 2.2 -
Local authorities
and project-
supported service
providers are willing
to act upon
feedback from
target group CI
1.2.4 - Households
adopt the promoted
technologies and
take up loans for
productive
investments
International
demand for
horticultural
products from
Zimbabwe remains
high; Exporters able
to meet market
conditions
PMU/outsourced
Baseline,
midline,
completion
PMU/outsourced
Baseline,
midline,
completion
PMU/outsourced
Baseline,
midline,
completion
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
3/7
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
COI Survey
Total number of household
members
Households
Households
0 150000 255000
0
0
42
72
30000
51000
PMU/Outsourced
Baseline,
Midline,
Completion
Volume of horticultural exports
Zimtrade
Annual
External data
USD million
64.6
80
200
Outcome 
Outcome 1.1 - Sustainable 4P Partnerships
established in horticultural value chain
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private
entities
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Number of POs
Percentage of POs
60
80
Women in leadership position
5000
10000
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities
Males
Females
Young
Total number of persons with new
jobs/employment opportunities
0
0
0
0
5000
10000
5000
10000
7500
15000
10000
20000
Specific survey applied to a sample
of supported rural enterprises or
rural producers’ organizations
Midline,
completion
PMU
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in
sales
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Number of Rural POs
Rural POs wtih women in
leadership position
30
60
9000
18000
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices
COI survey
Total number of household
members
0
50000 100000
PMU /outsourced
Baseline,
midline,
completion
C.I 2.2.3 - Export
market for
horticultural value
chain remains
attractive CI 2.2.1 -
Export market for
horticultural value
chain remains
attractive; anchor
firms expand their
activities and do not
invest large sums in
mechanisation CI
2.2.5 - GoZ
engages external
BDS service
providers CI 3.2.2 -
Target groups is
open to adoption of
new technologies
and practices
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 1.1 - Capacity of rural producers organisations
to participate in 4P partnership has been built
Output 
Output 1.2 - Smallholder farmers have been trained in
good agricultural production practices and in income
generating activities
Name
4/7
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Households
Households
0
0
20
40
14200
28400
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
2.1.3 Rural producers’ organizations supported
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Total size of POs
Rural POs supported
Males
Females
Young
0
0
0
0
0
10000
20000
5000
10000
5000
10000
2500
5000
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or
technologies
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Total number of attendances to
training sessions
Men trained in crop
Women trained in crop
Young people trained in crop
Total persons trained in crop
0
0
0
0
0
25000
51000
12500
25500
12500
25500
6000
12750
25000
51000
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business
management
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Persons trained in IGAs or BM
(total)
0
0
0
0
12500
25500
12500
25500
6000
12750
25000
51000
CI 2.1.3 - Rural
producers
organisations show
continued interested
in project activities
CI 1.1.4 - SHF have
not already been
trained
autonomously by
anchor firms CI
2.1.2 - Participating
farmers show
continued interest in
commercial
production
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
5/7
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.3 - Climate resilient practices have been
incorporated in each 4P inclusive business plans
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Hectares of land
0
10000
21000
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their
nutrition
MIS
Annual
PMU
CI 3.1.4 - 4Ps
business plans
include investments
in climate-smart
infrastructure; VHGs
include solar-
powered pumps and
water-efficient drop
irrigation systems
The need for
nutrition training is
confirmed by the
baseline survey.
Output 
Output 1.4 - Nutrition training has been provided to
smallholder farmers
Output 
Output 1.5 - Village Horticultural Gardens (VHG) have
been established and capacitated
Total persons participating
Males
Females
Households
Household members benefitted
Non-Indigenous people
Young
Not Young
0
0
0
0
0
7750
15500
7750
15500
15500
31000
77500 155000
3875
7750
Non-women-headed households
Village Horticultural Gardens (VHG) established
VHG
1
400
620
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure
constructed/rehabilitated
Output 
Output 1.6 - 4P investments have been supported
through matching grants
APG matching grants disbursed
Number of recipient PO groups
Hectares of land
Number of recipient PO group
members
0
0
0
500
775
50
80
10000
20000
MIS
MIS
MIS
Annual
ARDA
Annual
ARDA
Monthly
PMU
Local communities
continue showing
interest for VHGs
CI.1.1.2
Infrastructure works
proceed according
to plan
APGs completed
business plans
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 1.7 - 4p-relevant public infrastructure built or
rehabilitated
Name
6/7
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Number of climate-smart grants
Number of innovation grants
0
0
10
10
20
20
2.1.5 Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded
Length of roads
0
50
710
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed or
rehabilitated
Total number of facilities
0
10
20
MIS
MIS
Market facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Processing facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Storage facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Monthly
PMU
Monthly
PMU
Suitable public good
investments
identified
Outcome 
Outcome 2.1 - Increased access to finance
smallholder farmers and SMEs in horticulture
1.2.5 Households reporting using rural financial services
COI survey
Total number of household
members
Households
Households
0
0
0
10000
20000
14
28
50000 100000
PMU
Baseline,
midline,
completion
Output 
Output 2.1 - In-kind loans provided to smallholders for
key production inputs
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or
technological packages
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Total rural producers
0
0
0
0
12750
25500
12750
25500
6375
12750
25500
51000
Number of POs accessing in-kind loans from anchor firms
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Number of POs
Total PO members
0
0
50
80
15000
24000
No contextual
macroeconomic
shocks that cause a
sharp increase in
interest rates
CI 1.1.3 - ARDA is
effective in
providing inputs to
VHGs and anchor
firms are interested
in accessing finance
from the EHRF to
provide in-kind
loans to 4Ps. Export
horticulture
revolving fund
(EHRF), established
and operational.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 2.2 - Capacity of financial institutions to
develop and deliver financial services to SHFs and
MSMEs strengthened
Name
7/7
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
1.1.6 Financial service providers supported in delivering
outreach strategies, financial products and services to rural
areas
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Service providers
0
4
4
1.1.5 Persons in rural areas accessing financial services
MIS
Total number of accesses to
financial services
Men in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Women in rural areas accessing
financial services - credit
Young people in rural areas
accessing financial services -
credit
Total persons accessing financial
services - credit
0
0
0
0
10000
20000
5000
10000
5000
10000
3000
6000
0
10000
20000
Annual
Financial Service
Providers
CI 1.1.6 - Financial
service providers
interested in
developing products
for SHF CI 1.1.5 -
The outreach
strategies supported
by HEEP are
effective
Output 
Output 3.1 - Policy-relevant knowledge products
developed based on trials of innovative products and
processes.
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
MIS
Monthly
PMU
Number
0
2
4
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Impacts
Increased incomes, food security and empowerment for smallholder farmers engaged in profitable and sustainable horticulture value chains
Outcomes
Sustainable 4P Partnerships established in 
the horticultural value chain
increased access to finance for smallholder 
farmers and SMES in climate-resilient 
horticulture
Institutions, strategies and innovations made 
more conducive to smallholder commercial 
horticulture 
Outputs
Activities
•
•
Increased participation of rural producers 
organisations in 4Ps
Smallholder farmers trained in good 
horticultural production practices and in 
income generating activities 
• Climate resilient practices incorporated in 
each 4P inclusive business plans
Component 1 – VHG and 4P Development
• Development of smallholder VHGs
• Mobilization of 4Ps to develop and 
implement inclusive business plans;
• Capacity building of SHFs/MSME 4P 
partners
• Develop public infrastructure to support 
coverage and  impact of 4Ps
• Capacity of financial institutions to 
develop and deliver financial services to 
SHFs and MSMEs strengthened
• Rural producers are accessing production 
inputs and/or technological packages
• Policy relevant knowledge products 
•
•
developed 
Efficient and timely project 
implementation
Improved country portfolio management 
with SIRP and SACP
Component 2 – Access to Finance
• Development of an export horticulture 
•
•
fund for hard currency financing
Identification of hosting and managing 
agency
Strengthen the capacity of financial 
institutions
• Development of  value chain financing 
instruments for SHFs and MSMEs
Component 3 – Institutional Support and 
Project Coordination
• Capacity building of implementing  
agencies
• Regular horticulture data collection
• Project management
• HEEP becomes apart of JMU
Barriers 
and risks
Key 
challenges
Assumptions
Barrier: Rural 
farmers, esp. 
women lack 
knowledge, skills 
and finance
Risk: Limited 
livelihood, 
income 
generating and 
employment 
opportunities,  
esp. for women 
Barrier: Low 
agricultural 
productivity 
focused on 
cereals limits 
private sector 
investment
Barrier: Limited 
incentives for 
private sector 
investment 
Risk: Continued  
unsustainable 
crop production 
practices
Barrier: Limited 
fiscal space for 
private sector 
investment in 
rural areas
Risk: Inadequate 
policy. 
institutional and 
financial  
frameworks
Barrier: Lack of 
investment in 
adaptive, climate 
resilient 
technologies and 
infrastructure 
Zimbabwe agriculture is highly dependent on rain-fed cereal production, with limited diversification, few cash crops grown, limited access to input and output markets, low 
adoption of new and improved technologies, and with limited private sector investments. Increasing climate variability poses an increasing risk to household food security, 
agricultural diversification, investment and sustainability.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
Improved macro-economic conditions, no external shocks, stable prices
Project services adequately address the barriers to empowerment. 
Targeting strategy is correct and operationalised
Export market for horticultural value chain remains attractive; anchor firms expand their activities and do not invest large sums in mechanisation 
Government of Zimbabwe engages external Business Development Service providers
Target groups is open to adoption of new technologies and practices
Issues identified and key stakeholders (e.g. Horticultural Development Council, Market linkages working group) interested in partnering with HEEP
With Project
Households and 
particularly women 
diversify their crop 
production by 
investing in climate 
resilient and 
profitable 
horticulture value 
chains
Without Project
Households and 
particularly women 
have low incomes 
from cereal crop 
farming and have 
increasing climatic 
risk to livelihoods
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Local
(Excl. Duties &
Taxes)
Taxes
18 623
159
1 895
24 483
3 420
2 411
6 372
3 407
60 771
54
3
112
257
227
29
104
363
1 148
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers
(US$ '000)
IFAD Loan
For.
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Exch.
Total
HDC
PFIs
Smallholder
OPEC Fund Farmers (SHFs)Anchor Firms
Government of
Zimbabwe
20 752
164
2 640
25 673
3 829
2 710
6 692
4 085
31.2 2 075
1
633
934
181
270
216
315
66 545 100.0 4 626
0.2
4.0
38.6
5.8
4.1
10.1
6.1
1. Civil Works
2. Goods, Services & Inputs
3. Equipment & Materials including vehicles
4. Grants & Subsidies
5. Training & Workshops
6. Technical Assistance and Consultancies
7. Salaries & Allowances
8. Operations & Maintenance
Total PROJECT COSTS
7 403 35.7
147 89.7
2 344 88.8
16 923 65.9
2 344 61.2
2 530 93.4
4 036 60.3
1 418 34.7
37 145 55.8
11 735 56.5
8.4
14
7.0
185
-
-
899 23.5
-
0
2 167 32.4
-
-
15 000 22.5
191 0.9
-
-
-
-
809 3.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 000 1.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 600 10.1
9.2
5.5
-
-
4.7
351
150
-
-
3 100
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 993 19.4
0.2
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
7.5
5 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42 0.6
17 0.4
59 0.1
1 423
3
112
349
227
29
447
6.9
1.9
4.2
1.4
5.9
1.1
6.7
2 650 64.9
7.9
5 240
Page 1
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Components by Financiers
(US$ '000)
IFAD Loan
Smallholder
OPEC Fund Farmers (SHFs)Anchor Firms
PFIs
HDC
Government of
Zimbabwe
Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
Local
(Excl. Duties &
For.
Exch. Taxes) Taxes
A. Village Horticultural Gardenand 4P Mobilization and Development
Village Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development
4P/Hub and Spoke Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building
Public Infrastructure & Matching Grants
Subtotal
B. Access to Finance
Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).
Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
Subtotal
C. Institutional Support and Project Management
Institutional Support
Project Coordination
Subtotal
Total PROJECT COSTS
6 384 35.2
971 40.7
9 917 61.4
17 273 47.1
7 660 42.2
729 30.6
4 259 26.4
12 648 34.5
191 1.1
-
-
809 5.0
1 000 2.7
-
-
501 21.0
5.6
910
3.8
1 410
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 856 59.0
499 89.5
10 355 60.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
830 83.2
8 688 74.9
9 518 75.5
56
37 145
-
-
2 352 20.3
2 352 18.7
23
15 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 690 10.1
-
-
9.8
1 690
4 993 29.9
8
1.4
5 000 29.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 000
2
3 100
5
5 000
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 913 21.6
7.7
1.6
4 350 11.9
183
254
164
51
215
1.0
9.1
1.2
18 149
2 384
16 148
36 682
16 703
557
17 260
-
59 5.9
-
59 0.5
0
59
109 11.0
4.9
566
5.4
675
8
5 240
998
11 606
12 603
66 545
27.3
3.6
24.3
55.1
25.1
0.8
25.9
1.5
17.4
18.9
100
18
1 815 16 078
2 183
1 615 14 372
3 448 32 632
- 16 539
153
354
153 16 893
256
183
161
601
164
51
215
299
589
726 10 657
1 025 11 246
60 771
4 626
109
223
333
1 148
Page 2
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
(US$ '000)
I. Investment Costs
Civil Works
Goods, Services & Inputs
Equipment, Materials & Vehicles
Grants & Subsidies
Training & Workshops
Technical Assistance & Consultancies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Salaries and Allowances
Operation & Maintenances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
IFAD Loan
Smallholder
OPEC Fund Farmers (SHFs)Anchor Firms
PFIs
HDC
Government of
Zimbabwe
Total
For.
Local
(Excl. Duties &
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Exch. Taxes) Taxes
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 423
3
112
349
227
29
2 143
6.9
1.9
4.2
1.4
5.9
1.1
3.8
20 752
164
2 640
25 673
3 829
2 710
55 768
31.2 2 075 18 623
159
1
633
1 895
934 24 483
3 420
181
2 411
270
83.8 4 095 50 991
0.2
4.0
38.6
5.8
4.1
42 0.6
17 0.4
59 0.5
59 0.1
447
6.7
2 650 64.9
3 097 28.7
7.9
5 240
6 372
6 692
3 407
4 085
10 777
9 780
66 545 100.0 4 626 60 771
10.1
6.1
16.2
216
315
531
54
3
112
257
227
29
682
104
363
467
1 148
7 403 35.7
147 89.7
2 344 88.8
16 923 65.9
2 344 61.2
2 530 93.4
31 691 56.8
11 735 56.5
8.4
14
7.0
185
-
-
899 23.5
-
0
12 833 23.0
4 036 60.3
1 418 34.7
5 454 50.6
37 145 55.8
2 167 32.4
-
-
2 167 20.1
15 000 22.5
191 0.9
-
-
-
-
809 3.2
-
-
-
-
1 000 1.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 000 1.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 600 10.1
9.2
5.5
5.6
351
150
3 100
-
-
-
3 100
-
-
-
4.7
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 993 19.4
0.2
8
-
-
9.0
5 000
-
-
-
5 000
-
-
-
7.5
Page 3
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Costs to
be
Financed
Project
Costs
Government of
Zimbabwe
Cumulative
Cash Flow Cash Flow
1 119
1 119
3 068
3 068
5 677
5 677
7 696
7 696
7 797
7 797
4 656
4 656
2 487
2 487
773
773
-74
-74
-173
-173
-359
-359
-486
-486
-510
-510
-455
-455
-411
-411
-152
-152
-74
-147
-320
-493
-853
-1 212
-1 697
-2 183
-2 693
-3 203
-3 658
-4 114
-4 525
-4 936
-5 088
-5 240
Total
1 045
1 045
2 895
2 895
5 318
5 318
7 211
7 211
7 287
7 287
4 200
4 200
2 076
2 076
621
621
61 305
66 545
-5 240
-5 240
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Disbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow
(US$ '000)
Financing Available
IFAD Loan OPEC Fund
Amount
Amount
Smallholder
Farmers
(SHFs)
Amount
Anchor
Firms
PFIs
Amount Amount Amount
HDC
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
885
885
1 975
1 975
3 191
3 191
4 269
4 269
4 190
4 190
2 321
2 321
1 197
1 197
545
545
156
156
468
468
1 220
1 220
1 578
1 578
1 737
1 737
1 406
1 406
860
860
75
75
-
-
46
46
96
96
140
140
140
140
59
59
19
19
-
-
4
4
158
158
313
313
465
465
459
459
152
152
-
-
-
-
0
0
249
249
498
498
749
749
751
751
252
252
0
0
0
0
Total
37 145
15 000
1 000
3 100
5 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
10
10
10
10
-
-
-
-
59
Page 4
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Components Project Cost Summary
A. Village Horticultural Gardenand 4P Mobilization and Development
Village Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development
4P/Hub and Spoke Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building
Public Infrastructure & Matching Grants
Subtotal
B. Access to Finance
Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).
Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
Subtotal
C. Institutional Support and Project Management
Institutional Support
Project Coordination
Subtotal
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
(Local '000)
Foreign
Local
Total
Local Foreign
(US$ '000)
% Total
%
Base
Foreign
Total Exchange Costs
465 410
3 165 599 351 733
3 590
2 836 620 315 180
6 467 629 670 503
469 000
3 517 332 15 828
2 327
3 151 800 14 183
7 138 132 32 338
18
1 759 17 587
2 345
1 576 15 759
3 353 35 691
3 272 000
76 824
3 348 824
-
28 776
28 776
3 272 000 16 360
384
3 377 600 16 744
105 600
- 16 360
144
528
144 16 888
179 621
125 735
53 886
2 116 029 138 651
2 241 764 192 537
629
2 254 680 10 580
2 434 301 11 209
12 058 217 891 816 12 950 033 60 291
917
711
12 383 811 925 166 13 308 977 61 919
183 373
142 221
206 596
152 347
23 223
10 126
269
898
693 11 273
963 12 172
4 459 64 750
1 033
762
4 626 66 545
116
51
1 795
3%
10
1
10
9
-
27
1
30
6
8
7
11
7
7
27
4
24
55
25
1
26
1
17
19
100
2
1
103
55%
19%
Page 5
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary
(Local '000)
Foreign
Local
Total
Local Foreign
(US$ '000)
% Total
%
Base
Foreign
Total Exchange Costs
 I. Investment Costs
Civil Works
Goods, Services & Inputs
Equipment, Materials & Vehicles
Grants & Subsidies
Training & Workshops
Technical Assistance & Consultancies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Salaries and Allowances
Operation & Maintenances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
30 740
3 625 020 402 780
260
386 834 120 573
4 838 000 182 000
33 443
50 966
4 027 800 18 125
154
1 934
5 020 000 24 190
3 534
2 353
10 058 180 790 022 10 848 202 50 291
31 000
507 406
740 332
521 664
706 889
470 698
1 305 170
796 661
1 264 514
735 523
40 656
61 138
2 000 037 101 794
6 323
3 678
2 101 831 10 000
12 058 217 891 816 12 950 033 60 291
917
711
12 383 811 925 166 13 308 977 61 919
183 373
142 221
206 596
152 347
23 223
10 126
2 014 20 139
155
1
603
2 537
910 25 100
3 702
167
2 608
255
3 950 54 241
6 526
203
306
3 983
509 10 509
4 459 64 750
1 033
762
4 626 66 545
116
51
10
1
24
4
5
10
7
3
8
5
7
11
7
7
31
-
4
39
6
4
84
10
6
16
100
2
1
103
Page 6
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
Village Horticultural Gardenand 4P
Mobilization and Development
4P/Hub and
Spoke
Identification,
Mobilization Mobilization,
Village
Horticulture
Garden
Public
Infrastructure Horticultural
Export
and
Development
and Capacity & Matching
Building
Grants
Revolving
Fund (EHRF).
Access to Finance
Capacity
Building for
Enhanced
Agricultural
Lending
Institutional Support and
Project Management
Institutional
Support
Project
Coordination
Total
 I. Investment Costs
Civil Works
Goods, Services & Inputs
Equipment, Materials & Vehicles
Grants & Subsidies
Training & Workshops
Technical Assistance & Consultancies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Salaries and Allowances
Operation & Maintenances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
15 375
-
-
-
232
-
15 607
-
2 542
2 542
18 149
256
1 815
-
31
-
-
2 054
300
2 384
-
-
-
2 384
183
18
5 377
-
1 433
9 338
-
-
16 148
-
-
-
16 148
161
1 615
-
-
-
16 335
30
-
16 366
337
-
337
16 703
164
-
-
-
-
-
48
-
48
403
106
509
557
51
153
-
-
93
-
347
145
584
316
98
413
998
109
299
-
133
1 114
-
1 117
2 265
4 629
5 636
1 340
6 976
11 606
223
726
20 752
164
2 640
25 673
3 829
2 710
55 768
6 692
4 085
10 777
66 545
1 148
4 626
Page 7
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
PY1
PY2
Totals Including Contingencies
PY7
PY5
PY6
PY4
PY3
PY8
Total
A. Village Horticultural Gardenand 4P Mobilization and Development
Village Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development
4P/Hub and Spoke Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building
Public Infrastructure & Matching Grants
Subtotal
B. Access to Finance
Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).
Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
Subtotal
C. Institutional Support and Project Management
Institutional Support
Project Coordination
Subtotal
Total PROJECT COSTS
25
- 1 077
283
- 1 131
25 2 491
64 1 678
35
74
99 1 752
2 781
440
2 983
6 204
3 311
206
3 517
3 458
675
4 465
8 599
4 954
74
5 028
524
3 512 3 522 3 533
103
235
206
4 888 2 269
8 924 6 026 3 842
98
266 18 149
2 384
207 16 148
571 36 682
4 954 1 683
48
5 001 1 731
48
40
48
88
19 16 703
25
557
44 17 260
144
116
998
373
816 11 606
1 970 1 522
2 114 1 895
932 12 603
2 238 6 137 11 354 15 392 15 593 9 311 4 973 1 546 66 545
9
1 510 1 502 1 035
1 668 1 554 1 044
52
1 714
1 766
95
1 537
1 632
158
52
Page 8
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies
(US$ '000)
PY1
PY2
Totals Including Contingencies
PY7
PY5
PY6
PY4
PY3
 I. Investment Costs
Civil Works
Goods, Services & Inputs
Equipment, Materials & Vehicles
Grants & Subsidies
Training & Workshops
Technical Assistance & Consultancies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Salaries and Allowances
Operation & Maintenances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
-
11
1 199
983
5
204
- 2 551
645
366
1 654 4 755
113
331
26
206
3 384
21
205
5 118
573
332
4 851 4 110 2 995
27
207
-
298
196
9 632 13 678 13 874 7 587 3 722
26
206
7 723 2 582
400
262
4 429
26
205
7 700
783
535
699
369
PY8
Total
21
208
- 20 752
164
2 640
- 25 673
3 829
317
319
2 710
866 55 768
443 1 071
141
311
584 1 382
6 692
306
374
4 085
680 10 777
2 238 6 137 11 354 15 392 15 593 9 311 4 973 1 546 66 545
574
1 034 1 037
677
687
1 719 1 724 1 251
1 180
542
1 722
1 046
669
1 715
685
Page 9
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 1.1. Village Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development
Detailed Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. Creation and Capacitation of Village Horticulture Gardens in Four (4) Provinces
Masvingo
Matabeleland South
Midlands
Manic land
Subtotal
B. Provincial ARDA Manager ToT Workshop Costs
Travel /a
DSA
Full board in GoZ Training centre
Workshop venue /b
Trainer costs /c
Subtotal
C. Following year Provincial ARDA Manager Refresher Workshop Costs
Travel /d
DSA
Full board in GoZ Training centre
Workshop venue /e
Trainer costs /f
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating costs
Operating costs /g
Total
Unit
Quantities
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
-
-
-
-
155
155
155
155
-
620
- 1 860
- 1 860
72
-
24
-
Hectare
Hectare
Hectare
Hectare
-
-
-
-
10
10
10
10
25
25
25
25
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
Days
Days
Days
Days
Ls/Workshop
Days
Days
Days
Days
Ls/Workshop
Per Year
-
40 100 120 120 120 120
- 120 300 360 360 360 360
- 120 300 360 360 360 360
12
12
-
4
4
-
12
4
12
4
12
4
12
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40 100 120 120 120 120
620
80 200 240 240 240 240 1 240
80 200 240 240 240 240 1 240
48
8
24
4
8
4
8
4
8
4
8
4
8
4
40 140 220 240 240 240 120 1 240
_________________________________
\a Per Province x 4 Provinces (Yr1 10 people, Yr2 25, Yr3-7 30)
\b Four Provinces per year x three days per training
\c Trainer cost per Province - travel 25, DSA 25, full board at GoZ training centre 20 - plus fee @150 for 3 days + 3 days @150 prep and report writing
\d Per Province x 4 Provinces (Yr2 10 people, Yr3 25, Yr4-8 30)
\e Four Provinces per year x two days per training
\f Trainer cost per Province - travel 25, DSA 25, full board at GoZ training centre 20 - plus fee @150 for 2 days + 2 days @150 prep and report writing
\g 2,000 a year per scheme for two years (100% GoZ)
Page 10
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Unit Cost
(US$) PY1 PY2
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
PY5
PY7 PY8
PY3
PY6
PY4
24,000
24,000
24,000
24,000
25
25
20
100
1,100
25
25
20
100
740
2,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
616
616
616
616
749
246
749
246
749
246
246
749
983 2 466 2 968 2 977 2 986 2 995
746
746
746
746
742
742
742
742
744
744
744
744
1
3
2
1
4
12
3
8
6
1
4
22
3
9
7
1
4
25
3
9
7
1
5
25
3
9
7
1
5
25
3
9
7
1
5
26
-
-
-
-
-
3
6
5
1
3
996 2 496 3 009 3 020 3 029 3 038
3
6
5
1
3
3
6
5
1
3
3
5
4
1
3
1
2
2
1
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
6
5
1
3
18
81
-
494 248
- 1 077 2 781 3 458 3 512 3 522 3 533 266
285
491
493
449
Parameters (in %)
Phy.
Cont. For.
Gross
Total Rate Exch. Tax Rate
3 844
3 844
3 844
3 844
15 375
16
48
38
7
27
136
16
32
25
5
18
15 607
96
2 542
18 149
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
10.0
10.0
Page 11
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Component
Expenditure Account
Disb. Acct.
Summary Divisions
Other Accounts
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS_DAIFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )
CIVIL_WORKS_DAIFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )
CIVIL_WORKS_DAIFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )
CIVIL_WORKS_DAIFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
VILLAGE_HORTICULTURE_GARDEN_MOBILIZATION_AND_DEVELOPMENT
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M
Page 12
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Other Accounts
IFAD Loan
Fin. Rule
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3
IFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )- 101 254 306 307 308 309
IFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )- 101 254 306 307 308 309
IFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )- 101 254 306 307 308 309
IFAD_LOAN ( 41.225% ), OPEC_FUND ( 48.625% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 1.245% )- 101 254 306 307 308 309
- 405 ### ### ### ### ###
- 1 585
- 1 585
- 1 585
- 1 585
- 6 338
300
- 120
300
- 120
300
- 120
- 120
300
- 478 1 199
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
1
0
0
1
2
1
2
1
0
1
4
1
2
1
0
1
5
1
2
1
0
1
5
1
2
1
0
1
5
1
2
1
0
1
5
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
-
1
1
-
1
1
-
0
0
-
-
1
1
- 408 ### ### ### ### ###
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
-
-
-
-
- 408 ### ### ### ### ###
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
9
8
1
5
27
3
1
6
1
5
1
1
0
1
4
4 6 384
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
2
1
4
10
2
6
5
1
4
17
1
-
-
2
-
-
1
-
-
1
-
-
-
2
-
- 488 1 223
-
-
4 6 384
-
-
-
- 488 1 223
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
GOVT
Page 13
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
OPEC Fund
PY5
PY4
PY6
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Smallholder Farmers (SHFs)
Government of Zimbabwe
361
361
361
361
364
364
364
364
1 443 1 448 1 452 1 456
363
363
363
363
362
362
362
362
2
7
6
1
4
20
2
7
6
1
4
20
2
7
6
1
4
20
2
7
6
1
4
20
2
4
3
1
2
2
5
4
1
2
1 476 1 482 1 486 1 491
2
5
4
1
2
2
5
4
1
2
-
-
1 476 1 482 1 486 1 491
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
55
55
55
55
67
22
67
22
67
22
22
67
88 220 264 265 266 267
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
342
-
342
-
342
-
-
342
- 1 369
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
0
0
0
1
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
88 220 265 266 266 267
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 1 371
-
81 285 449 491 493 494 248 2 542
- 169 505 714 757 759 761 248 3 913
- 1 869
- 1 869
- 1 869
- 1 869
- 7 476
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
38
30
6
21
108
2
5
4
1
2
13
25
20
4
14
14 7 660
-
-
14 7 660
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
3
3
3
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
-
12
8
8
8
8
31
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
31
-
31
9
9
9
9
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
-
37
9
9
9
9
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
-
37
9
9
9
9
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
-
37
9
9
9
9
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
-
37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
48
48
48
191
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
191
-
191
Page 14
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 1.2. 4P/Hub and Spoke Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building
Detailed Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. Mobilization and Capacity Building
GALS  training
Demonstartion of labour saving technologies
international women day commemoration
Women and men forums
Youth Day Commemoration
Youth forums
4P Promotional and Mobilization Costs
4P Capacity Building
4P Proposal Development - support to 4P anchor firms
Inclusive Horticulture Exposure tour for GoZ, HDC to Ethiopia or Kenya
Total
Unit
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8
Quantities
Session
Unit
#days
session
session
session
Lumpsum
per 4p
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
24
5
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
-
24
5
2
1
1
1
3
4
4
-
24
5
2
1
1
1
3
6
6
1
24
5
2
1
1
1
1
6
6
-
24
5
2
1
1
1
-
2
2
-
24
5
2
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
24
-
2
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
Page 15
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Unit Cost
(US$)
Total
168
30
14
7
7
7
10
20
20
2,500
1,000
5,000
10,000
5,000
10,000
25,000
50,000
15,000
1 100,000
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
Parameters (in %)
Phy.
Cont. For.
Gross
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total Rate Exch. Tax Rate
61
5
10
10
5
10
50
61
5
10
10
5
10
75
61
5
10
10
5
10
75
-
-
-
-
-
-
25
61
5
10
10
5
10
25
62
5
10
10
5
10
-
- 101 204 306 307 103
30
-
-
-
62
5
10
10
5
10
-
-
-
-
25 283 440 675 524 235 103
90
- 102
90
-
30
-
60
430
62
31
-
72
10
72
10
36
5
72
10
-
250
- 1 021
300
-
102
-
98 2 384
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
1.0
0.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
1.0
0.0
1.0
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
0.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
0.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
10.0 HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
Page 16
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Component
Expenditure Account
Summary Divisions
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING
HUB_AND_SPOKE_IDENTIFICATION_MOBILIZATION_AND_CAPACITY_BUILDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
Page 17
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Disb. Acct.
Fin. Rule
Other Accounts
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS_DA
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 35% ), OPEC_FUND ( 35% ), ANCHOR_FIRMS ( 30% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 35% ), OPEC_FUND ( 35% ), ANCHOR_FIRMS ( 30% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), ANCHOR_FIRMS ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
Page 18
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
IFAD Loan
OPEC Fund
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
27
2
5
5
2
5
18
32
15
-
28
27
-
2
2
-
5
5
-
5
5
-
2
2
-
5
5
-
9
26
9
97
64
-
45
30
-
-
-
-
9 110 166 305 197
28
2
5
5
2
5
26
96
45
92
28
2
5
5
2
5
-
32
15
-
94
28
2
5
5
2
5
-
-
-
-
46
28
-
5
5
2
5
-
-
-
-
44
193
14
32
32
16
32
88
322
150
92
971
-
-
-
-
-
-
9
-
-
-
9
27
2
5
5
2
5
26
64
-
-
27
2
5
5
2
5
18
32
-
-
28
2
5
5
2
5
9
97
-
-
95 136 169 152
28
2
5
5
2
5
26
96
-
-
28
2
5
5
2
5
-
32
-
-
79
28
2
5
5
2
5
-
-
-
-
46
28
-
5
5
2
5
-
-
-
-
44
193
14
32
32
16
32
88
322
-
-
729
Page 19
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Anchor Firms
Government of Zimbabwe
-
-
-
-
-
-
8
-
-
-
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
15
27
15
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
23
55
30
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8
83
45
-
57 107 150 135
-
-
-
-
-
-
23
83
45
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
28
15
-
43
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
75
276
150
-
501
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6
1
1
1
1
1
-
10
-
-
20
6
1
1
1
1
1
-0
20
-
-
31
6
1
1
1
1
1
-0
31
-
10
51
6
1
1
1
1
1
-
31
-
-
41
6
1
1
1
1
1
-
10
-
-
21
6
1
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
10
6
-
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
10
43
3
7
7
4
7
-0
102
-
10
183
Page 20
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 1.4. Public Infrastructure
Detailed Costs
Unit
Quantities
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
PY1 PY2
PY3
 I. Investment Costs
A. Installation of Climate Proofed Public Infrastruture
1. Climate proofed road rehabiltation (Total 110km)
Design (Inclusive safeguard studies)
Construction
Supervison
Subtotal
2. Farm roads
Design & Supervision
Construction
Subtotal
3. Basic Community Storage Units (Total 15 units)
Design (Inclusive safeguard studies)
Construction
Supervison
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Renewable energy investments
C. Matching Grants
4P Core Matching Grants
4P Climate Resilience Grants
4P Innovation Grants
Total
KM
KM
KM
KM
KM
Unit
Unit
Unit
Lumpsum
Per 4P
Per 4P
Per 4P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
2
2
30
30
30
40
40
40
40
40
40
-
-
-
50 100 200 250
50 100 200 250
-
-
-
1
4
4
4
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
1
6
6
6
1
6
6
6
1
2
2
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
110
110
110
200
23,000
200
600
600
1,000
3,000
150
150
150
200
1,500
200
7 200,000
20 250,000
20 105,000
20 100,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
200
6
690
6
702
50
150
200
-
-
-
-
902
200
500 1 000
-
420
210
-
-
400
200
- 1 110 2 922
Page 21
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Base Cost (US$ '000)
PY5
PY4
PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
PY5
PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
PY3
PY4
8
920
8
936
100
300
400
8
920
8
936
-
-
-
-
250
200
600
750
800 1 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
75
10
95
10
75
10
95
10
75
10
95
1 431 1 831 1 095
200
-
-
-
-
-
200 200 200
-
-
-
-
-
200
22
2 530
22
2 574
600
1 800
2 400
30
225
30
285
5 259
1 400
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
203
6
702
6
714
51
153
204
8
939
8
955
102
306
408
8
942
8
958
-
-
-
-
257
205
614
770
819 1 027
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
77
10
97
10
77
10
97
10
77
10
98
918 1 461 1 874 1 124
204
-
-
-
-
-
205 206 207
-
-
-
-
-
204
205
22
2 583
22
2 628
614
1 843
2 458
31
230
31
292
5 377
1 433
1 500 1 500
630
600
5 000
2 100
2 000
4 361 4 761 2 205 200 200 15 759
500
210
200
630
600
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 105
507 1 018 1 531 1 536
-
2 191
659
218
-
-
2 042
614
203
- 1 131 2 983 4 465 4 888 2 269 206 207 16 148
513
220
205
437
407
657
612
-
-
-
-
-
-
Page 22
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Parameters (in %)
Phy.
Cont. For.
Rate Exch. Tax Rate
Gross
Summary Divisions
Other Accounts
Component
Expenditure Account
Disb. Acct.
1.0
1.0
1.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
1.0
1.0
10.0
10.0
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
1.0
1.0
1.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
CIVIL_WORKS_DA
1.0
10.0
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
E_M_&_V_DA
1.0
3.2
1.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
1.0 PUBLIC_INFRASTRUCTURE
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES_1
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES_1
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES_1
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES
Page 23
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Other Accounts
Fin. Rule
PY1 PY2 PY3
IFAD Loan
PY5
PY4
PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 20% ), OPEC_FUND ( 80% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 201
1
139
1
141
10
30
40
-
-
-
-
182
201
2
186
2
189
20
61
81
2
15
2
19
289
202
2
186
2
190
41
122
162
2
15
2
19
371
203
-
-
-
-
51
152
203
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
511
4
520
122
365
487
6
-
2
46
-
15
6
-
2
-
58
19
223
- 1 065
203 204 205 1 419
-
-
-
-
-
- 4 451
887 1 335 1 339
- 442
- 1 757
528
527
350
- 175
- 122
- 1 226
369
368
244
- 940 1 865 2 721 2 810 1 174 204 205 9 917
448
177
123
-
-
-
IFAD_LOAN ( 87% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 10% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 81% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 7% ), ANCHOR_FIRMS ( 12% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 81% ), SMALLHOLDER_FARMERS_SHFS ( 7% ), ANCHOR_FIRMS ( 12% )
Page 24
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
OPEC Fund
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
Smallholder Farmers (SHFs)
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4
PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
-
- 556
-
5
- 566
40
-
- 121
- 161
6
744
6
757
81
243
323
6
746
6
759
-
-
-
-
162 203
486 610
649 813
-
-
-
-
8
8
-
61
61
-
8
8
-
-
77
77
- 727 1 157 1 485 890
-
-
-
8
61
8
77
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 727 1 157 1 485 890
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18
-
- 2 046
-
18
- 2 081
487
-
- 1 460
- 1 946
24
-
182
-
24
-
-
231
- 4 259
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 4 259
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
51 102 153 154
46
15
15
44
80 161 243 243
46
44
30
29
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
51
15
15
81
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
510
152
146
809
Page 25
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Anchor Firms
Government of Zimbabwe
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
52
-
78
-
-
26
79
64 129 195 195
90 181 273 274
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26
65
91
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
261
649
910
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
0
7
0
7
1
2
2
-
-
-
-
9
2
14
2
2
20
29
4
4
48
0
9
0
10
1
3
4
0
1
0
1
15
2
43
7
6
72
0
9
0
10
2
6
8
0
1
0
1
19
2
43
7
6
77
-
-
-
-
3
8
10
0
1
0
1
11
2
14
2
2
32
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
2
0
26
0
26
6
18
25
0
2
0
3
54
14
143
22
20
254
Page 26
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 2.1. Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).
Detailed Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).
EHRF Disbursements from IFAD Loan
B. Physibility studies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and Allowances
Export Finance/Insurance Facilitation
Export Finance/Insurance Portfolio Administrator
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Unit
Quantities
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Unit Cost
Per 4P
per study
Per Month
Per Month
-
3
1
6
2
-
4
-
6
-
6
-
2
-
-
-
1
13
1
13
1
13
-
13
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
6
20
3
4
90
Page 27
Unit Cost
(US$)
800,000
10,000
15,000
3,000
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
PY1 PY2
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
PY5
PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
PY3
PY4
- 1 623 3 256 4 899 4 914 1 643
-
30
30 1 623 3 256 4 899 4 914 1 643
-
-
-
-
15
40
55
-
15
40
18
33
40
64 1 678 3 311 4 954 4 954 1 683
-
40
40
15
40
55
15
40
55
-
-
-
-
40
40
40
- 16 335
30
-
- 16 366
61
-
276
19
19
337
19 16 703
Page 28
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Parameters (in %)
Phy.
Cont. For.
Rate Exch. Tax Rate
Gross
Component
Expenditure Account
Disb. Acct.
Fin. Rule
Summary Divisions
Other Accounts
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
1.0 EXPORT_HORTICULTURAL_REVOLVING_FUND
1.0 EXPORT_HORTICULTURAL_REVOLVING_FUND TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES_1
GRANTS_&_SUBSIDIES
IFAD_LOAN ( 58% ), PFIS ( 31% ), ANCHOR_FIRMS ( 11% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 EXPORT_HORTICULTURAL_REVOLVING_FUND
0.0 EXPORT_HORTICULTURAL_REVOLVING_FUND
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A
S_&_A
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
Page 29
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
PY1 PY2 PY3
PY4
PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4
IFAD Loan
Anchor Firms
PFIs
PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Government of Zimbabwe
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
- 943 1 892 2 846 2 855 954
-
30
30 943 1 892 2 846 2 855 954
-
-
-
-
15
40
55
-
15
40
18
33
40
63 998 1 947 2 901 2 894 994
-
40
40
15
40
55
15
40
55
-
-
-
-
40
40
40
- 9 489
30
-
- 9 519
61
-
276
19
19
337
19 9 856
- 168 337 507 508 170
-
-
- 168 337 507 508 170
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 168 337 507 508 170
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 1 690
-
-
- 1 690
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 1 690
- 496 995 1 497 1 502 502
-
-
- 496 995 1 497 1 502 502
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 496 995 1 497 1 502 502
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 4 993
-
-
- 4 993
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 4 993
-
0
0
-
-
-
0
16
-
16
-
-
-
16
33
-
33
-
-
-
33
49
-
49
-
-
-
49
49
-
49
-
-
-
49
16
-
16
-
-
-
16
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
163
0
164
-
-
-
164
Page 30
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 2.2. Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
Detailed Costs
Unit
Quantities
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4
 I. Investment Costs
A. Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
1. Capacity Building
Training Workshops
Coaching Workshops
Group Coaching Sessions
Subtotal
B. Market  study for appropriate  crop insurance for smallholder farmers Lumpsum
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Access to Finance Specialist
Access to Finance Specialist
DSA for Access Specialist (4 days per month)
TA contract for 4 PFIs, $25,000 each = $100000
PFI/GOZ Inclusive Finance Exposure tour
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Per Month
Per days
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Workshop
Workshop
Session
6
6
12
1
6
48
-
-
6
6
12
6
6
12
6
6
12
6
6
12
6
6
12
6
6
12
6
6
12
48
48
96
200
200
200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
10,000
13
48
1
-
13
48
2
1
13
48
1
-
13
48
-
-
13
48
-
-
13
48
-
-
6
48
-
-
3,000
90
25
384
4
25,000
1 100,000
1
1
2
5
10
15
19
1
-
-
20
35
1
1
2
5
-
5
1
1
2
5
-
5
41
1
26
41
1
53
- 106
69 201
74 206
1
1
2
5
-
5
41
1
27
-
69
74
Page 31
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
Parameters (in %)
Phy.
Cont. For.
Gross
PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total Rate Exch. Tax Rate
1
1
2
5
-
5
42
1
-
-
43
48
1
1
2
5
-
5
42
1
-
-
43
48
1
1
2
5
-
5
42
1
-
-
43
48
1
1
2
5
-
5
19
1
-
-
21
25
10
10
19
38
10
48
287
10
106
106
509
557
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
Page 32
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Component
Expenditure Account
Disb. Acct.
Fin. Rule
Summary Divisions
Other Accounts
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS IFAD_LOAN ( 80% ), PFIS ( 20% )
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS IFAD_LOAN ( 80% ), PFIS ( 20% )
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS IFAD_LOAN ( 80% ), PFIS ( 20% )
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1 TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING
CAPACITY_BUILDING_FOR_ENHANCED_AGRICULTURAL_LENDING
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
O_&_M_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A
S_&_A
O_&_M
S_&_A
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
Page 33
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
PFIs
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Government of Zimbabwe
IFAD Loan
1
1
2
4
10
14
17
1
-
-
18
32
1
1
2
4
-
4
1
1
2
4
-
4
37
1
24
-
37
1
48
95
62 181
66 185
1
1
2
4
-
4
37
1
24
-
62
66
1
1
2
4
-
4
37
1
-
-
39
42
1
1
2
4
-
4
37
1
-
-
39
42
1
1
2
4
-
4
38
1
-
-
39
43
1
1
2
4
-
4
17
1
-
-
19
22
8
8
15
31
10
41
258
9
95
95
458
499
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
0
0
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
2
4
8
-
8
-
-
-
-
-
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
0
-
-
2
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
0
3
-
7
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
0
5
11
20
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
0
3
-
7
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
0
-
-
4
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
0
-
-
4
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
0
-
-
4
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
0
-
-
2
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
29
1
11
11
51
51
Page 34
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 3.1. Institutional Support
Detailed Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. Women Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI)
B. TA develeopment of Targteing and Social Inclusion Strategy
C. Support to MLAFWRD
Support to MLAFWRD for horticultural survey
M&E training for MLAFWRD staff
Subtotal
D. Support to HDC - Capital Costs
Vehicle - Toyota Hilux Double Cab 2.8L GD with canopy
Laptop
Cell phone
Office Furniture
Subtotal
E. Capacity building for DRSS on draught crop and seed varieties
Environment Climare change and Social safeguards
Training on ESS
Training of Agritex staff
Support on acces to climate information and Early warning
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. TA community mobilsation specialist
B. Support to HDC
1. Staff and Administration Costs
Project Coordination
Market Linkage Specialist (includes statutory employer costs)
Subtotal
2. Operational Costs
Fuel (@2000 km/month = 200 lts/month)
Vehicle licensing and insurance (5% of insured value)
Vehicle repairs and maintenance
DSA (2 days/month @ $100/day)
Accommodation costs (2 nights/month @ $140/night)
Communication allowance
Administration
Subtotal
Subtotal
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Unit
Quantities
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Unit Cost
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
-
-
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
1
1
-
-
-
-
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Per Month
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
16
Per Month
Per Month
6.5
6.5
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
13
13
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
13
13
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
52
52
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
Page 35
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Unit Cost
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
Parameters (in %)
Phy.
Cont. For.
Gross
Summary Divisions
Other Accounts
(US$) PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total Rate Exch. Tax Rate
Component
Expenditure Account
Disb. Acct.
60,000
15,000
75,000
1,500
500
800
20,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
-
-
63
18
42
-
-
60
- 102
89
2
1
1
93
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
24
24
24
96
93 278
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
64
-
42
-
42
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 106
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
64
-
43
-
43
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 107
192
5.0
18 19.0
127 19.0
60 19.0
186
89 19.0
2 19.0
1 19.0
1 19.0
93
24 19.0
24 19.0
24 19.0
24 19.0
96
584
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
15.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
4,000
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
68
5.0
30.0
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
S_&_A_DA
500
4,000
180
165
43
100
140
25
309
3
27
31
7
55
62
2
2
1
1
2
0
4
12
43
51
5
4
1
3
4
1
8
24
86
94
144 373
7
55
62
5
4
1
3
4
1
8
24
86
95
95
3
28
31
3
28
31
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
0
0
4
4
12
12
43
43
52
52
52 158
3
28
31
2
2
1
1
2
0
4
12
44
52
52
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9
9
9 116
28
220
248
18
17
4
10
14
3
31
98
345
413
998
5.0
5.0
30.0
30.0
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
10.0 INSTITUTIONAL_SUPPORT
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
O_&_M
O_&_M
O_&_M
O_&_M
O_&_M
O_&_M
O_&_M
Page 36
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
HDC
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Government of Zimbabwe
IFAD Loan
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
12
14
1
1
0
1
1
0
2
6
19
19
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
12
14
1
1
0
1
1
0
2
6
20
20
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
12
14
1
1
0
1
1
0
2
6
20
20
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
37
42
3
3
1
2
2
0
5
17
59
59
59
-
-
-
-
-
9
0
0
0
9
-
-
-
-
-
9
1
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
5
14
9
2
4
6
10
-
-
-
-
-
2
2
2
2
10
31
1
1
5
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
9
9
40
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
6
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
9
9
9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
5
5
10
-
4
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14
1
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
5
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
5
5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
10
-
4
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
15
29
2
13
6
19
9
0
0
0
9
2
2
2
2
10
68
7
3
22
25
2
2
0
1
1
0
3
10
35
41
109
Other Accounts
Fin. Rule
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
-
-
-
-
-
80
2
1
1
83
54
16
38
54
91
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
22
22
22
22
86
83 247
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
54
-
38
-
38
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
92
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
55
-
38
-
38
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
93
163
16
114
54
168
80
2
1
1
83
22
22
22
22
86
516
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
61
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 ), HDC ( 0% FOR 3, 50% FOR 5 )
3
25
28
6
49
56
2
2
0
1
2
0
4
11
39
46
4
4
1
2
3
1
7
22
77
85
130 332
6
50
56
4
4
1
2
3
1
7
22
78
85
85
2
12
14
2
12
14
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
2
2
6
6
19
20
27
27
27 119
2
12
14
1
1
0
1
1
0
2
6
20
27
27
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8
8
8 101
20
161
181
13
12
3
7
10
2
23
71
252
314
830
Page 37
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 3.2. Project Coordination
Detailed Costs
Unit
PY1 PY2
PY3
Quantities
PY5
PY4
PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
Unit Cost
19
1
21
1
1
3
23
23
23
3
23
3
1
4
6
20
1
3
-
-
-
1
30
1
1
-
-
20
-
-
1
2
4
-
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
Lumpsum
Unit
Unit
Unit
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
Per Year
Per Year
Per Year
No.
Per Year
No.
Person days
No.
Annual
No.
Person days
No.
Lumpsum
No.
No.
No.
No.
Per Year
Lumpsum
 I. Investment Costs
A. Equipment and Materials - PMU
Laptops and desk screens
Network storage
Mobile phones
Office refurbishment
Office equipment for office furniture /a
Photocopier/printer
Subtotal
B. Equipment and Materials - Regional Offices /b
Laptops
External hard drives
Mobile phones
Office refurbishment
Office equipment - 23 sets of desks, desk chairs, visitors chairs - $1120 X 23 = $25,760
Photocopier/printer
Subtotal
C. Accounting System
Accounting software
D. Vehicles and Motorcycles for Project Staff
Project Management Unit
Regional Project Management Unit
20 District Motor Cycles - 1 for each district
Subtotal
E. Workshops
Startup workshop at National Level
Three information meetings
IFAD Financial Management Workshop
IFAD implementation workshop
AWPB Workshops
Subtotal
F. Monitoring and Evaluation
Baseline, Mid-line and Impact surveys
TA for setting up MIS and M&E plan
Workshop  with project stakeholders
MIS
Training with implementing partners on M&E
TA for M&E during implementation
Tablets for data collection
Field visits by M&E Officer
Mid term Review
AWPB and Review
Coordination Commitee meetings
Provincial consultative Meetings
IFAD Supervision Missions
Project Completion Report
Subtotal
G. Knowledge Management
Lumpsum
Field visits by KM Officer
No.
Exchange visits for farmer organisations
No.
KM publication
No.
Thematic studies
Internships for Zimbabwe university students
Per Month
Support to University students for MSc and PhD studies linked to projectCampaign
Lumpsum
Development of short videos
Printing of communication materials
Lumpsum
Subtotal
H. Technical Assistance to PMU Office
Senior Horticulture and Agribusiness Advisor
Horticulture and Agribusiness Specialist
Senior 4P/Partnership Advisor
Farming as Business Advisor
Senior Export Finance Advisor
Access to Finance Advisor
Hydrologist
Pest Management Officer
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. National Project Management Unit
Per Month
National Project Coordinator
Per Month
Senior Procurement Officer
Per Month
Junior Procurement assistant/clerk
Per Month
Chief Accountant
Per Month
Junior Accountant
Per Month
Climate Smart Agriculture Advisor
Per Month
M&E and Planning Specialist
Per Month
Environment Safeguard Specialist
Per Month
Driver/Office assistant X3 /c
Per Month
Assistant Horticulture Officer
Per Month
Nutrition Garden Specialist
Senior Social Inclusion Specialist (Shared with HEEP, SIRP, SACP)
Per Month
KM and communication specialist (Shared with SIRP, SACP & HEEP) Per Month
Per Month
Social Inclusion Officer
Per Month
Office Secretary (Shared by HEEP, SACP & SIRP)
Senior Infrastructure Specialist
Per Month
Subtotal
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
24
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
1
-
-
-
-
12
15
-
12
-
1
2
-
2
-
4
10
-
1
9
1
-
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
1
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
-
1
2
-
2
-
4
10
3
1
9
1
-
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
1
1
-
-
-
12
10
-
12
1
1
2
-
2
-
4
-
3
1
9
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
1
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
-
1
2
-
2
-
4
-
3
1
9
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
1
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
-
1
-
-
2
-
-
-
3
1
9
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
1
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
-
1
-
-
2
-
-
-
3
1
9
1
1
1
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
24
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
-
1
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
-
1
-
-
2
1
-
-
3
1
9
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
12
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
19
1
21
1
1
3
23
23
23
3
23
3
1
4
6
20
1
3
4
14
6
3
30
1
1
84
25
20
84
1
8
10
4
14
1
20
20
18
7
63
7
5
8
75
75
75
75
75
75
75
75
300
75
75
75
75
75
75
75
Page 38
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
B. Three (3) Regional Offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo) /d
Provincial Horticultural Specialist/Provincial Coordinator
Agribusiness Specialist
Climate Smart Agriculture Specialist
Infrastructure Officer
Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer
M&E and Planning Officer
Junior Procurement Officer
Driver/office assistant.
Subtotal
C. Office Rent
Head Offices
Regional Offices /e
Subtotal
D. Per Diem in Country Travel
Joint Management Unit /f
Project Management Unit /g
Region Peoject Management Unit /h
Subtotal
E. Project Technical Committee /i
F. District Extension Officers
District Extension Officers allowances
G. Airtime Allowances
Airtime allocation - Joint Management Unit
Airtime allocation - Project Management Unit
Airtime allocation - Regional Project Management Unit
Airtime allocation - District
Subtotal
H. Project Staff Recruitment
I. Vehicles running costs - including fuel and maintenance
Project Management Unit
Regional Project Management Unt
District Motor cycles
Subtotal
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Year
Per Year
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per year
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Lumpsum
Per Year
Per Year
Per Year
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
36
12
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
72
12
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
72
12
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
72
12
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
72
12
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
72
12
36
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
36
12
36
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
18
12
36
225
225
225
225
225
225
225
450
96
288
240
240
60 1 404
240
24
80 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 800 400 9 280
90 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 1 600 900 450 9 440
240 120
240
1
20
7
18
21
20
2
3
10
1
20
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
1
20
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
1
20
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
1
20
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
1
1
-
7
20
20
20
160
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
7
18
21
20
2
3
10
56
144
168
160
28
42
140
_________________________________
\a comprising of 20 desks (880 each), 20 desk chairs ($200) and 20 visitor chairs ($120) = $22,400
\b Three (3) Regional Offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo)
\c 3 drivers
\d 3 Staff for 3 Regional Offices
\e Three offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo)
\f JMU has 7 people @ 100 days /year gives 14 days/ person per year
\g PMU has 26 people @ 240 days is 9 days per person / year
\h RMU have 24 people at 500 days : year gives 20 days per year/ person - Three (3) Regional Offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo)
\i Including all expenses and honoraria for participants
Page 39
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Unit Cost
(US$)
PY1
PY2
PY3
Base Cost (US$ '000)
PY5
PY4
PY6
1,800
2,000
633
5,175
22,400
2,070
1,800
500
633
5,175
1,120
2,070
34
2
13
5
22
6
83
41
12
15
16
26
6
115
10,000
10
65,000
65,000
9,300
20,000
5,000
2,500
20,000
20,000
75,000
500
3,000
15,000
3,000
300
100
1,000
100,000
10,000
2,500
2,000
20,000
100,000
1,000
500
5,000
15,000
200
20,000
5,000
1,000
4,000
3,000
900
3,500
700
3,000
1,000
1,000
300
700
1,000
750
1,000
1,000
500
1,000
260
390
186
836
20
15
-
-
-
35
75
15
3
15
-
-
2
-
-
10
5
8
-
-
133
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
5
36
30
36
36
36
36
20
20
250
1 467
24
18
5
21
4
18
6
6
7
4
6
5
6
6
3
6
146
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
36
5
-
12
-
10
5
-
40
-
108
4
5
-
15
2
20
-
1
47
36
30
36
36
36
36
20
20
250
467
48
36
11
42
8
36
12
12
14
8
12
9
12
12
6
12
291
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
36
-
-
12
-
10
5
-
40
-
103
4
5
15
15
2
20
-
1
62
36
30
36
36
36
36
20
20
250
477
48
36
11
42
8
36
12
12
14
8
12
9
12
12
6
12
291
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
75
-
-
-
36
3
-
12
100
10
5
-
40
-
281
4
-
15
15
2
20
5
1
62
36
30
36
20
36
36
20
20
234
639
48
36
11
42
8
36
12
12
14
8
12
9
12
12
6
12
291
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
36
-
-
12
-
10
5
-
40
-
103
4
-
15
15
2
20
5
1
62
36
30
36
-
36
36
20
20
214
441
48
36
11
42
8
36
12
12
14
8
12
9
12
12
6
12
291
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
20
60
-
-
-
-
36
-
-
12
-
10
-
-
40
-
98
-
-
15
15
2
20
5
1
58
36
30
36
-
36
36
20
20
214
430
48
36
11
42
8
36
12
12
14
8
12
9
12
12
6
12
291
PY7 PY8 Total
PY1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
20
60
-
-
-
40
-
40
-
-
-
-
36
-
-
12
-
10
-
-
40
75
-
-
-
36
-
-
12
-
10
-
-
40
- 100
98 273
-
-
15
15
2
20
5
1
58
-
-
15
15
2
20
5
1
58
34
2
13
5
22
6
83
41
12
15
16
26
6
115
34
2
13
5
22
6
83
41
12
15
16
26
6
115
10
11
260
390
186
836
20
15
10
280
120
445
225
15
3
15
252
8
2
84
100
80
25
8
280
100
1 197
20
10
90
105
13
140
25
8
411
273
410
196
879
20
15
-
-
-
35
79
16
3
16
-
-
2
-
-
11
5
8
-
-
140
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
5
36
30
-
-
36
36
20
20
36
30
-
-
36
36
20
20
178 178
394 549
36
288
30
240
36
216
36
128
36
288
36
288
0
160
0
160
1 768
212
4 864 1 491
24
18
5
21
4
18
6
6
7
4
6
5
6
6
3
6
146
12
9
3
11
2
9
3
3
4
2
3
2
3
3
2
3
73
300
225
68
263
53
225
75
75
90
53
75
56
75
75
38
75
1 819
24
18
5
21
4
18
6
6
7
4
6
5
6
6
3
6
147
Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000)
PY5
PY4
PY3
PY6
PY2
PY7 PY8 Total
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
38
5
-
13
-
11
5
-
42
-
113
4
5
-
16
2
21
-
1
49
37
30
37
37
37
37
0
0
213
439
49
37
11
43
9
37
12
12
15
9
12
9
12
12
6
12
295
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
38
-
-
13
-
11
5
-
42
-
109
4
5
16
16
2
21
-
1
65
37
31
37
37
37
37
0
0
214
451
49
37
11
43
9
37
12
12
15
9
12
9
12
12
6
12
296
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
80
-
-
-
38
3
-
13
106
11
5
-
42
-
298
4
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
66
37
31
37
20
37
37
0
0
198
624
49
37
11
43
9
37
12
12
15
9
12
9
12
12
6
12
297
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
38
-
-
13
-
11
5
-
43
-
110
4
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
66
37
31
37
-
37
37
0
0
178
417
49
37
11
43
9
37
12
12
15
9
12
9
12
12
6
12
298
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
20
60
-
-
-
-
38
-
-
13
-
11
-
-
43
-
105
-
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
62
37
31
37
-
37
37
0
0
179
406
49
37
11
43
9
37
12
12
15
9
12
9
12
12
6
12
299
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
20
60
-
-
-
40
-
40
-
-
-
-
39
-
-
13
-
11
-
-
43
81
-
-
-
39
-
-
13
-
11
-
-
43
- 107
105 293
-
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
62
-
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
62
37
31
-
-
37
37
0
0
37
31
-
-
37
37
0
0
142 143
370 431
25
19
6
22
4
19
6
6
7
4
6
5
6
6
3
6
150
12
9
3
11
2
9
3
3
4
2
3
2
3
3
2
3
75
34
2
13
5
22
6
83
41
12
15
16
26
6
115
11
273
410
196
879
20
15
10
280
120
445
239
16
3
16
268
8
2
89
106
85
26
8
298
107
1 273
21
11
96
112
13
149
27
9
437
294
245
220
129
294
294
0
0
1 478
4 629
306
230
69
268
54
230
77
77
92
54
77
57
77
77
38
77
1 857
Page 40
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
50
16
16
16
16
16
13
11
155
36
36
72
2
6
7
15
5
20
1
3
3
2
9
3
101
32
32
32
32
32
25
22
310
36
36
72
18
120
120
258
5
101
32
32
32
32
32
25
22
310
36
36
72
18
120
120
258
5
101
32
32
32
32
32
25
22
310
36
36
72
18
120
120
258
5
101
32
32
32
32
32
25
22
310
36
36
72
18
120
120
258
5
101
32
32
32
32
32
25
22
310
36
36
72
18
120
120
258
5
50
16
16
16
16
16
13
11
155
36
36
72
9
60
68
137
5
25
8
8
8
8
8
6
5
77
36
36
72
5
30
34
68
-
630
203
203
203
203
203
158
135
1 935
288
288
576
105
696
708
1 509
35
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
160
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
8
22
25
16
71
24
51
16
16
16
16
16
13
11
157
36
36
73
2
6
7
15
5
20
1
3
3
2
9
3
102
33
33
33
33
33
26
22
314
37
37
73
18
122
122
262
5
103
33
33
33
33
33
26
22
315
37
37
73
18
122
122
263
5
103
33
33
33
33
33
26
22
316
37
37
73
18
122
122
263
5
103
33
33
33
33
33
26
22
317
37
37
74
18
123
123
264
5
103
33
33
33
33
33
26
22
318
37
37
74
18
123
123
265
5
52
17
17
17
17
17
13
11
159
37
37
74
9
62
70
141
5
26
8
8
8
8
8
7
6
80
37
37
74
5
31
35
70
-
643
207
207
207
207
207
161
138
1 976
294
294
589
108
711
724
1 542
36
20
20
20
20
21
21
21
164
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
9
22
26
16
73
25
16
24
10
50
32
48
20
100
32
48
20
100
32
48
20
100
474 1 068 1 068 1 068 1 068 1 068
229
343
143
716
6 976
1 941 1 534 1 545 1 706 1 509 1 497 1 040 921 11 693 1 970 1 522 1 537 1 714 1 510 1 502 1 035 816 11 606
33
49
21
103
479 1 083 1 086 1 090 1 093 1 096
16
32
24
48
10
20
100
50
646 372
17
33
25
49
10
21
103
52
665 385
224
336
140
700
6 829
33
49
20
102
33
49
20
102
33
49
20
102
32
49
20
101
32
48
20
100
32
48
20
100
16
24
10
51
2,800
900
900
900
900
900
700
300
3,000
1,000
75
75
75
5,000
1,000
150
150
150
100
8,000
8,000
1,000
Page 41
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Parameters (in %)
Phy.
Cont. For.
Rate Exch. Tax Rate
Gross
Summary Divisions
Other Accounts
Component
Expenditure Account
Disb. Acct.
Fin. Rule
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
5.0
10.0
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS
GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS_DA
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
10.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
10.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
E_M_&_V_DA
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
E_M_&_V_DA
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION EQUIPMENT_MATERIALS_&_VEHICLES
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS_1
GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS_DA
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
TRAINING_&_WORKSHOPS
GOODS_SERVICES_&_INPUTS_DA
E_M_&_V_DA
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TA_&_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
TECHNICAL_ASSISTANCE_AND_CONSULTANCIES IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 84.8% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 79% )
OPEC_FUND ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 85.3% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 73.3% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 79% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 85.3% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 85.3% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 85.3% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 70.6% )
OPEC_FUND ( 85.3% )
Page 42
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
1.0
0.0
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
O_&_M_DA
1.0
0.0
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
S_&_A_DA
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
S_&_A_DA
1.0
0.0
1.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
S_&_A_DA
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
0.0 PROJECT_COORDINATION
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
O_&_M_DA
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
O_&_M
O_&_M
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
O_&_M
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
S_&_A
O_&_M
O_&_M
O_&_M
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 83.6% )
OPEC_FUND ( 83.6% )
OPEC_FUND ( 83.6% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 83.6% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 83.6% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 80.5% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 73.3% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), OPEC_FUND ( 50% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
IFAD_LOAN ( 100% )
Page 43
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
OPEC Fund
Government of Zimbabwe
PY1
PY2
PY3
PY4
PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 Total
IFAD Loan
PY5
34
2
13
5
22
6
83
41
12
15
16
26
6
115
11
246
185
176
607
20
15
-
-
-
35
79
16
3
16
-
-
2
-
-
11
5
8
-
-
140
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
5
36
30
36
36
36
36
10
10
210
1 216
12
9
5
11
3
-
5
3
5
3
5
5
5
5
2
-
79
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
38
5
-
13
-
11
5
-
42
-
113
4
5
-
16
2
21
-
1
49
36
30
36
36
36
36
10
10
211
436
24
18
9
21
7
-
10
6
11
7
10
9
10
10
4
-
158
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
38
-
-
13
-
11
5
-
42
-
109
4
5
16
16
2
21
-
1
65
36
30
36
36
36
36
10
10
212
449
24
18
9
21
7
-
10
6
11
7
10
9
10
10
4
-
158
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
80
-
-
-
38
3
-
13
106
11
5
-
42
-
298
4
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
66
36
30
36
20
36
36
10
10
196
622
24
18
9
21
7
-
10
6
11
7
10
9
10
10
4
-
159
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
38
-
-
13
-
11
5
-
43
-
110
4
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
66
36
30
36
-
36
36
10
10
176
415
24
18
9
21
7
-
10
6
11
7
10
9
10
10
4
-
159
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
34
2
13
5
22
6
83
41
12
15
16
26
6
115
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
246
-
185 185
176
-
607 185
-
-
-
40
20
60
-
-
-
40
20
60
-
-
-
40
-
40
20
15
10
280
120
445
-
-
-
-
39
-
-
13
-
11
-
-
43
-
-
-
-
38
-
-
13
-
11
-
-
43
-
239
81
16
-
3
-
16
-
268
39
8
-
2
-
89
13
106
-
85
11
26
-
8
-
298
43
107
- 107
105 105 293 1 273
-
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
62
-
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
62
-
-
16
16
2
21
5
1
62
21
11
96
112
13
149
27
9
437
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
36
30
-
-
36
36
10
10
36
30
-
-
36
36
10
10
36
30
36
-
36
36
10
10
-
288
-
240
-
216
-
128
-
288
-
288
10
81
10
81
177 141 141 1 463
0
404 369 430 4 342 185
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
0
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
0
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
0
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
0
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
0
0
24
18
9
21
7
-
11
6
11
7
11
9
11
11
4
-
160
12
9
5
11
3
-
5
3
5
3
5
5
5
5
2
-
80
6
5
2
5
2
-
3
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
1
-
40
152
114
58
133
42
-
65
38
67
42
65
57
65
65
27
-
992
12
9
-
11
-
18
-
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
24
18
-
21
-
36
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
24
18
-
21
-
37
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
58 116 116 117 117 117
24
18
-
21
-
36
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
24
18
-
21
-
36
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
24
18
-
21
-
36
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
0
0
12
9
-
11
-
18
-
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
59
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
0
0
6
5
-
5
-
9
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
29
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
185
-
185
27
41
20
88
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
81
81
0
185
152
114
-
133
-
227
-
38
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
65
729
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
2
90
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
4
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
4
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
4
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
4
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
4
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27
41
20
88
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
2
15
103
3
2
10
3
11
2
11
1
25
11
11
1
11
11
11
11
137
Page 44
Annex 3. Project Cost and Financing Detailed Costs  29 September 2022 DA Final IFAD 37.1...F.xlsx
-
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
38
5
5
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
71
73
-
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
38
5
5
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
71
73
-
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
38
6
6
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
71
73
-
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
38
6
6
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
71
73
-
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
38
6
6
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
71
73
-
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
19
6
6
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
41
43
-
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10
6
6
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
34
34
34
34
34
31
37
238
44
44
88
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
-
-
-
-
26
28
-
-
-
-
463
566
25
14
-
-
14
14
10
8
85
31
31
62
1
3
3
7
5
51
27
-
-
27
27
21
16
170
31
31
62
9
61
61
131
5
51
28
-
-
28
28
21
16
171
31
31
62
9
61
61
131
5
51
28
-
-
28
28
21
16
171
31
31
62
9
61
61
132
5
52
28
-
-
28
28
21
16
172
31
31
63
9
61
61
132
5
52
28
-
-
28
28
21
16
172
31
31
63
9
62
62
132
5
26
14
-
-
14
14
10
8
86
32
32
63
5
31
35
70
5
13
7
-
-
7
7
5
4
322
173
-
-
173
173
129
101
43 1 071
32
32
63
2
15
17
35
-
250
250
500
54
356
362
771
36
20
20
20
20
20
21
21
21
164
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
1
3
3
2
9
3
9
22
26
16
73
24
25
-
14
14
-
-
-
-
51
-
27
27
-
-
-
-
52
-
28
28
-
-
-
-
53 106 106 107 107 107
52
-
28
28
-
-
-
-
51
-
28
28
-
-
-
-
51
-
28
28
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9
61
61
9
61
61
9
61
61
9
1
62
3
3
62
7 131 131 132 132 132
-
-
9
61
61
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
26
-
14
14
-
-
-
-
54
-
-
-
5
31
35
70
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
7
7
-
-
-
-
27
-
-
-
2
15
17
35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
322
-
173
173
-
-
-
-
667
-
-
-
54
356
362
771
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
19
5
5
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
16
24
10
51
321
-
33
-
49
-
21
103 103
-
668 441 266 4 346 118 353 354 355 356 357 183
1 537 1 096 1 111 1 286 1 081 1 072 809 696 8 688 303 353 354 355 356 357 183
32
49
20
101
660
33
49
20
102
666
33
49
20
102
664
33
49
20
102
662
229
343
143
716
17
25
10
52
33
49
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
92 2 167
41
92 2 352 131
Page 45
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
a.  Project benefits: Economic and Financial analysis. 
Introduction; 
1.  The  overall  goal  of  the  Horticulture  Enterprise  Enhancement  Project  (HEEP)  is  to 
contribute to the increase of household incomes, food security and empowerment for 
smallholder  farmers,  through  revitalization  of  horticultural  sector.  The  project’s 
objective  is  to  support  increase  and  enhanced  participation  by  SHFs,  MSMEs,  and 
employees in market-oriented and climate-resilient horticulture value chains. 
2.  The  project  target  areas  for  the  VHG  activities  in  four  (4)  provinces;  Matabeleland 
South,  Manicaland,  Masvingo,  and  Midlands  Provinces;  project  target  areas  for  4P 
and Access to Finance activities are nationwide. Key project data regarding costs and 
anticipated outreach and outcomes are presented in table 1 below. 
Table 1: Project Costs and Indicators for Log-Frame 
b.  Financial analysis; 
3.  The  objectives  of  the  financial  analysis  are;  i)  to  determine  the  extent  to  which 
participation in the proposed project activities will be financially viable for the target 
group,  ii)  calculate  incremental  production  that  would  result  from  project  activities; 
and provide a basis for the economic analysis of the project. 
4.  Seven  (7)  crop  models  have  been  developed  to  representative  typical  farm  models  
of Village Horticulture Gardens (VHG) in the project area: 
Table  2:  Crop  models  representing  the  typical  cropping  patterns  in  the 
project 
66.9              430,000 people86,000          Households                      156 USD x person                       778 USDWOP ($)WP ($)                     37.8               5,184                      18.6                      10.5                      66.9 Components and Cost (USD million)Average increase in Rural income per capitaA. Village Horticultural Gardenand 4P Mobilization and DevelopmentAverage  increase in income per HH per yearPROGRAMME COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAMETOTAL PROGRAMME COSTS (in million USD )BeneficiariesCost per beneficiaryB. Access to FinanceC. Institutional Support and Project ManagementTotal Hot Chillies  Butternut  Green Maize  Tomatoes  Carrots  Rape  Pea PY18,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY28,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY38,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY48,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY58,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY68,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY78,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY88,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY98,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               PY108,204                   2,631              3,189                 1,945             1,434            3,104              210               50,41316,16919,59211,9538,81019,0741,292Farm models' net incremental benefits(in US$) IRR/**  NPV ($)  
5.  The representative crop models used for the typical farm models of VHG have been 
generated  basing  on  available  data  on  physical  inputs/outputs,  prices  and  related 
variables  obtained  from  a  successful  project  in  Zimbabwe  (SIRP)  to  estimate  “with” 
and “without” project of crop gross margins per hectare. Based on prevailing farming 
practices, three representative farm models have been developed to reflect the HEEP 
interventions at the farm level. Table 3,4,5 & 6 below presents the three crop models 
used for the VHG and the cropping typologies 
Tables 3: Farm model 1 
Table 4: Farm model 2 
CropsChilisButterNut Green Maize  Total  Farm Ratio0                       0                    0                 1st CycleGross margin2,461               789                1,240         2nd CycleGross margin2,461               789                1,240         3rd  CycleGross margin2,461               -                     -                  Total                7,384              1,579           2,481 11,444          Less (Overheads):1,000            276                368                1,144            Net Incremental8,655            87                  173                Gross margin per member (Assume 100 members)Gross margin per member (Assumming 50 members) Crop cycle /Year salaries-Managersalaries-Clerksalaries-2 GuardsReserves (Spares and Equipments)CropsTomatoesCarrotsRapeButternutTotalFarm Ratio0.30.30.30.31st CycleGross margin486          358     776       658           2nd CycleGross margin486          358     776       658           3rd  CycleGross margin486          358     776       658            Gross Margin        1,459    1,075     2,328         1,974 6,836           1,000           -                    -                    Reserves (Spares and Equipments)684              5,152           52                 103              Gross margin per member (Assume 100 members)Gross margin per member (Assumming 50 members)Less (Overheads):salaries-Managersalaries-Clerksalaries-2 GuardsA concrete analysis of the VHG compared to an irrigation scheme in a 4P contract farming arrangementLocal Sales3 Crops/Year (Cycles)MarketNet  Gross Margin 
Table 5: Farm model 3 
CropsTomatoesPeaGreen MealieTotal Gross MarginFarm Ratio0.160.160.161st CycleGross margin311                34                496               2nd CycleGross margin311                34                496               3rd  CycleGross margin311                496               4th CycleGross margin311                Total             1,245                 67             1,489 2,801                 1,000                 -                         -                         56                      1,745                 Gross margin per member (Assume 100 members)17                      35                      Net IncrementalGross margin per member (Assumming 50 members) A typical 4P type project drawing from an irrigation scheme Local SalesMarketLess (Overheads):salaries-Managersalaries-Clerksalaries-2 GuardsReserves (Spares and Equipments) 
Table 6: Cropping patterns 
c.  Economic Analysis  
6.  21.  The  objectives  of  the  economic  analysis  are  (i)  to  determine  whether  the 
expected  economic  benefits  of  the  proposed  project  sufficiently  justify  the  use  of 
scarce resources that would be required; and (ii) evaluate the expected contribution 
of the proposed project on the economic development of the project target areas and 
Zimbabwe as a whole.  
d.  Infrastructure Efficiency Gains  
7.  The  analysis  has  taken  into  account  the  project  benefits  from  infrastructure 
investment  efficiency  gains.  The  project  is  expected  to  rehabilitate  feeder  roads  in 
the  selected  provinces  during  the  implementation  period.  Road  infrastructure 
improvement  can  significantly  cut  down  on  transport  costs  both  for  inputs  and 
outputs.  On  average,  the  perimeter  impacted  by  1  km  of  road  is  3  Km  which 
translates  into  the  number  of  farm  hectares  as  shown  below.  The  reduction  in 
transportation costs has been computed in the table below to arrive at the multiplier 
benefits that can accrue from these strategic infrastructure investments. 
HEEP Cropping PatternsFarm Model 1UnitY1Y2Y3Y4+Y5 to 10Cropping Intensity%100%100%100%100%100%Chillisha0.30.30.30.30.3Butter Nutha0.30.30.30.30.3Green Maizeha0.40.40.40.40.4Total cropped areaha1.01.01.01.01.0Total plot areaha1.01.01.01.01.0Farm Model 2Cropping Intensity%100%100%100%100%100%Tomatoesha0.250.250.250.250.25Carrotsha0.250.250.250.250.25Rapeha0.250.250.250.250.25Butter Nutha0.250.250.250.250.25Total cropped areaha1.01.01.01.01.0Total plot areaha1.01.01.01.01.0Farm Model 3 - IrrigatedCropping Intensity%100%100%100%100%100%Tomatoesha0.160.160.160.160.16Peaha0.160.160.160.160.16Green Mealieha0.160.160.160.160.16Total cropped areaha0.480.480.480.480.48Total plot areaha0.480.480.480.480.48With project 
Table 7: Computation of infrastructure efficiency gains 
8.  Project  main  assumptions  and  overall  economic  analysis:  The  tables  below 
presents the project assumptions used for economic analysis and the overall project 
economic analysis; 
Table 8: Project main assumptions: 
AssumptionsPer km of road1Perimeter impacted by the road3kmAssumptionTotal area with road benefits, km220            km2ComputedTotal area with road benefits, ha1,007        haComputedOtherShare of cultivated hectares50%AssumptionSales per hectare, kg25,000      kgAverage based on tomatoes as representative cropTransport cost/kg, on a bad road0.1USDTransport cost/kg, on a rehabilitated road0.0USDSavings per kilo from using a rehabilitated road0.0USD86%Y1Y2Y3Y4Y5-20Km of roads built/rehabilitated, additional, farm tracks-      -                      30                     40                        40                        Km of roads built/rehabilitated, stockComputed-      -                      30                     70                        110                      Hectares with improved road networkComputed-      -                      30,206              70,480                 110,754               Cultivated hectares with improved road networkComputed-      -                      15,103              35,240                 55,377                 Total kilos sold through improved roads, USD-      -                      377,571,880     881,001,054         1,384,430,227      Savings from transport costs, USD-      -                      2,643,003         6,167,007            9,691,012            C) Output land SizePrice ($)MAIN ASSUMPTIONS & SHADOW PRICES Yields  (Annually) KgFINANCIALWOPWPHot Chillies1 Ha1,500             7.25             Butternut1 Ha15,000           0.30             Green Maize1 Ha21,000           0.25             Tomatoes1 Ha25,000           0.25             Carrots1 Ha20,000           0.20             Rape1 Ha15,000           0.40             Pea1 Ha1,700             0.90             EconomicFINANCIALDisc. Rate (opp. Cost of capital)10%Discount rate on saving/deposit accounts10%Economic 
Table  9:  Overall  economic  analysis  showing  Incremental  net  benefit  and 
cash flow at the project level: 
Graph 1: Cash flow of incremental benefits, costs and net cash flow: 
e.  Economic Profitability Indicators  
9.  Given the above assumptions, the base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) 
for HEEP investment area over 8 years of implementation is estimated at 25% with a 
positive  net  present  value  (NPV)  of  USD  31.9  million.  The  benefit/cost  ratio  is 
estimated at 2.9.  
PY1-                        -                         -                         -                  2,271              2,271             (2,271)          PY2207                       -                         80                      287             5,368              5,368             (5,081)          PY3726                       2,643                 280                    3,649          10,483            10,483           (6,834)          PY41,348                   6,167                 440                    7,955          14,352            14,352           (6,397)          PY51,970                   9,691                 480                    12,141        14,519            14,519           (2,378)          PY62,592                 9,691                 480                    12,763        8,479              8,479             4,284           PY73,214                 9,691                 480                    13,385        4,719              4,719             8,667           PY83,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534              1,534             11,611         PY83,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY93,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY103,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY113,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY123,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY133,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY143,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY153,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY163,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY173,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY183,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY193,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         PY203,214                 9,691                 240                    13,145        1,534             1,534             11,611         NPV@ 19% (ZM$ '000)6,389,265 NPV@ 10% ('000 USD)31,946EIRR25% Project year  COSTSCASH FLOWIncremental benefits from farm modelsInfrastructure Investment Efficiency GainsTotal Net Inc. Benefits (millions)Project Economic Costs Recurrent Costs Total Incremental CostsBENEFITSAdd back costs already included in the VHG models 
Table 10: Economic Profitability Indicators 
f.  Sensitivity Analysis  
10. An increase in project costs by 10 per cent will reduce the EIRR to 22per cent, while 
a decrease in overall project benefits by 20 per cent will result in an EIRR of 20 per 
cent.  A  one-year  delay  in  benefits  reduces  the  EIRR  to  19  per  cent  and  a  two-year 
delay  to  15  per  cent.  The  detailed  sensitivity  analysis  workings  and  the  matrix  are 
presented in table 11 and 12 below: 
Table 11: Sensitivity analysis matrix 
Economic Net Prsenet Value (USD) 10%31,946     Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR)25%NPV Benefits (USD)79,716     NPV Costs (USD)46,201     B/C Ratio2.9IRRNPV (US$)25%31,946-10%23%27,233-20%20%20,585-30%19%17,69110%22%27,34720%19%22,74830%17%18,14819%23,0852 Delay of benefits15%15,02810%29%39,74020%33%47,534Increase of benefitsCost Increase1 Delay of benefitsSensitivity analysis%Base ScenarioDecrease of Project benefits 
Table 12: Detailed sensitivity analysis workings. 
Year1234567891011Incremental Benefits02873,6497,95512,14112,76313,38513,14513,14513,14513,145benefits +10%-              316          4,014      8,750      13,355    14,039      14,724      14,460      14,460      14,460   14,460  benefits +20%-              345          4,379      9,546      14,569    15,316      16,062      15,774      15,774      15,774   15,774  Mild scenario-              259          3,649      6,364      12,141    12,763      12,047      13,145      10,516      13,145   13,145  Medium scenario-              259          3,649      3,182      12,141    12,763      12,047      13,145      5,258        13,145   13,145  High scenario -              230          3,284      3,182      12,141    12,763      10,708      11,831      5,258        13,145   13,145  Project Costs2,2715,36810,48314,35214,5198,4794,7191,5341,534        1,534     1,534     costs +10%2,498      5,905       11,531    15,787    15,971    9,327        5,190        1,687        1,687        1,687     1,687     costs +20%2,725      6,441       12,579    17,223    17,423    10,175      5,662        1,841        1,841        1,841     1,841     costs +30%2,953      6,978       13,628    18,658    18,875    11,023      6,134        1,994        1,994        1,994     1,994    Net cash flowbase scenario2,271-      5,081-       6,834-      6,397-      2,378-      4,284        8,667        11,611      11,611      11,611   11,611   costs +10%2,498-      5,617-       7,882-      7,833-      3,830-      3,436        8,195        11,458      11,458      11,458   11,458   costs +20%2,725-      6,154-       8,931-      9,268-      5,282-      2,588        7,723        11,305      11,305      11,305   11,305   costs +30%2,953-      6,691-       9,979-      10,703-    6,734-      1,740        7,251        11,151      11,151      11,151   11,151  benefits +10%2,271-      5,052-       6,469-      5,602-      1,164-      5,560        10,005      12,926      12,926      12,926   12,926  benefits +20%2,271-      5,023-       6,104-      4,806-      50           6,836        11,344      14,240      14,240      14,240   14,240  benefits -10%2,271-      5,109-       6,834-      7,988-      2,378-      4,284        7,328        11,611      8,982        11,611   11,611  benefits -20%2,271-      5,109-       6,834-      11,170-    2,378-      4,284        7,328        11,611      3,724        11,611   11,611  benefits -30%2,271-      5,138-       7,199-      11,170-    2,378-      4,284        5,990        10,297      3,724        11,611   11,611  benefits delayed 1 year2,271-      5,368-       10,195-    10,703-    6,564-      3,662        8,044        11,851      11,611      11,611   11,611  benefits delayed 2 years 2,271-      5,368-       10,483-    14,065-    10,870-    524-           7,422        11,229      11,851      11,611   11,611  a\ Discount rate10% +10%+20%+30%+10%+20%-10%-20%- 30%1 year2 yearsIRR25%21.9%19.2%16.8%28.9%32.6%23.0%19.8%18.5%19.1%15.3%NPV (USD) '00031,94627,34722,74818,14839,74047,53427,23320,58517,69123,08515,028Sensitivity AnalysisBase caseCosts IncreaseIncrease of BenefitsDecrease of BenefitsDelay of Benefits 
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
The SECAP Review note should build on the preliminary note mentioned above, draw on the results of the screening exercise and be
informed by the issues raised during the design mission, the stakeholders interviews, publicly available tools and dataset, and
environmental, social or climate-related studies that inform on the characteristics of the project location. The SECAP review note
includes the revised ESMP and should be attached to the Project Design Report, integrated in Draft Project Implementation Manual
(PIM) and COSTAB and shall be submitted to Design Review Meeting (DRM) or IRC (for NSOs).
1/21
1. Introduction
1.
2.
The SECAP Review Note details the analysis of the social, environmental and climate change risks and opportunities of HEEP. It
provides a situational analysis and describes trends, policies and regulatory frameworks, and strategic actions to mainstream
environment, climate change, nutrition, youth, and gender and mitigate risks and enhance positive outcomes of HEEP.
This review note was developed through review of literature drawn from IFAD’s Zimbabwe Country Strategic Opportunities
Programme (COSOP, 2020-2025); IFAD SIRP supervision and mid-term review mission reports; SACP design, Government
reports (institutional and policy documents); and IFAD strategy papers, action plans, and project reports. Information from
multilateral agencies and other development partners were reviewed.
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts
3.
4.
5.
6.
Demography. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country of 390,757 square kilometres and had a population of about 14.9 million[1] in
2020, with a rural population of 67.8 per cent. Life expectancy is 61.5 years[2] and average household size is 4.2 persons[3]. The
country is divided into ten provinces (eight rural provinces and two urban provinces). Two thirds of the population live in rural
areas. 63 per cent of the population are under the age of 24. Fifty-two per cent are female, 48 per cent are of reproductive age,
and 9 percent have at least one type of disability. The total population in the 4 provinces of Matabeleland South, Manicaland,
Masvingo and Midlands is 5,586,722 people (51.6 per cent women). Manicaland has the highest population of 1, 752, 6988
followed by Midlands with a population of 1,614,941 people. Matabeleland South has the least population. Mashonaland Central
has the largest population in rural areas (93.8 per cent) followed by Matabeleland North (91 per cent), Mashonaland East (86 per
cent), Midlands (75.4 per cent) and Mashonaland West (75 per cent).
Human development. Zimbabwe’s literacy rate ranks the highest in Africa at 92.1 per cent, notwithstanding the threat posed by
an increase in the number of children dropping out of school[4]. There is no variation in literacy rates between male (89 per cent)
and female (88 per cent) or between rural and urban populations[5]. The youth literacy rate is 90.4 per cent[6]. 46 per cent[7] of
the population have attended lower secondary education. Zimbabwe is classified as a lower middle income and medium human
development country. The country’s Human Development Index HDI value for 2019 was 0.571, ranking at 160 out of 189
countries[8].
Rural livelihoods. Zimbabwe has three main rural land use sectors. Smallholder farming areas consist of: (i) Communal Lands
where farmers have areas for cropping and common grazing lands; production is mainly for subsistence with the surplus being
sold to the market. The population makes up about 51 per cent and occupies 42 per cent of total arable land area. (ii) Old
Resettlement Schemes (redistribution programme from 1982 to 1998): This involved willing buyer willing seller basis and
resettled farmers from communal lands on an individual family basis or as co-operatives. (iii) A1 Farms, which include an
individual family farm of at least six hectares (depending on natural regions) plus a common grazing land for livestock. The
homesteads are in villages and farmers have fields at a designated area. (iv) Small Medium Scale Commercial Farming Areas
consist of: (a) A2 Farms where an individual has a farm for crop and livestock production (no common grazing land). Farmers,
males or both spouses jointly or females, are given offer letters and 99 years lease agreements issued; and (b) Small Scale
Commercial Farming Areas consisting of approximately 9,655 farms with an average size of 148 hectares. Small Scale
Commercial Farms occupy 4 per cent of arable land and farmers have title deeds or lease with option to purchase deed of grant.
and (iv) Large Scale Commercial Farming Areas consist of farming areas occupied by white commercial farmers, state farms,
forests and national parks.
Agriculture accounts for 7-20 per cent of Zimbabwe’s GDP but constitutes the primary source of livelihood for about 70 per cent
(52 per cent of which are women) of the population, mainly living in rural areas. The 1.3 million farmers practice[9] rain-fed
subsistence agriculture, characterized by low productivity, resulting in food insecurity and poverty. The key food and cash crops
are maize, wheat, small grains, tobacco, cotton, sugar, horticulture (food and non-food), and groundnuts. Livestock production
consists of beef, dairy, fish, pigs, goats, sheep and poultry. Maize, tobacco and cotton account for more than 50 per cent of the
agriculture GDP, with tobacco leading at 25 per cent, followed by cotton at 25 per cent and maize at 14 per cent. Beef and
fisheries account for 10 per cent while 24 per cent is contributed from other livestock. Increasing incidence of drought and
cyclones, low production and productivity, limited access to inputs, agricultural extension services, equipment and mechanization,
and other labour-saving technologies, together with high post-harvest losses, poor access to financial services and existing
markets, and lack of markets. The more arable parts of the country represent the main crop zones for maize and wheat, and the
less arable parts of the country in the southern and western zones mostly grow sorghum and millet.
7.
The country has little resilience to shocks (economic, climate and health). Climate change associated with extreme weather
events (drought, cyclones, floods, heat waves), climate-associated pests and diseases pose significant threats to Zimbabwe's
key economic sectors. These occur more frequently and have the potential to affect the most vulnerable population, thereby
pushing the SHF into poverty. Serious livestock losses and crop failures have occurred due to recurrent droughts from 1900 to
8.
9.
10.
2021 and the recent cyclones (Idai in 2019, Eloise in 2021 and Ana in 2022), which together with COVID-19 have left more than
half the population food insecure[10].
2/21
Employment. In 2019, out of 8 million adult population, Zimbabwe had a labour force of 3.5 million (excluding 1.7 million
diaspora workforce) consisting of 2 million males and 1.5 million females who are classified as economically active population
(EAP) Female participation in the labour market is 78.1 per cent compared to 89 per cent for men[11]. The largest employment
sector is agriculture, while the highest non-agriculture employment consists of retail and trade (23 per cent), mining (12 per cent),
manufacturing (12 per cent) and domestic workers (9 per cent).
Migration. The number of Zimbabweans living outside Zimbabwe is estimated to be 5 million people (30 per cent of the
population)[12]. The countries with the most significant diaspora population include South Africa, the United Kingdom, Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, and USA. Approximately 1.7 million immigrants from Zimbabwe are in South Africa.[13] Remittances
officially contribute 10.1 per cent of Zimbabwe’s GDP[14], but this is much higher as 85 per cent immigrants remit informally.
Child Labour. Zimbabwe ratified all key international and regional instruments, related to the welfare and rights of children.
These include the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of Children. The
Labour Act prohibits employment of any person less than 18 years of age for work that is likely to compromise personal safety,
health, and morale. The worst forms of child labour include children’s participation in prostitution, mining, agriculture, hazardous
domestic work and illicit activities. The major causes of child labour include poverty, breakdown of family unit due HIV and AIDS
as well as inadequacy in social delivery services[15].
11.
Gender Based Violence (GBV). GBV of all forms: physical, sexual, emotional, economic, is prevalent in Zimbabwe. There are
reports of increased GBV during the COVID-19 lockdown imposed in March 2020. The national population-based data (DHS,
2015) shows that 39.4 per cent of all women in Zimbabwe (aged 15-49 years) have experienced some form of violence in their
lifetime.
2.1 Socio-economic assessment
a. Overall poverty situation
12.
13.
Poverty situation. Poverty levels remain high in Zimbabwe, with around 70 per cent of all households in 2017 living in
poverty[16]. The number of extreme poor increased from 4.5 million in 2017 to 6 million in 2019[17]. A series of climate-induced
disruptive shocks and crises have negatively affected the poorest. The impact of COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated
the economic and social situation in the country. Particularly affected are women, youth, children, persons with disabilities.
Children under 15 constitute half of the poor and the extremely poor. Further, rural child poverty was at 76.3 per cent in 2017
compared with urban child poverty at 20 per cent. The poverty among people with disabilities was at 74.1 per cent. The 2019,
Zimbabwe’s Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), which is the share of the population that is multidimensional poor, adjusted by
the intensity of deprivations is 0.110[18].
The highest prevalence of poverty can be found in rural provinces in Mashonaland Central (81.6 per cent), Matabeleland North
(74.3 per cent), Mashonaland West (71.1 per cent), Manicaland (71 per cent), Mashonaland East (65.6 per cent), Masvingo
(64.8 per cent), Midlands (63 per cent), and Matabeleland South (62.8 per cent). Harare and Bulawayo cities have the lowest
poverty prevalence rates of 31.1 and 22.3 per cent respectively[19]. According to Zimbabwe Humanitarian Response Plan (2020),
around 7 million people required humanitarian support, with more than 4.3 million people being acutely food insecure in rural
areas. Poverty, economic hardship, COVID-19, natural disasters, and low agricultural productivity have collectively impeded the
availability of and access to adequate quantity and quality of diverse and safe nutritious foods. Smallholder agriculture continues
to face challenges such as limited use of irrigation, low access to agricultural inputs, high post-harvest losses, inadequate access
to markets and market information, limited access to finance, and weak extension support systems.
b. Gender
14.
Gender. In Zimbabwe, there are gender disparities in terms of access to education, identity documents, financial service, access
to and control over resources, among others. Overall, Zimbabwe ranked 129 out of 162 countries for Gender inequality index
(GII). Zimbabwe’s overall Global Gender Gap score is 0.730, positioning it at 47 out of 153 countries globally. Males receive
approximately 9 years of schooling on average, and females 7.6 years despite access to primary school being close to parity. In
Zimbabwe, women hold 34.6 per cent of parliamentary seats, and 59.8 per cent of adult women have reached secondary
education compared to 70.8 per cent of male counterparts. In terms of access to financial services, a higher proportion of males
(33 per cent) have accounts at financial instructions than females (23 per cent). The gender gap is less once mobile money is
considered; however, a significant gender gap remains. Due to the patriarchal system, cultural norms, and traditions that shape
the status of women, women have less of a role to play in decision making both at household and community level.
15.
Approximately 80 per cent of women live in communal areas where they constitute 61 per cent of the subsistence farmers and
provide 70 per cent of the labour. Female-headed households are categorized as poor and consist of 35 per cent of households.
Although women constitute 52 per cent of Zimbabwe’s population, several constraints exacerbate gender inequality in the
horticulture value chain. These include (i) production - lack of land ownership, low paid employment, limited assets, lack of
livestock ownership, and a large share of agricultural labour; (ii) markets - lack of market facilities, safety issues and unfair prices;
(iii) unsafe transportation (iv) limited participation in decision making processes: at household and community level. Other
constraints include limited access to finance, and limited participation in capacity building activities. These issues widen the
gender inequality gap and make women in Zimbabwe more nutrition-sensitive, financially insecure, and vulnerable to climate-
related impacts. Women are also perceived as one of the most vulnerable groups regarding nutrition and climate change
impacts. According to ZIMVAC (2022) at least 2.9 per cent of the respondents experienced gender based violence in a physical
way. The majority of the women are marginalized in taking control of the decision on income expenditure at home. There is
inequitable work balance between men and women due to the reproductive and productive roles by women.
3/21
Women comprise the majority of smallholder farmers, and horticulture crops are considered women’s crops, with women mostly
growing leafy vegetables for consumption and for local sale. Women currently provide a significant part of the labour for planting,
weeding and harvesting. At the same time, men are active in mechanized tasks. The prevalence of poverty in female-headed
households is 68 per cent. Under the land reform programme, women were entitled to at least 20 per cent of large-scale farms
under the A2 scheme and women were eligible to apply for land under the A1 village schemes – a departure from the traditional
norm where women only access land through a husband or male relative. This has allowed women to gain control over land as a
means of production, and land and other economic resources as collateral for bank credit.
IFAD’s policy on gender equality and women’s empowerment guides projects to address three strategic objectives: (i) promote
economic empowerment to enable women and men to participate in and benefit from profitable economic activities; (ii) enable
women and men to have equal voice and influence in rural institutions and organisations; and (iii) achieve more equitable
balance in workloads and in the sharing of economic and social benefits between men and women.
Division of Labour. Rural women work long hours, spending at least 49 per cent of their time on agricultural activities and about
25 per cent on unpaid domestic work[20] On average women work five hours more than men in both the dry and rainy season to
fulfil both their reproductive and productive roles (SNV 2017). Women are responsible for reproductive roles and in some
communities, women travel long distances in search of firewood. Due to climatic changes, water bodies are drying up and
women have to travel long distances in search of water, a time-consuming process. Women mostly fetch water and firewood
using their heads and this is physically burdensome and has long-term health effects. Women are responsible for food and
nutrition security for the household including the cultivation of food crops and preparation of meals.
Access and control over assets. Land ownership favours men in communal areas; women can only access land through their
husbands or a male relative. FHHs average arable land holding is lower than male-headed households. Only 13.9 per cent of the
large commercial farms are owned by women, while 34.5 per cent of land in the communal area are female owned. Women own
3.5 per cent and 16.3 per cent of A2 and A1 farms respectively[21]
Decision making roles in rural households. Women have limited participation in decision-making processes at both household
and community levels. Men make decisions around farm management, investments, income and community development. At
household level, landowners remain decision makers despite minimal involvement in fieldwork; while women have limited
opportunities to claim benefits of their labour.
Women and technology. The major cause of low agricultural productivity is the unavailability of appropriate agricultural
technology and poor access to mechanisation to carry out operations such as processing, tillage, weeding, harvesting, and
transportation. There is a need to promote the adoption of environment-friendly technologies and machinery for crop production
and post-harvest to reduce the drudgery of women farmers. Agricultural technical innovations that are designed to be labour-
saving for men may increase the workload for women in weeding or processing.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
c. Youth
22.
Youth. Zimbabwe is a youthful country, with approximately 68 per cent of the population below the age of 35 years. The
population structure could potentially yield a demographic dividend. However, rural and urban youth are financially more insecure
as there is a high unemployment rate for youth, which is estimated to be at least 84 per cent of the unemployed. Youths do not
have access to land, assets, and finance. Other challenges the youth face include the lack of business, management, technical
and leadership skills, which would be relevant for running SMEs. Few youths participate in primary agriculture production. Most
youth prefer jobs outside agriculture that have quicker returns. For lack of opportunities youth end up migrating to cities and
outside of Zimbabwe. The Marriage Act addresses the problem of child marriages which is high among the youth.
23.
The Presidential Youth Programme will be implemented by the MLAFWRD and provides incubation centres in the ten provinces
for the training of youth in agriculture including horticulture. There is a need to promote skills and entrepreneurial training for
youth in vocational training centres and integrated youth outreach programme to address job creation priority reported by 83 per
cent of households.[22] There is also the need to support income generation projects through access to credit, and grants.
24.
Holistic and systematic inclusion of the target groups, by GALS and other participatory methodologies is expected to lead to
major youth mobilization. Enhanced production and productivity in horticulture value chains, with use of modern technologies and
identification of related off-farm activities could offer real opportunities for rural youth.
d. Indigenous peoples
25.
Indigenous peoples. The GoZ does not recognize any specific group as indigenous peoples, maintaining all Zimbabweans are
indigenous people. The Tshwa and Doma groups who self-identify as indigenous make up 0.03% of the country's population, and
historically have hunting and gathering based livelihoods.[23]
4/21
e. Marginalised groups
26.
Marginalised groups. Marginalized people include people infected or affected by HIV and AIDS, and those with high number of
dependents, women headed households, orphans, extremely poor households, people with disabilities (PWDs) and the elderly.
The prevalence of HIV among adults (15-49 years) is 12.9 per cent. HIV prevalence is higher among women (15.3 per cent) than
men (10.2 per cent). The prevalence ranges from 10.2 per cent in Manicaland to 17. 6 per cent in Matabeleland South
province.[24] Due to the HIV/AIDs pandemic, there is increased female-headed households and several orphans under the care
of elderly persons. Poverty and deprivation are rural phenomena due to distance to social and other services, and poor
infrastructure. These communities have been further marginalized by climate change and natural disasters affecting their
livelihoods options. Poverty and inequality indicators for marginalisation have a regional perspective.
27.
People with Disabilities (PWD). Approximately, 9 per cent of the population in Zimbabwe encompass PWD and more than half
of that population are women[25]. Poverty affects PWD disproportionally due to poor living conditions, limited access to essential
services, limited support for income generation, unequal access to credit and finance. Excluding PWD from social services
causes them to become more prone to malnutrition and diseases and contributes to the poverty.
f. Nutrition
28.
29.
30.
Nutrition. According to the latest 2019 Zimbabwe VAC (Vulnerability Assessment Committee) study, around 56.2 per cent of the
rural households are food insecure, with a significant drop in the proportion of women of reproductive age consuming minimum
dietary diversity and only 10 per cent of children 6-23 months receiving a minimum acceptable diet. In 2020, 69 per cent of
households faced difficulties accessing food during the 2019 COVID-19 lockdown. Over 70 per cent of the rural households
considered poor and 23 per cent extremely poor, with households spend over half of their income on food and many households
consuming a poor diet and 33 per cent suffer from food deprivation. Women from food-insecure households had a low Women
Dietary Diversity Score (2.19) compared to those from food-secure households (2.38). Reducing the number of meals per day
and reducing meal portion sizes were reported as the most common coping strategies. This is particularly concerning given that
without adequate diversity and meal frequency, especially infants and young children are vulnerable to malnutrition.
Lack of access to dietary diversity, safe water, sanitation, and health care, early childbearing (adolescent girls) continues to
create high levels of child malnutrition. Inadequate quality and quantity of food consumption among children, adolescent girls,
pregnant and lactating mothers, including poor infant and young child feeding and caring practices contribute to acute
malnutrition[26]. The prevalence of child stunting is 27.1 per cent and child wasting is 3.3 per cent among children under five
years of age[27]. With 28.8 per cent of women of reproductive age being anaemic, iron deficiencies and other micronutrient
deficiencies remain a public health concern. Major causes of childhood under-nutrition can include low rates of exclusive
breastfeeding, early introduction of supplementary foods that lack sufficient energy density and/or critical micronutrients, low
feeding frequency, and inadequate caring and feeding capacity at the household and community level attributed mainly to women
workload, high levels of food insecurity and poverty. Despite behaviour change education on recommended practices,
complementary foods are commonly introduced in Zimbabwe before six months. More than one third of children under six months
of age are given complimentary food, in addition to breastfeeding. Another trend that is cause for concern is that 10 percent of
mothers introduce complementary foods before two months of age.
Geographical location is also associated with major disparities in nutritional status. Rural children have higher stunting, wasting
and underweight rates than urban children. Poor diet diversity and inadequate caring and feeding practices are also the results of
a lack of knowledge and practices regarding balanced and healthy diets for children and adults, the nutritional value of foods,
purchasing and dietary intake choices, including improper harvesting, storage, processing, preservation and cooking methods in
maintaining the quality, safety and nutritional value of foods. People need to know what constitutes a healthy diet and how to
make good food choices. Promoting nutritionally adequate diets for all consumers is vital to improve the health and wellbeing of
populations and foster social and economic development in the country. Nutrition challenges are prevalent in both high and low
agricultural potential areas in Zimbabwe. Nutrition education should constitute an important element in investment programmes
in promoting production, marketing and consumption of a diversity of safe and nutritious foods that are often critically lacking
especially in poor people’s diets. Hence, the need to foster strong nutrition education and behavioural change interventions to
encourage income contributed to nutritional outcomes of smallholder farmers in HEEP investment programme.
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications
31.
Location. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country in the Southern part of Africa bordered by Zambia to the north, Botswana to the
west, South Africa to the south, and Mozambique to the east. The country lies between latitude 15 and 23 degrees South and
longitude 25 and 34 degrees East.[67]
Key environmental challenges
32.
Key environmental challenges facing Zimbabwe are land degradation, deforestation, inadequate quantity and quality of water
resources, air pollution, habitat destruction and loss of biodiversity, waste (including toxic waste), natural hazards (mainly
recurring droughts), and climate change (including rainfall variability and seasonality).
a. Environmental assessment
a. Environmental assessment
Environment and natural resources
5/21
33.
Ecology. Zimbabwe is divided into five agro-ecological regions (AERs), natural regions (Figure 1), based on the rainfall regime,
soil quality, and vegetation. The quality of the land resource ranges from Natural Region (NR) I (most suitable) through V (least
suitable). Table 1 provides detailed descriptions of these natural regions and their farming systems
Figure 1 Agro ecological regions of Zimbabwe
Table 1. Descriptions of the agro-ecological regions of Zimbabwe[28]
6/21
Key environmental challenges
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
Biodiversity and protected areas. Zimbabwe has a rich biodiversity, providing essential ecosystem services, livelihood
opportunities, and income from tourism. The abundant biodiversity is being lost despite Zimbabwe’s long history of biodiversity
preservation, caused by: habitat destruction from the expansion of agricultural lands, timber logging, fuelwood collection,
poaching, and invasion of alien species, droughts, fires, and high elephant densities[29]. The distribution of people and productive
agricultural resources is uneven, leading to problems of land degradation, where large numbers of people and livestock are
concentrated on marginal lands.[30] Investments in agroforestry, reforestation and afforestation, and a landscape approach has
potential to contribute to biodiversity conservation.
Zimbabwe has approximately 49 000 KM2 of state-owned protected areas which includes national parks, safari areas,
recreational parks, sanctuaries, botanical gardens, botanical reserves and forestry lands
Land degradation: Land degradation, including soil erosion and land pollution, is a severe problem in Zimbabwe with significant
consequences for agricultural productivity, particularly for people living in poverty. Several factors cause land degradation such
as: deforestation, uncontrolled veld fires, sand extraction, artisanal mining, and poor land management in general (e.g., improper
wetland utilization, overutilization of arable and grazing land, agriculture expansion, and human-wildlife conflict).
Deforestation. The deforestation rate in Zimbabwe is very high, currently around 1.5 per cent per year (compared to the
southern African average deforestation rate of 0.9 per cent)[31]. The ratio of forest area over total land area saw a drastic
decrease from 57 per cent in 1990 to 36 per cent in 2015.[32] Between 1990 and 2010, Zimbabwe suffered an average loss of
327,000 ha or 1.48 per cent forest cover per year, totalling over 6.5 million ha.[33] The main causes of the deforestation are
poverty related and include fuelwood collection and timber extraction, land clearing for cultivation, and energy for tobacco curing.
Water scarcity/stress: Zimbabwe is a semi-arid country, and water is an essential resource unevenly distributed in time and
space. Although it shares one of the world’s greatest water bodies, the Zambezi River[34], it does not currently supply water to
most of the country. Groundwater constitutes a vital water source for both rural and urban areas. However, water availability is an
increasing problem because of fluctuating rainfall. Reduced water availability is caused by over-extraction due to population
growth, urbanisation and industrialization, resulting in increased competition between water-using sectors. Weak water
governance systems compound the situation. Zimbabwe is currently facing one of the worst droughts since 2021.[35].
Natural disasters: Drought is Zimbabwe's significant natural disaster risk regarding the number of people affected, accounting
for six out of 10 top significant disasters between 1991 and 2021. Flooding is the natural disaster with greatest economic
damage. At the same time, epidemics are most severe and result in most deaths.[36] Zimbabwe is ranked as one of the six
countries where the poor are overexposed (or 50 per cent more likely) to the impacts of floods than non-poor people.[37] To avoid
further similar and more damaging impacts, Zimbabwe urgently needs to implement a wide range of adaptation measures, which
reduce climate sensitivities, increase adaptive capacities and/or reduce direct or indirect exposure to climate-related disasters.
40.
Climate change is likely to result in hotter days and fewer cold days. The warming trend is already established with increased
annual mean surface temperature.[38] The timing and amount of rainfall are becoming increasingly uncertain, and the frequency
and length of dry spells during the rainy season have increased. Increasing temperatures of around 2.2°C by 2050 are projected.
Rainfall is predicted to decrease in all seasons[39]. A mapping study from 2014 highlights the following challenges associated
with climate change: brain drain affecting insights into knowledge and research needs and capacity gaps, inadequate research
and development facilities, and low levels of awareness about climate change. There are also political and institutional barriers
that include inadequate planning capacity and weak institutions, socio-cultural barriers (e.g. resistance to adoption of biogas
cooking technologies) and financial barriers due to the current economic situation.
7/21
b. Climate trends and impacts
41.
Present climate trends: In the last 20 years, the occurrence and severity of droughts and floods have increased[40] and the
onset and cessation of rainfall have become more erratic[41],.[42] The mean monthly temperature of the country has ranged
between 15°C and 25°C from 1901 – 2016. The mean monthly precipitation of the country has varied from 0 to 160 mm, resulting
in an annual average rainfall of roughly 670 mm[43]. In the past, the rainy season generally began in October/early November,
but most parts of the country are now only receiving rains as late as mid-December[44]. Over the last century, there has been an
overall decline of approximately 5 per cent in rainfall across the country[45] and since the 1980s, there have been an increase in
the number of years with below normal rainfall and increases in the intensity of mid-season dry spells and/or droughts.
Figure 2. Mean annual rainfall from 1901–2020[46] (Zimbabwe)
42.
Climate projections. Generally, the country is projected to experience a progressive reduction in precipitation, increase in
temperatures, increasingly volatile weather events, and less dependable seasons. The annual temperature is projected to
increase by 1.2°C (RCP 2.6) and 2.2°C (RCP 8.5) in 2040–2059. By 2080–2099, the annual median temperature is projected to
increase by 1.0°C (RCP 2.6) and 5.1°C (RCP 8.5)[47]. The spatial distribution of temperature increase is relatively homogeneous
across the country, with a slightly higher warming trend projected in southern and western parts. Compared to the baseline
period, the rising temperatures are more noticeable during summer, from September to December. The annual median
precipitation is projected to decrease by 1.2 per cent (RCP 2.6) and 4.4 per cent (RCP 8.5) in 2040–2059. Temperatures of
around 2.2°C by 2050 are projected. Compared to the baseline period (1986–2005) rainfall reductions are more pronounced
during the wet season, especially from October to March. Northern and eastern parts of the country are projected to experience
above-normal precipitation, while western and southern parts of the country will receive less than historic levels of
precipitation[48]
8/21
Figure 3. Projected changes in annual temperature (left) and precipitation (right) (Zimbabwe’s)[49]
43.
44.
45.
Impact of climate change on agriculture. Zimbabwe is considered highly vulnerable to climate change impacts and was
ranked 171 out of 182 countries in the 2020 ND-GAIN Index[50]. The country is ranked 188 out of 192 in readiness to adapt. In
terms of vulnerability, it is ranked 143 out of 182. Climate change negatively affects Zimbabwe’s economy. Evidence shows a
great degree of correlation between the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and rainfall patterns[51]. Extreme weather
events pose severe threats to the performance of the Zimbabwean agriculture sector. They are likely to be accelerated by
adverse impacts of climate change in the future. The majority of the agriculture is rain-fed, making the industry highly vulnerable
to climate change impacts, especially precipitation variability and climate-induced natural hazards. Approximately 80 per cent of
agricultural production in Zimbabwe is rain-fed, while the remaining 20per cent is irrigated. As one of the highest irrigation-
dependent countries in the southern African region, Zimbabwe has deployed a relatively large portion of its irrigated potential,
with a total irrigated area of 123,000 ha. An extra 80,000 ha can be irrigated from the estimated groundwater available in the
country[52]. Therefore, water availability is crucial to agricultural development in the country.
Rain-fed agriculture faces increasing threats, with droughts and floods becoming more frequent and intense. The rain-fed crop
production in Africa is projected to see a decline of 12 per cent by 2080.[53] For Zimbabwe, maize is an important agricultural
product. It is the staple food and gaining even more importance, with cereal yield decreasing since the country’s independence in
1965. Over the past 15 years, maize yields have gradually declined while the population has increased, resulting in higher than
usual levels of food insecurity in most parts of the country.[54] Meanwhile, many crops are irrigated, including significant cash
crops such as tobacco, cotton, tea, coffee, and horticultural crops. Irrigated agriculture also encounters challenges as water
demand increases and water availability declines.[55] Similarly, limited precipitation and extreme heat induced by climate change
contribute to diminished rangeland productivity and decreased livestock production. A study shows that most of the country will
experience reduced rangeland carrying capacity for livestock and wildlife as Net Primary Production (NPP) drops from 8 t per ha
per year to slightly above 5 t per ha, per year by 2080. The most intensive decline in rangeland productivity will be in the
Southwest and Northwest.
46.
e) Impact of climate change on crop yields
47.
According to the CARD (Climate Adaptation in Rural Development) tool simulations of the ISIMIP model, due to climate risks, the
yields of many crops will significantly decrease under the high-warming climate projection scenario (RCP8.5). The rainfed crops
that will be most affected are wheat, maize, sunflower, and soy, whose yields could fall by 14.28 to 38 per cent by 2040. The
yields of irrigated crops (wheat, rice, groundnuts, and peas) are projected to fall by 14.68 to 25 per cent by 2040. These
projections should be taken into account when choosing the value chains to target with IFAD interventions in Zimbabwe to
ensure the resilience of these crops to the multiple impacts of climate change.
9/21
48.
49.
Figure 4. Impact of climate change on rainfed crop yields (left) and irrigated crop yields (right)
c. Climate change mitigation
Climate change adaptation. 
In Zimbabwe, the following farming systems practices are being undertaken by smallholder farmers that conform to the principles and
strategies of sustainable agriculture.
Soil and nutrient management – Farmers use compost from manure and crop residues; and legumes for natural nitrogen fixation or
as green manures planted in intercropping systems as part of a crop rotation scheme or in agro-forestry systems. Using these
methods and practices markedly reduces the need of synthetic fertilizers, which, apart from their high costs, contribute to GHG
emissions.
Water harvesting and use:  Improved water harvesting and retention (such as pools, dams, pits, retaining ridges, etc.) and irrigation
systems are fundamental for increasing production and addressing the increasing irregularity of rainfall patterns. In Zimbabwe
common irrigation facilities are pump and tidal systems and boreholes with different distribution facilities such as flood, overhead
sprinklers and drip systems. Water catchment tanks are used in some schools and homes to harvest rainwater used for irrigation in
vegetable gardens and orchards. There are water conservation structures in the form of dikes, bunds and spillways that facilitate
water retention and combat salinity.
Pest and disease control: Climate change alters the distribution, incidence, and intensity of plant pests and diseases and invasive
and alien species. The integrated pest management approach is widespread following its introduction.
Resilient ecosystems. Improving ecosystem management and biodiversity can lead to more resilient, productive, and sustainable
systems that may also contribute to reducing or removing greenhouse gases. In Zimbabwe, agroforestry systems such as alley
farming, farm border planting, and energy-efficient equipment such as improved cooking stoves are carried-out in many communities.
Drought tolerant crop varieties. Early maturing, high-yielding, and drought-resistant crop varieties are recommended for food crops
planted with horticultural crops under irrigation. The use of crop suitability maps developed by UCT is recommended[56].
Climate risks can be addressed through promotion an Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) approach such as conservation agriculture,
soil erosion control, agroforestry, integrated soil fertility management, bio-pesticides and appropriate use of agrochemicals,
biodiversity conservation. An EbA emphasise increasing the diversity of cropping systems, while enhancing local biodiversity and
ecosystem services, and strengthening and empowering local communities. Enhancement of local environmental services can
provide a buffer against climate shocks
Climate Change Mitigation.
Despite little contribution to global Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission which was 22,019 Gg CO2 e.q in 2006, representing less than
0.05 per cent, Zimbabwe is committed to contribute to the Paris Agreement GHG reduction goal. By 2030, Zimbabwe aims to reduce
GHG emissions by 33 per cent against its business as usual scenario, thus from 3.3 tons to 2.2 tons CO2 eq per capita. As
agriculture and energy contribute 40 per cent and 49 per cent respectively to Zimbabwe’s GHG emissions, the Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) has highlighted adaptation and mitigation co-benefits through the promotion of sustainable agriculture and
provision of clean energy. Eighty-five per cent of irrigation uses unclean power, providing opportunities to generate mitigation benefits
with renewable energy in irrigation. HEEP will aim to enhance vulnerable communities’ adaptation to climate change and support the
country’s mitigation commitments. Opportunities are going to be explored to access environment and climate financing from the
Global Environmental Facility to provide additional resources to help the country build resilience in the agricultural sector.
2.3 Target group profiles
Geographical targeting: HEEP will take a two-pronged approach to geographic targeting based on a combination of poverty and
nutritional status and potential for commercial horticultural development. HEEP Village Horticultural Gardens (VHG) will be
implemented in the four provinces: Manicaland, Masvingo Midlands and Matabeleland South[57]. The 4P will take a nationwide
approach with a special focus in the high horticulture potential region of Mashonaland and Manicaland Provinces located in Natural
Regions I and IIA. Within these four targeted provinces, HEEP VHG will be implemented in 20 rural districts[58]which are further
broken down into wards.
10/21
The Village Horticultural Garden (VHG) activities, which are focused on the poorest rural households with less immediate
opportunities for commercial horticulture. The 620 VHGs will be sited, using a hub and spoke approach, in the districts with functional
ARDA-managed irrigation schemes especially but not limited to those rehabilitated by the GoZ through the Smallholder Irrigation
Rehabilitation Project (SIRP). There will be 155 VHGs per province. Five districts will be targeted per province and 10 wards per
district. For wards with irrigation scheme, adjacent wards will be targeted with 3 VHGs covering 200 out of the 776 rural wards in the
four targeted provinces. The criteria for district selection include: (i) poverty prevalence, (ii) proximity of functional smallholder
irrigation scheme, (iii) proximity to a major agricultural corridor, (iv) agribusiness and nutrition sensitive horticulture potential, and
(v)agro-ecological and inclusive, ARDA aggregation potential.
The selection criteria for wards include: proximity to the ARDA-managed smallholder scheme, poverty prevalence, vulnerability to
climate shocks, and interest of the farmers. HEEP will implement a participatory approach, including the community and their leaders,
for the selection of areas for VHG. This hub and spoke approach will provide important synergies in terms of access to local markets,
management, and provision of capacity building assistance for SHFs both in VHGs and on the schemes. The selection criteria for the
VHGs in these wards will include: poverty prevalence, technical and financial feasibility, ARDA interest, geo-physical conditions,
potential for eventual inclusion in commercially viable horticulture, areas vulnerable to climate change, availability of arable land and
water, interest of farmers to contribute towards operation and maintenance and replacement costs and engage in market-led
production. The key horticulture crops include nutritional sensitive horticulture crops grown specifically to fulfil nutritional needs on the
0, 25 hectares and the commercial horticulture crop on one-hectare garden. Individual households will benefit from fruit trees seeding
and water harvesting tanks for their homesteads.
The location of the 4P activities, which include mostly poor rural households with more immediate opportunities for commercial
horticulture, will be based on market conditions and agro climatic potential, and selected through a competitive process. Therefore,
the location of the 4P SHFs will depend on both the demand from anchor firms/farms and the interest and potential of SHFs. The 4P
households will be located in i) well-functioning irrigation schemes throughout the country and ii) high potential regions of the
Mashonaland Provinces and Manicaland, that is, those that fall into Natural Regions 1 and 2A (50 percent women and 30 percent
youth beneficiaries)to qualify for funding, APGs should have 70% project target group). The targeted beneficiaries per province is
given in Table 3.
Table 3. The targeted beneficiaries in provinces
Gender and Social inclusion Strategy in HEEP
HEEP is gender transformative. It is recognised that the majority of rural women have limited access to resources than men, have
lack of voice in decision making and are overburdened by productive and reproductive roles. In addition, women do not share the
benefits of their labour and efforts since they are subjected to discriminatory socio-cultural norms. The intervention will seek to
remove barriers and constraints for women participating in and contribution in horticulture sector development, strengthen women’s
economic empowerment, decision-making and achievement of workload balance. HEEP will strengthen women’s voices in
determining household priorities, spending patterns, and in addressing their own well-being. Gender roles and relations are
discussed between men and women.
11/21
A community Gender Action Learning System (GALS) approach will be adopted for achieving gender transformation. This
community-led empowerment methodology places the poor women and men in the centre to determine their own development.
Through participatory processes and simple mapping and diagram tools, men and women jointly identify and address obstacles in
their environment. This strengthens the control over their personal, household, community and organisational development to improve
income, food and nutrition security in a gender-equitable way. Ultimately, GALS can promote collaboration between vulnerable and
powerful value chain actors[59].GALS training will be undertaken by the Targeting and Social Inclusion experts at the regional project
implementation unit.
Alleviating the women’s workload and enhancing the equal sharing of economic benefits is central to achieving gender transformation.
HEEP will implement empowering measures such as facilitating women’s access to CSA technology ensuring not to increase the
workload for women, carrying out training close to their homes, arranging for child-care sessions to facilitate women’s participation in
training while easing their workload. The technologies[60] that liberate women from traditional gender roles will be promoted. The use
of GALS will ensure that both the men and women are targeted at the same time, to challenge unequal gender relations and enhance
the redistribution of household tasks among the household members.  It will also enhance the distribution of workloads, economic and
social benefits between men and women. A “men and masculinities” approach will be integrated in awareness raising activities to
address gender stereotypes, behaviours and expected roles and responsibilities.  A pro-WEAI baseline, mid-term and end line survey
will be undertaken in order to understand the women’s role and needs. This in line with IFAD’s policy on gender equality and women’s
empowerment focusing on economic empowerment, decision making and representation and workload balance. The project will
challenge and change the existing gender norms, promote the position of influence for women, and address power inequalities
between men and women.  HEEP seeks to advance rural women as key agents of change through the adoption of gender sensitive
horticulture value chains under sub-component 1.1 on VHG. 
HEEP will promote economic empowerment of women through access to Matching Grants and the linkages to anchor firms under
Sub-component 1.3. The project will encourage women-led APG and VHG to access land and engage in productive horticulture
enterprises. The land will be allocated through the traditional chiefs which is transformative since land ownership is a preserve for
males. Women and men will be trained in business development, financial literacy, foundational literacy, record keeping, CSA among
others. Through the linking of women and men to private sector firms under the 4P or to ARDA under the VHG model, new market
opportunities are created for men and women and this will spur production and productivity. The men and the traditional leaders will be
sensitised on the need to create equal opportunities for men and women for economic empowerment and equal sharing of benefits.
Women will account for a minimum of 50 per cent project beneficiaries, with adequate participation and representation in decision
making committees - for APGs and Village Horticulture Gardens and across all the project components. Women‘s participation in
decision making at household level will be promoted through GALS.  The GALS approach will promote equitable working conditions
for men and women. A “men and masculinities” approach will be integrated in awareness raising activities to address gender
stereotypes, behaviours and expected roles and responsibilities. GALS will be essential to strengthen women’s voices in the
household. In order to achieve equal voice and influence, women will be allowed to assume executive roles in non-technical executive
positions in the management committees for management committees for APGs, VHG and to own microenterprises. HEEP will create
network forums for women to share ideas and exchange experiences as well as channel grievances to national level for policy action.
In addition, leadership training will be provided in order to improve the quality of leadership roles by women and men.
Strengthen the capacities of BDS providers to operate in a gender sensitive manner and increase women’s access to information,
knowledge and skills necessary to run their enterprises. HEEP will appoint gender and social inclusion staff as part of the NPMU and
the three regional PMUs. Community gender sensitisation training by Agritex will ensure availability of mentoring and coaching
services to women and men throughout the project life.
Component 1, training should not only address technical skills (e. g business skills and entrepreneurship), but also soft skills that act
as a barrier for the participation of women including confidence building, leadership skills, reproductive health rights and GBV.
Youth have limited productive resources, skills and capital and are less likely to have adult population assets, experience, or skills.
Youth require fast return on their activities for them to remain engaged, considering their financial obligations. Youth Strategy: HEEP
is a youth sensitive project. The challenges faced by youth include: limited access to productive assets and land, limited access to
finance and inadequate skills.  HEEP is targeting 30% youth participation across project activities and components. HEEP will
promote access to services and productive assets for youth through the provision of Business Development Services, Climate Smart
Agriculture, vocational skills training, and entrepreneurial training, access to land, finance, digital technology   as well as participation
in policy dialogue with special focus on young women and disadvantaged youth.   As a result of project interventions, decent jobs will
be created for young men and women in the along the 4P horticulture value chain.  The project will generate long term youth
employment opportunities and entrepreneurship by addressing challenges of rural youth in both wage and self-employment
opportunities. Youth will be empowered to access matching grants as beneficiaries of APG. Technologies such a hydroponics agro-
processing equipment, high yielding varieties  and tractor tillage services  will assist in overcoming drudgery and attract youth
participation.  
HEEP will target youth directly by identifying skilled and unskilled youth interested or already participating in 4Ps in providing services
to the 4P members, or in production, post-production activities such as processing, marketing, artisanry, or casual labour. The 4Ps
APGs will allocate 30 per cent of membership to interested youth. The project will provide equal opportunities for 21,300 female and
male youth aged 18 to 35. In addition, youth that are interested in being part of the 4Ps APGs will benefit from technical assistance on
4Ps business plan development, training of youth in climate-resilient agriculture and access to 4Ps loan finance (through anchor firm)
and matching grants, capacity building under 4Ps on financial literacy and business planning, and technical training..
12/21
Nutritionally vulnerable groups: the project will target nutritionally vulnerable groups such as adolescent girls, women of
reproductive age, pregnant and lactating mothers and support their needs through tailored local specific interventions. The project will
liaise with associations of PWDs to assess concrete opportunities for this social group. Likewise, associations of people living with
HIV and AIDS will be contacted in the target areas to assess opportunities to participate in project interventions.
3. Institutional analysis
50.
The most important institutions as potential strategic partners to help achieve IFAD's mainstreaming agenda are outlined below.
51.
52.
53.
National Gender Policies, Institutions and actors: Gender equality is recognised in The Zimbabwe Constitution and
elaborated in the National Gender Policy, under the Ministry of Women Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises.
The Zimbabwe Gender Commission and several NGOs promote gender equality and women’s empowerment. HEEP will
collaborate Ministry of Youth, Sports, Arts, and Recreation on youth empowerment.
HEEP will work with government (Agritex, ARDA, AMA, and ZIMTRADE, DR&SS) and financial institutions in the provision of
extension services, business management, market linkages, GAP certification, nuanced horticulture technologies and provision of
farmer loans.
GoZ Social, nutrition, and IFAD Policies : This SECAP review note is aligned with key Government strategies and plans,
including the National Development Strategy 1 (2021-2025), Vision 2030, National Agriculture, and Food Systems,
Transformation Strategy (2020-2025) National Agriculture Policy Framework (2018-2030), Land Policy Framework, Zimbabwe
Agricultural Investment Plan, the National Gender Policy, the National Youth Policy, and Food and Nutrition Policy. The review
note is also aligned with Zimbabwe United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (2022-2026) and in line
with IFAD´s (2016-2025) Strategic Framework, IFAD´s Strategy and Action Plan on Environment and Climate Change (2019-
2025), New SECAP guidelines (2021), and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). It is also aligned to the IFAD12
Replenishment commitments on climate adaptation and environment, gender, youth, nutrition, social inclusion.
54.
Climate and Environment related institutions
55.
Relevant climate and Environment Institutions. Ministry of Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry
(MoECTHI) is responsible for environmental and natural resources management. It hosts the focal points for Global Green
Climate Funds (GCF) and Global Environmental facility (GEF) and will play a key role in securing co-financing resources for the
HEEP. The two important units under the Ministry are Climate Change Department and Environmental Management
Authority (EMA). EMA ensures adequate environmental safeguards are met in the targeted areas and carries out environmental
education, conservation of natural resources.
56.
The Department of Civil Protection (DCP) HEEP will collaborate with DCP on disaster risk reduction measures related to
climate change and extreme weather events.
57.
Zimbabwe’s NDC (2016). The NDC seeks to upscale options that enhance climate resilience and eradicate poverty. Zimbabwe
urgently needs to implement a wide range of adaptation measures, which seek to reduce climate sensitivities, increase adaptive
capacities and/or reduce direct or indirect exposure to climate-related hazards. At this stage and for the summative purposes of
this high-level NDC report, Zimbabwe is initially focusing on four high-level priority adaptation measures, namely to.
Develop, implement and scale-up climate smart agriculture solutions and strengthen agricultural value chains and markets;
Enhance early warning and climate-related disaster risk reduction systems (including information management systems);
Ensure climate resilient infrastructure designs and development; and
Develop and promote resilient and sustainable water resources management.
58.
59.
The NDC commits to a 33 per cent GHG reduction by 2030. HEEP will support the NDC through investments in climate
adaptation actions with mitigation co-benefits e.g. Agro-ecological and Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) approach, renewable
energy, climate smart agricultural practices, irrigation, water harvesting and climate and weather information systems, including
mobilisation of climate finance from GEF.
Climate and Environmental Policies and legislations. The following policies and legislations will be key implementing
mainstreaming themes: National Climate Change Policy and National Climate Change Response Strategy (2016), Zimbabwe
Agriculture Investment Plan (2013–2017) Environmental Management Act (2006), The Forest Act (1999), National Environmental
Policy and Strategies (2009).
4. Environmental and social category
60.
The preliminary environmental and social categorization is Substantial. Project interventions, though reversible, may lead to
potentially adverse risks to the environment and humans/society if not adequately mitigated through mitigation actions. Some
sub-projects likely to have significant or negative risks include rehabilitation or construction of irrigation schemes, agro-
processing facilities, rural roads, and agrochemicals.
61.
Potential environmental and social risks include deforestation, degraded land and rangelands, soil erosion, inappropriate
agrochemicals, pollution, declining soil fertility, conflicts, gender-based violence, child labour, youth unemployment, social unrest,
etc. A focus will be on employment creation for youth, household mentoring, observe ILO guidelines on child labour, and GRM.
 An ESCMF developed during design provides all risks identified and steps involved in mitigating the potential environmental and
social impacts of HEEP investment.
13/21
5. Climate risk category
62.
63.
64.
The preliminary climate risk classification for HEEP is Substantial based on IFAD Environment Social and climate online tool.
The high climate vulnerability will have significant negative impacts on food security and the livelihoods of smallholders. An in-
depth climate vulnerability analysis for Zimbabwe, with a value chain focus, undertaken by the University of Cape Town with the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP2) financing, has informed the HEEP design and will be fundamental
during project design. The climate analysis shows that the adverse effects of CC significantly affect agricultural production. The
primary driver for climate vulnerability for agricultural production in the smallholder sector is rainfall variability and intensity. The
project design will also benefit from the World Bank climate risk analysis in 2019-2020.
Considering the challenges identified during the review. The impact of the climate on the targeted populations is considered high,
especially in the zones considered most vulnerable. HEEP will systematically include mitigation and adaptation measures to
reduce vulnerability and manage the various climate-related risks. All mitigation and adaptation will be aligned to the country's
priorities in the national strategies and the NDC.
HEEP will invest in climate adaptation and resilience measures with mitigation co-benefits. These include climate-resilient
agricultural practices, climate and weather advisories, crop insurance, drought-tolerant varieties, shade nets and greenhouses,
climate-proofing infrastructure, renewable energy, agroforestry, and water harvesting and irrigation. A targeted adaptation
assessment consistent for substantial climate risk classification was developed to guide implementation in different regions.
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation
65.
In line with IFAD 12 ambitions, HEEP will be climate-focused, gender transformative and nutrition sensitive.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
CSA capacity building is recommended for promoting environmental and Natural Resources Management (ENRM) practices and
CC adaptation. Consequently, the farmer's CSA capacity building should be done before the approval of matching grants to
enable farmers to make informed investment decisions on sustainable land management in the early stages of project
implementation.
It is important to ensure that all partner financial intermediaries be required to prepare an Environmental and Social Management
System (ESMS) consistent with SECAP requirements, including developing an environmental and social policy, procedures and
capacities for assessing, managing and monitoring risks, organizational capacity and competency, and Grievance Redress
Mechanisms
The mitigation co-benefits through improved soil carbons and potential investment in agroforestry systems can also be included
in the CSA training. However, to ensure that the investments achieve these benefits, measures should be included in monitoring
the grants and results from the investments. The screening criteria in the ESCMF should be used to screen business plans and
the matching grant proposals should include ENRM and CC considerations.
To ensure adherence to the SECAP and the national regulations, potential grantees should be made aware of the relevant
certificates required for specified activities and the need to acquire these before the approval of grants. This can be done through
templates for the grants and sensitisation sessions for HEEP.
Furthermore the project will (i) provide broad training for 4Ps for rural youth, (ii) identify 4Ps anchor firms with greater reach to
smallholder farmers, (iii) raise awareness of labour saving technologies to reduce  drudgery, (iv) enhance youth participation in
the innovation fund through a special Expression of Interest for youth, (v) promote women’s economic empowerment through
promoting women as producers and involvement in MSMEs, (vi) improve the participation of women in decision-making through
adhering to the 50% quota for women participation, (vii) improve women and youth’s access to finance and provide financial
literacy training, (viii) hire a social inclusion expert for HEEP and conduct gender sensitisation through Gender Action Learning
System (GALS) for the 4Ps.
71.
Target group profiles
72.
HEEP’s primary target group consists of 71,000 smallholder households comprising (i) 31 000 smallholder farmers  beneficiaries
supported by ARDA under 620 Village Horticulture Scheme benefiting from improved production, post-harvest handling, market
access and capacity building in climate smart agriculture and business development; (ii) 20,000 smallholder farmers consisting of
800 Agricultural Groups, benefiting from co-financing support for improved production, harvesting, post-harvest handling through
the 4P anchor firms; (iii) 20,000 labourers will benefit from seasonal and full-time employment from the APGs and 4P anchor
firms; and The target group consists of fifty (50) per cent FHH and women in male-headed households, as well as 30 per cent
youth (21,300 youths consisting of 50 per cent youth females aged 18 to 35 years). The total indirect target group is estimated to
be 50,000 households not participating directly in HEEP activities, who will benefit from the long-term indirect benefits of
economic development in the targeted villages including indirect job creation in services and trade sector. Poverty categorisation
of rural households in Zimbabwe is presented in Table 2.
14/21
73.
Table2: Poverty Categorisation of directly targeted HEEP beneficiaries
74.
Social mitigation measures
75.
The project will adhere to international labour standards and adopt adequate safety measures. As required, appropriate
grievance redress mechanisms will be established for both workers and programme’s beneficiaries.
7. Further studies needed
76.
The following studies required for HEEP were prepared during design and are attached as annexes:
1.  Environment, Climate and Social Management Framework (ESCMF),
2.  Environment, Climate and Social Management Plan (ECSMP),
3.  Pesticides management plan (PMP) to guide pest management
4.  Grievance redress mechanism (GRM) and
5.  Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
15/21
77.
Further risk assessment will be done during implementation to ensure specific project intervention areas are not near the
protected areas. Mitigation measures will be included according to Standard 1, paragraph 7.
78.
The ECSMP matrix attached will be used as a monitoring plan that will include monitoring parameters, frequency of monitoring,
and responsibility for monitoring, timelines and costs. The targeting approach and strategy of HEEP include considerations on
how the choice of value chain commodities and steps within the value chain prioritize pro-poor outcomes. A gender analysis of
potential value chains should be planned, and the strategies and measures for promoting gender transformative approach should
be clearly identified. Detailed analysis of the specific constraints that the youth experience along the selected value chains and
how the HEEP will tackle these challenges would contribute to a clear strategy on social inclusion. A complete situation analysis
on nutrition, assessment of the nutritional needs of different age groups, the adequacy of dietary intake, food habits, feeding and
caring practices, including food availability (sources of food), accessibility (markets), affordability (price and income) and different
coping strategies, will be carried out.
79.
Stakeholder engagement
80.
The project will consult and engage with relevant stakeholders in all stages of the project cycle being guided by the stakeholder
engagement plan (SEP) annexed to ESCMP which was developed during design. The project has created governance structures
such as the project steering committee, which includes public and private sector players. The project will also work closely with
community forest associations and water resource user associations, including local communities to ensure they are well
engaged and represented in the project cycle. The project will also conduct an inventory of other development partners working
in the country to enhance cooperation, synergy and close working relationships. Using the ESCMP developed for the project will
undertake stakeholder consultations to discuss the reports, obtain feedback and validation of reports.
8. Monitoring and evaluation
81.
The programme will use M&E indicators in the logical framework to measure climate resilience, NRM practices, and nutrition
aspects, including gender and youth issues. A monitoring plan will be developed to identify monitoring indicators at different
levels, parameters to monitor, frequency of monitoring, responsibility for monitoring, and cost. Key responsibilities and monitoring
for designing and implementing environmental and social safeguards measures are identified within ESCMP matrix (Table 4).
The FAO EXACT Tool GHG emissions accounting will be used to account for emissions. A detailed GHG analysis will be done at
the start of implementation. Procurement actions and budget related to SECAP will be monitored by PMU and IFAD.
9. References
82.
Refer to footnotes
ESCMP Matrix
83.
Table 4. Environment, Social and Climate Management Plan (ESCMP) Matrix
84.
16/21
17/21
18/21
19/21
20/21
Footnotes
1.  World Bank https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=ZW
2.  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.LE00.IN?locations=ZW
3.  https://www.zimstat.co.zw/wp-content/uploads/publications/Population/population/ICDS_2017.pdf
4.  Ibid
5.  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS?locations=ZW
6.  http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/zw
7.  https://www.zimstat.co.zw/wp-content/uploads/publications/Social/Education/Education_Report_2020.pdf
8.  UNDP, 2020.
9.  http://www.livestockzimbabwe.com/Updates/Draft20Zimbabwe%20Agriculture%20National%20Policy%20Framework.pdf
10.  2022-2026 ZUNSDCF_Final.pdf
11.  https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/ZWE.pdf
12.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zimbabwean_diaspora
13.  Zimbabwe_Financial_Inclusion_Refresh.pdf
14.  https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/ZWE.pdf
15.  https://www.herald.co.zw/child-labour-in-zimbabwe
16.  Poverty Income Consumption and Expenditure Surveys. 2017. Zimstat
17.  Ibid
18.  https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/ZWE.pdf
21/21
19.  https://www.zimstat.co.zw/wp-content/uploads/publications/Income/Finance/Poverty-Report-2017.pdf
20.  FAO, 2017 Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector
21.  MLARR (2019) Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Framework.
22.  ZIMVAC, 2022
23.  www.iwgia.org, accessed 28 March 2022.
24.  Zimbabwe Population-based HIV Impact Assessment Survey (ZIMPHIA 2020)
25.  National Disability Policy, 2020
26.  Zimbabwe National Nutrition Survey 2018
27.  GHI 2019
28.  46 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO, 2006). Fertilizer use by crop in Zimbabwe, First Version.
URL: http://www.fao.org/docrep/009/a0395e/a0395e00.htm#Contents
29.  Spong et al (undated)
30.  Spong et al (undated)
31.  Chapter 17. Southern Africa (fao.org)
32.  Deforestation statistics for Zimbabwe (2022) (mongabay.com)
33.  Zimbabwe Forest Information and Data. URL: https://rainforests.mongabay.com/deforestation/2000/Zimbabwe.ht
34.  The countries sharing the Zambezi river are Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia and
Zimbabwe
35.  FAO (2017) Zimbabwe Country Gender Assessment Report. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6997e.pdf
36.  EM-DAT | The international disasters database (emdat.be)
37.  Hallegatte et al. (2017): Unbreakable. Building the Resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters. URL: https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25335
38.  Zimbabwe Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment (2021
39.  Zimbabwe Revised Nationally Determined Contribution 2021 Final.pdf (unfccc.int)
40.  Ibid, UCT 2019
41.  Zimbabwe National Communication Report to UNFCCC, NC 2016
42.  Ibid, UCT 2019
43.  Government of Zimbabwe (2019). National Adaptation Plan Roadmap for Zimbabwe
44.  CIAT/World Bank, 2017)
45.  Government of Zimbabwe, 2015,
46.  BG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2019). Climate Data: Historical. URL:
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank. org/country/Zimbabwe
47.  In climate change modelling, RCP stands for representative greenhouse gas concentration (not emissions trajectory) pathway
that is adopted by the IPCC to describe different climate futures whose likelihood is estimated by the GHG emissions in the
emissions to come.
48.  Zimbabwe Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment (2021)
49.  WBG Climate Change Knowledge Portal (CCKP, 2021). Climate Data: Projections. URL:
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank. org/country/Zimbabwe/climate-data-projection
50.  Zimbabwe Economic Outlook Report (World Bank 2016)
51.  NEPAD–CAADP Bankable Investment Project Profile (2004). “Zimbabwe Smallholder Irrigation Development”. URL: http://
www.fao.org/tempref/docrep/fao/007/ae567e/ae567e00.pdf
52.  Musiyiwa, W. Leal Filho, D. Harris, and J. Nyamangara (2014). Implications of Climate Variability and Change for Smallholder
Crop Production in Different Areas of Zimbabwe. Res. J. Environ. Earth Sci., 6(8): 394–401, 2014. URL:
http://maxwellsci.com/print/rjees/v6-394-401.pdf
53.  World Bank Open Data. Data retrieved in September 2018. URL: https://data.worldbank.org/
54.  Zimbabwe Resilience Building Fund, 2016: El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle events and their impacts in Zimbabwe.
URL: http://www.zrbf.co.zw/download/library/5F00B100B2002900/enso-analysis--a5
55.  Climate Risk Assessment, Agriculture Sector of Mozambique, IFAD, and University of Cape Town, 2019
56.  Wageningen (2020)
57.  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Descrimination Against Women (CEDAW), and Optional Protocol to the African
charter on the Rights of Women in Africa, SADC Gender and Development Protocol (2008) which advocates for gender parity
in all sectors and set out targets for achievement of gender equality.
58.  Rankings Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative // University of Notre Dame (nd.edu)
59.  Cost Estimates to be determined at preparation stage at national, regional and sub-project level once construction and
operational activities are well defined (7th clolumn).
60.  Included in the PMU and key in the implementation and monitoring of this Plan are the Environmental, Social and Climate
Safeguards Specialists/Officers who have presence at National, provincial and district level
Environmental and Social Safeguards Classification: Substantial
1/6
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Biodiversity conservation
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
1.1 Could the project potentially involve or lead to conversion or
degradation of biodiversity, habitats (including modified habitat,
natural habitat and critical natural habitat) and/or ecosystems and
ecosystem services?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Minor impact on habitats.
Impacts are temporary
and confined to a small
area of low ecological
sensitivity or value.
1.2 Could the project involve or potentially lead to activities
involving habitats that are legally protected, officially proposed for
protection, or recognized as protected by traditional local
communities and/or authoritative sources (e.g. National Park,
Nature Conservancy, Indigenous Community Conserved Area,
ICCA, etc.)?
No
Risk
Rating
Moderate
Low
1.3 Could the project potentially involve or lead to an increase in
the chance of human-wildlife encounters/conflict?
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
Conflict leads to some
loss of livelihood or threat
to wildlife, but this is not
catastrophic
1.4 Could the project potentially involve or lead to risks to
endangered species (e.g. reduction, encroachment on habitat)?
No
Low
1.5 Could the project potentially involve or lead to impacts/risks to
migratory wildlife?
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
1.6 Could the project potentially involve or lead to introduction or
utilization of any invasive alien species of flora and fauna, whether
accidental or intentional?
No
1.7 Could the project involve or lead to the handling or utilization of
genetically modified organisms?
No
Project or associated
facilities may have minor
indirect impact on sites of
importance to migratory
wildlife. Project can be
modified/mitigated to
ensure that impacts do
not occur.
Low
Low
1.8 Could the project involve or lead to procurement through
primary suppliers of natural resource materials?
Yes
Likely
Moderate
Substantial
Poject requires
procurement of natural
resources through primary
suppliers, and resource
extraction is tightly
regulated
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
Risk
Rating
2.1 Could the project involve or lead to the release of pollutants to
the environment due to routine or non-routine circumstances with
the potential for adverse local, regional, and/or transboundary
impacts?
2/6
Environmental and Social Safeguards
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
2.2 Could the project involve or lead to primary not environmentally
sustainable production of living natural resources? (Note: this
includes the cultivation or rearing of plants or animals, including
annual and perennial crop farming, animal husbandry (including
livestock), aquaculture, plantation forestry, etc )
No
2.3 Could the project involve or lead to engagement in areas of
forestry, including the harvesting of natural forests, plantation
development, and/or reforestation?
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
2.4 Could the project involve or lead to significant consumption of
raw materials, energy, and/or water?
Yes
Almost
certain
Pollutants may possibly
be released, either
routinely or by accident,
but treatment systems are
proven and verified.
Receiving environment
has absorptive capacity.
Low
Only a small component
of the project is focused
on forestry, and this
aspect is well regulated.
Moderate
Substantial
The project will require
consumption of raw
materias, energy, and/or
water. This will be a
significant component of
the project, but impacts
can be appropriately
managed.
2.5 Could the project involve or lead to significant extraction,
diversion or containment of surface or ground water (e.g.
construction of dams, reservoirs, river basin developments,
groundwater extraction)?
Yes
Almost
certain
Moderate
Substantial
The project needs a
considerable amount of
groundwater or surface
water. Ths will require a
minor extension of
existing sources. It
includes construction of
large-scale irrigation
schemes
rehabilitation/development
– below 300 ha per
scheme
2.6 Could the project involve inputs of fertilizers and other modifying
agents?
Yes
Almost
certain
Moderate
Substantial
2.7 Could the project involve or lead to procurement, supply and/or
result in the use of pesticides on crops, livestock, aquaculture or
forestry?
Yes
Almost
certain
The project requires use
of fertilizers, but options
are available to replace
polluting fertilizers with
alternatives.
Moderate
Substantial
The project requires use
of pesticides, but options
are available to replace
potentially polluting
pesticides with
alternatives.
Environmental and Social Safeguards
2.8 Could the project be located in an area which is being, or has
been, polluted by an external source (e.g. a mine, smelter,
industry)?
3/6
2.9 Could the project involve livestock – extensive and intensive
systems and animal products (dairy, skins, meat, etc.)?
No
No
Cultural Heritage
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
3.1 Could the project be located in areas that are considered to
have archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical,
cultural, artistic, and religious values or contains features
considered as critical cultural heritage?
3.2 Could the project directly or indirectly affect indigenous peoples’
rights, lands, natural resources, territories, livelihoods, knowledge,
social fabric, traditions, governance systems, and culture or
heritage (tangible and intangible)?
3.3 Could the project involve or lead to significant excavations,
demolitions, movement of earth, flooding or other environmental
changes?
3.4 Could the project involve or lead to adverse impacts to sites,
structures, or objects with historical, cultural, artistic, traditional or
religious values or intangible forms of culture (e.g. knowledge,
innovations, practices)? (Note: projects intended to protect and
conserve Cultural Heritage may also have inadvertent adverse
impacts)
3.5 Could the project involve or lead to alterations to landscapes
and natural features with cultural significance?
3.6 Could the project involve or lead to utilization of tangible and/or
intangible forms (e.g. practices, traditional knowledge) of Cultural
Heritage for commercial or other purposes?
No
No
No
No
No
No
indigenous peoples
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
4.1 Could the project be sited in areas where indigenous peoples
are present (including the project area of influence)?
4.2 Could the project result in activities located on lands and
territories claimed by indigenous peoples?
4.3 Could the project result in impacts on the rights of indigenous
peoples or to the lands, territories and resources claimed by them?
4.4 Could the project result in the utilization and/or commercial
development of natural resources on lands and territories claimed
by indigenous peoples?
4.5 Could the project lead to impacts on the Cultural Heritage of
indigenous peoples, including through the commercialization or use
of their traditional knowledge and practices?
No
No
No
No
No
Labour and Working Conditions
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
5.1 Could the project operate in sectors or value chains that are
characterized by working conditions that do not meet national
labour laws or international commitments? (Note: this may include
discriminatory practices, high gender inequality and the lack of
equal opportunities, denial of freedom of association and collective
bargaining, labour migrants)
5.2 Could the project use or operate in a value chain where there
have been reports of forced labour? (Note: Risks of forced labour
may be increased for projects located in remote places or where
the status of migrant workers is uncertain)
No
No
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
5.3 Could the project involve children (a) below the nationally-
defined minimum employment age (usually 15 years old) or (b)
above the nationally-defined minimum employment age but below
the age of 18 in supported activities or in value chains?
4/6
No
Low
5.4 Could the project: (a) operate in a sector, area or value chain
where producers and other agricultural workers are typically
exposed to significant occupational and safety risks, and/or (b)
promote or use technologies or practices that pose occupational
safety and health (OSH) risks for farmers, other rural workers or
rural populations in general? (Note: OSH risks in agriculture might
include: dangerous machinery and tools; hazardous chemicals;
toxic or allergenic agents; carcinogenic substances or agents;
parasitic diseases; transmissible animal diseases; confined spaces;
ergonomic hazards; extreme temperatures; and contact with
dangerous and poisonous animals, reptiles and insects.
Psychosocial hazards might include violence and harassment.)
Yes
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The project operates in a
sector, area, or value
chain where workers are
occasionally exposed to
significant OSH risks, and
where regulation is known
to be effective.
Community Health, Safety and Security
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
6.1 Could the project be at risk from water-borne or other vector-
borne diseases (e.g. temporary breeding habitats), and/or
communicable and non-communicable diseases?
6.2 Could the project lead to unintended negative impacts on
nutrition?
6.3 Is there a possibility of harm or losses due to failure of structural
elements of the project (e.g. collapse of buildings or infrastructure)?
6.4 Could the project involve or lead to the construction or
rehabilitation of dams?
6.5 Could the project involve or lead to transport, storage, and use
and/or disposal of hazardous or dangerous materials (e.g.
explosives, fuel and other chemicals during construction and
operation)?
Yes
Possible
Minor
The project is situated in
an area where negative
impacts from water-borne
or other vector-borne
diseases, or
communicable/non-
communicable diseases
are possible, but where
there is no evidence of
past impact, and where
containment of these
impacts would be
effective if problems
emerged.
No
No
No
Risk
Rating
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Yes
Likely
Minor
Moderate
The project has only
minor involvement with
the transport, storage, and
use and/or disposal of
hazardous or dangerous
materials, and regulation
of hazardous materials is
effective.
6.6 Could the project lead to adverse impacts on ecosystems and
ecosystem services relevant to communities’ health (e.g. food,
surface water purification, natural buffers from flooding)?
Yes
Possible
Negligible
Low
The project does not
operate in a fashion that
will adversely impact on
ecosystem services.
Environmental and Social Safeguards
6.7 Could the project lead to the potential for gender-based
violence, including sexual harassment, exploitation and abuse, as a
result of labour influx, land redistribution, or other actions that alter
community dynamics?
5/6
Yes
Possible
Negligible
Low
The project will not result
in labout influx, land
redistribution, or other
actions that alter
community dynamics.
6.8 Could the project lead to increases in traffic or alteration in
traffic flow?
Yes
Possible
Negligible
Low
The project will not lead to
an increase in traffic, or
alteration of traffic flow.
6.9 Could the project lead to an influx of project workers?
Yes
Possible
Negligible
Low
6.10 Could the project involve or lead to the engagement of security
personnel to protect facilities and property or to support project
activities?
The project does not
require an influx of project
workers
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The project requires the
introduction of a
moderately-sized security
force. The force is well
trained, and protocols are
in place.
Physical and economic resettlement
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
7.1 Could the project result in temporary or permanent and full or
partial physical displacement (including people without legally
recognizable claims to land)?
7.2 Could the project result in economic displacement (e.g. loss of
assets or access to resources due to land acquisition or access
restrictions – even in the absence of physical relocation)?
7.3 Could the project present a risk of forced evictions?
7.4 Could the project result in impacts on or changes to land tenure
arrangements and/or community-based property rights/customary
rights to land, territories and/or resources?
No
No
No
Yes
Risk
Rating
Low
Low
Low
Possible
Minor
Moderate
The project will result in
minor impacts on or
changes to land tenure
arrangements and/or
community-based
property rights/customary
rights. Legal recourse and
other forms of
arbitration/conflct
resolution are available.
Financial intermediaries and direct investments
Yes/No Likelihood Consequence
8.1 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not
have an environmental and social policies and an associated
environmental and social management system (ESMS) in place
(transparent, publicly available)?
No
Risk
Rating
Low
Environmental and Social Safeguards
6/6
8.2 Could the investment be granted to an institution with
insufficient capacities (i.e. unqualified personnel e.g. ES Officer) to
implement the ESMS?
8.3 Could the investment be granted to an institution that does not
have an Exclusion List?
8.4 According to the institution's portfolio classification: Could the
institution have potential high-risk projects in their portfolio?
8.5 Is there evidence that the institution does not comply with the
local legal framework?
8.6 Does the institution provide a stable communication channel
with stakeholders and local communities (e.g. a Grievance Redress
Mechanism)?
8.7 Does the organization provide auxiliary or capacity building
support services.
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The institution does not
employ an ES Officer, but
has sufficiently trained
field staff available to
monitor the impact of the
operations of the
institution.
No
No
No
No
Low
Low
Low
Low
Yes
Possible
Moderate
Moderate
The institution offers
some services for
customers directly or
through third-party
providers.
Climate Risk Classification: Substantial
Step 1: Hazard identification
1/2
What are the expected hazards in the project intervention area?
No, Yes, TBD
River flood
Costal Flood
Urban Flood
Landslide
Cyclone
Water Scarcity (agricultural droughts and/or dry spells)
Extreme Heat
Wildfires
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Future climate scenarios foreseen (period 2040-2059) - Change in frequency and intensity
No, Yes, TBD
Change in temperature (increase or decrease)
Change in rainfall (increase or decrease)
Climate variability (larger or smaller)
Intensity and frequency of extreme events (larger or smaller)
Is the project expected to have an impact on climate?
Is the project expected to be a significant emitter of greenhouse gases?
Step 2: Exposure Assessment
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No, Yes, TBD
Yes
Is the project located in exposed areas to weather-related natural hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Low-lying areas (valleys, coastal zones, and small islands)
Very warm areas (subtropical)
Tropical areas (rainforests)
Arid and semi-arid areas (deserts)
Mountains zones and permafrost areas (tundra)
River banks
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Does the project target agricultural systems, ecosystems or livelihoods exposed to weather-related
hazards?
No, Yes, TBD
Is crop production frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or pests
and diseases?
Is livestock productivity frequently affected by rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, changes in temperature or
diseases?
Are fisheries frequently affected by ocean acidification, water salinity and changes in sea surface temperature due
to ocean-atmospheric oscillations or climate change?
Is forest productivity frequently affected by wildfires, diseases, rainfall variability, prolonged droughts, or changes in
temperature?
Is the biodiversity in the project area likely to be affected by changes in climate variables?
Is any stage of the agricultural value chain (production, storage, processing and marketing) exposed to climate
related hazards?
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Is any rural infrastructure likely to be affected by flooding, landslides, changes in temperatures, and extreme winds. Yes
Step 3: Sensitivity Assessment
What are key sensitivities for the populations in the project’s areas of intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is conflict exacerbating the population's sensitivity to weather related hazards?
Is population displacement being exacerbated by climate change impacts?
No
Yes
Are diseases (e.g. COVID-19, malaria, cholera) increasing the population´s vulnerability and affecting their capacity
to address potential weather-related hazards?
2/2
Is the income of the target population predominately coming from agriculture?
Are social inequalities (e.g. based on gender, youth, indigenous persons and other marginalized groups) being
exacerbated by climate change?
Is the Human Development Index (HDI) equal to or below 0.6?
Is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) equal to or above 0.1?
Step 4: Adaptive capacity and climate resilience
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
What are key adaptive capacities in the areas of project intervention?
No, Yes, TBD
Is the country well ranked in the Disaster risk reduction progress score?
Are climate and weather information services (real-time weather data, seasonal forecasts etc.) effectively being
delivered (through radio, TV, SMS, extension services etc.) to farmers, rural dwellers, and end users?
Does the project country have an early action plan (preparedness and emergency response) to mitigate the
impacts of weather-related hazards once the shock occurs?
Does the government or other institutions support the target population/communities with the necessary social and
economic resources to prepare for or respond to climate-related events?
Is the target community carrying out (using their own means) agricultural adaptation?
Does the target population have the economic means or support to adjust or adapt their activities in response to
weather related shocks?
Do policies/mechanisms exist that make financial credit, loans, and agricultural insurance available?
Are rural infrastructures effectively delivering services to farmers and rural dwellers?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Components by Financiers
(US$ '000)
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
IFAD Loan
Smallholder
OPEC Fund Farmers (SHFs)Anchor Firms
PFIs
HDC
Government of
Zimbabwe
Total
For.
Local
(Excl. Duties &
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Exch. Taxes) Taxes
A. Village Horticultural Gardenand 4P Mobilization and Development  
Village Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development
4P/Hub and Spoke Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building
Public Infrastructure
Subtotal
B. Access to Finance
Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).
Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
Subtotal
C. Institutional Support and Project Management
Institutional Support
Project Coordination
Subtotal
Total PROJECT COSTS
269 25.0
119 38.6
834 82.2
1 222 50.9
1 061 60.9
98 90.0
1 159 62.6
462 89.4
3 434 89.2
3 896 89.2
6 277 72.8
627 58.2
104 33.7
-
730 30.4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4.8
185
185
4.2
915 10.6
-
12 1.1
-
80 7.9
93 3.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
93 1.1
-
-
65 21.1
8.9
90
6.5
155
168
-
168
-
-
-
323
9.6
-
9.1
-
-
-
3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
496 28.5
1.8
498 26.9
2
-
-
-
498
-
-
-
5.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
169 15.7
6.6
1.0
8.3
20
10
199
17
9
25
0.9
8.2
1.4
55 10.6
6.0
6.6
5.9
233
288
512
1 077
308
1 015
2 399
1 742
109
1 850
12.5
3.6
11.8
27.8
20.2
1.3
21.5
6.0
517
44.7
3 851
4 368
50.7
8 618 100.0
108
2
101
211
-
27
27
155
487
642
880
961
286
903
2 149
1 725
73
1 798
307
3 241
3 548
7 495
8
20
10
39
17
9
25
55
124
179
243
Page 1
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Duties &
Page 2
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
(US$ '000)
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
IFAD Loan
Smallholder
OPEC Fund Farmers (SHFs)Anchor Firms
PFIs
HDC
Government of
Zimbabwe
Total
For.
Local
(Excl. Duties &
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Exch. Taxes) Taxes
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
88
1
99
24
45
6
263
8.9
3.3
7.1
1.0
6.0
2.2
4.5
983
16
1 403
2 435
758
271
5 866
11.4
0.2
16.3
28.3
8.8
3.1
68.1
6.2
140
109 21.8
9.1
249
5.9
512
26.1
2 249
5.8
503
2 752
31.9
8 618 100.0
98
1
510
81
74
36
801
52
27
79
880
885
14
794
2 329
638
229
4 890
2 166
439
2 606
7 495
-
1
99
24
45
6
175
31
36
68
243
I. Investment Costs
Civil Works
Goods, Services & Inputs
Equipment, Materials & Vehicles
Grants & Subsidies
Training & Workshops
Technical Assistance & Consultancies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Salaries and Allowances
Operation & Maintenances
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
267 27.1
13 82.1
1 119 79.8
1 576 64.7
549 72.5
250 92.3
3 775 64.3
2 109 93.8
393 78.2
2 502 90.9
6 277 72.8
617 62.7
2 14.6
185 13.2
-
111 14.7
-
915 15.6
-
-
-
-
12 1.2
-
-
80 3.3
-
-
93 1.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
258 10.6
6.6
5.5
5.5
50
15
323
-
-
-
-
-
-
496 20.4
0.3
-
8.5
2
-
498
-
-
-
-
-
-
915 10.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
93 1.1
-
-
-
323
-
-
-
3.8
-
-
-
498
-
-
-
5.8
Page 3
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 1.1. Village Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development
Detailed Costs
Unit
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months (US$)
Quantities
Unit Cost
Totals including Contigencies ('000)
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months
 I. Investment Costs
A. Creation and Capacitation of Village Horticulture Gardens in Four (4) Provinces 
Masvingo
Matabeleland South
Midlands
Manic land
Subtotal
B. Provincial ARDA Manager ToT Workshop Costs
Travel /a
DSA
Full board in GoZ Training centre
Workshop venue /b
Trainer costs /c
Subtotal
C. Following year Provincial ARDA Manager Refresher Workshop Costs
Travel /d
DSA
Full board in GoZ Training centre
Workshop venue /e
Trainer costs /f
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Operating costs
Operating costs /g
Total
  Hectare
  Hectare
  Hectare
  Hectare
Days
Days
Days
Days
 Ls/Workshop
Days
Days
Days
Days
 Ls/Workshop
  Per Year
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
10
10
10
40
120
120
12
4
-
-
-
-
-
10 24,000
10 24,000
10 24,000
10 24,000
40
120
120
12
4
25
25
20
100
1,100
-
-
-
-
-
40
40
2,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
246
246
246
246
983
1
3
2
1
4
12
-
-
-
-
-
996
246
246
246
246
983
1
3
2
1
4
12
-
-
-
-
-
996
81
1 077
81
1 077
_________________________________
\a Per Province x 4 Provinces (Yr1 10 people, Yr2 25, Yr3-7 30)
\b Four Provinces per year x three days per training
\c Trainer cost per Province - travel 25, DSA 25, full board at GoZ training centre 20 - plus fee @150 for 3 days + 3 days @150 prep and report writing
\d Per Province x 4 Provinces (Yr2 10 people, Yr3 25, Yr4-8 30)
\e Four Provinces per year x two days per training
\f Trainer cost per Province - travel 25, DSA 25, full board at GoZ training centre 20 - plus fee @150 for 2 days + 2 days @150 prep and report writing
\g 2,000 a year per scheme for two years (100% GoZ)
Page 4
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 1.2. 4P/Hub and Spoke Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building
Detailed Costs
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
Unit
 I. Investment Costs
A. Mobilization and Capacity Building
GALS  training
Demonstartion of labour saving technologies
international women day commemoration
Women and men forums
Youth Day Commemoration
Youth forums
4P Promotional and Mobilization Costs
4P Capacity Building
4P Proposal Development - support to 4P anchor firms
Inclusive Horticulture Exposure tour for GoZ, HDC to Ethiopia or Kenya
Total
Session
Unit
#days
session
session
session
Lumpsum
per 4p
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Unit Cost
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months (US$) First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months
Totals including Contigencies ('000)
Quantities
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
24
5
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
-
24 2,500
5 1,000
2 5,000
1 10,000
1 5,000
1 10,000
3 25,000
2 50,000
2 15,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25
-
-
-
25
61
5
10
10
5
10
50
101
30
-
283
61
5
10
10
5
10
75
101
30
-
308
Page 5
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 1.4. Public Infrastructure & Matching Grants
Detailed Costs
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
Unit
Quantities
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months
Unit Cost
(US$)
Totals including Contigencies ('000)
First 4 Quarters5 & 6 QuartersTotal 18 Months
 I. Investment Costs
A. Installation of Climate Proofed Public Infrastruture 
1. Climate proofed road rehabiltation (Total 110km) 
Design (Inclusive safeguard studies)
Construction
Supervison
Subtotal
2. Farm roads
Design & Supervision
Construction
Subtotal
3. Basic Community Storage Units (Total 15 units)  
Design (Inclusive safeguard studies)
Construction
Supervison
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Renewable energy investments
C. Matching Grants
4P Core Matching Grants
4P Climate Resilience Grants
4P Innovation Grants
Total
KM
KM
KM
KM
KM
  Unit
  Unit
  Unit
 Lumpsum
  Per 4P
  Per 4P
  Per 4P
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
2
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 200,000
2 250,000
2 100,000
50,000
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
203
507
-
203
-
-
101
- 1 015
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
203
507
203
101
1 015
Page 6
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Table 2.1. Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF). 
Detailed Costs
Quantities
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
Unit
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters
Total 18 Months
Unit Cost
(US$)
Totals including Contigencies ('000)
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters
Total 18 Months
 I. Investment Costs
A. Export Horticultural Revolving Fund (EHRF).
EHRF Disbursements from IFAD Loan
B. Feasibility studies
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and Allowances
Export Finance/Insurance Facilitation
Export Finance/Insurance Portfolio Administrator
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
  Per 4P
  per study
 Per Month
 Per Month
-
3
1
6
2
-
1
13
2 800,000
10,000
3
2
19
15,000
3,000
-
30
30
15
18
33
64
1 623
-
1 623
15
40
55
1 678
1 623
30
1 654
30
58
88
1 742
Page 7
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 2.2. Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
Detailed Costs
Quantites
Unit Cost
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
Unit
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months (US$)
Totals including Contigencies ('000)
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months
 I. Investment Costs
A. Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending
1. Capacity Building
Training Workshops
Coaching Workshops
Group Coaching Sessions
Subtotal
B. Market  study for appropriate  crop insurance for smallholder farmers  Lumpsum
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Access to Finance Specialist
Access to Finance Specialist
DSA for Access Specialist (4 days per month)
TA contract for 4 PFIs, $25,000 each = $100000
PFI/GOZ Inclusive Finance Exposure tour
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
 Per Month
  Per days
  Lumpsum
  Lumpsum
  Workshop
  Workshop
  Session
6
6
12
1
6
48
-
-
6
6
12
-
13
48
1
-
12
12
24
200
200
200
1 10,000
19
96
3,000
25
1 25,000
-
1
1
2
5
10
15
19
1
-
-
20
35
1
1
2
5
-
5
41
1
26
-
69
74
2
2
5
10
10
20
60
3
26
-
89
109
Page 8
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 3.1. Institutional Support
Detailed Costs
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
Unit
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months (US$)
Quantities
Unit Cost
Totals including Contigencies ('000)
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters Total 18 Months
 I. Investment Costs
A. Women Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI)
B. TA develeopment of Targteing and Social Inclusion Strategy
C. Support to MLAFWRD
Support to MLAFWRD for horticultural survey
M&E training for MLAFWRD staff
Subtotal
D. Support to HDC - Capital Costs
Vehicle - Toyota Hilux Double Cab 2.8L GD with canopy
Laptop
Cell phone
Office Furniture
Subtotal
E. Capacity building for DRSS on draught crop and seed varieties
Environment Climare change and Social safeguards
Training on ESS
Training of Agritex staff
Support on acces to climate information and Early warning
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. TA community mobilsation specialist
B. Support to HDC
1. Staff and Administration Costs
Project Coordination
Market Linkage Specialist (includes statutory employer costs)
Subtotal
2. Operational Costs
Fuel (@2000 km/month = 200 lts/month)
Vehicle licensing and insurance (5% of insured value)
Vehicle repairs and maintenance
DSA (2 days/month @ $100/day)
Accommodation costs (2 nights/month @ $140/night)
Communication allowance
Administration
Subtotal
Subtotal
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Unit
Unit
Unit
Unit
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
1 60,000
1 15,000
1 75,000
1,500
1
500
1
800
1
1 20,000
1 20,000
1 20,000
1 20,000
4
4,000
19.5
19.5
500
4,000
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
180
165
43
100
140
25
309
-
-
-
-
-
89
2
1
1
93
-
-
-
-
-
93
8
3
27
31
2
2
1
1
2
0
4
12
43
51
144
63
18
42
60
102
-
-
-
-
-
24
24
24
24
96
278
8
7
55
62
5
4
1
3
4
1
8
24
86
94
373
63
18
42
60
102
89
2
1
1
93
24
24
24
24
96
371
17
10
82
92
7
6
2
4
5
1
12
36
129
146
517
1
1
-
-
-
-
1
1
1
1
2
13
13
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
-
-
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
2
6.5
6.5
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
Page 9
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Zimbabwe
Horticultural Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Table 3.2. Project Coordination
Detailed Costs
First Eighteen Month Work Plan and Budget
Unit
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters
Total 18 Months
Quantities
Unit Cost
(US$)
Totals including Contigencies ('000)
First 4 Quarters 5 & 6 Quarters
Total 18 Months
 I. Investment Costs
A. Equipment and Materials - PMU
Laptops and desk screens
Network storage
Mobile phones
Office refurbishment
Office equipment for office furniture /a
Photocopier/printer
Subtotal
B. Equipment and Materials - Regional Offices /b
Laptops
External hard drives
Mobile phones
Office refurbishment
Office equipment - 23 sets of desks, desk chairs, visitors chairs - $1120 X 23 = $25,760
Photocopier/printer
Subtotal
C. Accounting System
Accounting software
D. Vehicles and Motorcycles for Project Staff
Project Management Unit
Regional Project Management Unit
20 District Motor Cycles - 1 for each district
Subtotal
E. Workshops
Startup workshop at National Level
Three information meetings
IFAD Financial Management Workshop
IFAD implementation workshop
AWPB Workshops
Subtotal
F. Monitoring and Evaluation
Baseline, Mid-line and Impact surveys
TA for setting up MIS and M&E plan
Workshop  with project stakeholders
MIS
Training with implementing partners on M&E
TA for M&E during implementation
Tablets for data collection
Field visits by M&E Officer
Mid term Review
AWPB and Review
Coordination Commitee meetings
Provincial consultative Meetings
IFAD Supervision Missions
Subtotal
G. Knowledge Management
Field visits by KM Officer
Exchange visits for farmer organisations
KM publication
Thematic studies
Internships for Zimbabwe university students
Support to University students for MSc and PhD studies linked to project
Development of short videos
Printing of communication materials
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. National Project Management Unit
National Project Coordinator
Senior Procurement Officer
Junior Procurement assistant/clerk
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
Lumpsum
Unit
Unit
Unit
Per Year
Per Year
Per Year
No.
Per Year
No.
Person days
No.
Annual
No.
Person days
No.
Lumpsum
No.
No.
No.
No.
Per Year
Lumpsum
No.
No.
No.
Per Month
Campaign
Lumpsum
Lumpsum
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
19
1
21
1
1
3
23
23
23
3
23
3
1
4
6
20
1
3
-
-
-
1
30
1
1
-
-
20
-
-
1
2
4
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
12
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
2
1
-
-
-
-
12
15
-
12
-
1
2
-
2
4
10
-
1
9
1
-
1
12
12
12
Page 10
1,800
19
2,000
1
633
21
1
5,175
1 22,400
2,070
3
23
23
23
3
23
3
1,800
500
633
5,175
1,120
2,070
1 10,000
4 65,000
6 65,000
9,300
20
1 20,000
5,000
3
1
2,500
2 20,000
1 20,000
1 75,000
500
30
1
3,000
1 15,000
3,000
300
100
1,000
12
15
20
12
-
2 10,000
2,500
4
4
2,000
2 20,000
1,000
500
8
10
-
1 15,000
9
200
1 20,000
-
2
1,000
24
24
24
4,000
3,000
900
36
2
14
5
24
7
88
44
12
15
16
27
7
121
11
273
410
196
879
20
15
-
-
-
35
79
16
3
16
-
-
2
-
-
11
5
8
-
140
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
5
1 278
49
36
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
40
20
63
-
-
-
-
38
5
-
13
-
11
5
-
42
113
4
5
-
16
2
21
-
1
49
226
49
37
11
36
2
14
5
24
7
88
44
12
15
16
27
7
121
11
273
410
196
879
20
15
3
40
20
98
79
16
3
16
38
5
2
13
-
21
11
8
42
253
8
5
-
16
2
21
-
2
55
1 504
97
73
22
Chief Accountant
Junior Accountant
Climate Smart Agriculture Advisor
M&E and Planning Specialist
Driver/Office assistant X3 /c
Senior Horticulture and Agribusiness Advisor
Horticulture and Agribusiness Specialist
Senior 4P/Partnership Advisor
Farming as Business Advisor
Senior Export Finance Advisor
Access to Finance Advisor
Assistant Horticulture Officer
Nutrition Garden Specialist
Senior Social Inclusion Specialist (Shared with HEEP, SIRP, SACP)
KM and communication specialist (Shared with SIRP, SACP & HEEP)
Social Inclusion Officer
Office Secretary (Shared by HEEP, SACP & SIRP)
Senior Infrastructure Specialist
Subtotal
B. Three (3) Regional Offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo) /d
Provincial Horticultural Specialist/Provincial Coordinator
Agribusiness Specialist
Climate Smart Agriculture Specialist
Infrastructure Officer
Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer
M&E and Planning Officer
Junior Procurement Officer
Driver/office assistant.
Subtotal
C. Office Rent
Head Offices
Regional Offices /e
Subtotal
D. Per Diem in Country Travel
Joint Management Unit /f
Project Management Unit /g
Region Peoject Management Unit /h
Subtotal
E. Project Technical Committee /i
F. District Extension Officers
District Extension Officers allowances
G. Airtime Allowances
Airtime allocation - Joint Management Unit
Airtime allocation - Project Management Unit
Airtime allocation - Regional Project Management Unit
Airtime allocation - District
Subtotal
H. Project Staff Recruitment
I. Vehicles running costs - including fuel and maintenance
Project Management Unit
Regional Project Management Unt
District Motor cycles
Subtotal
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
Annex 6  First 18 Months AWPB - HEEP Zimbabwe (1).xlsx
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Year
Per Year
Per Days
Per Days
Per Days
Per year
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Per Month
Lumpsum
Per Year
Per Year
Per Year
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
72
12
36
48
160
180
1
20
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
12
12
12
12
48
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
72
12
36
240
1 600
1 800
1
20
7
18
21
20
4
6
20
24
24
24
24
96
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
24
72
72
72
72
72
72
72
144
3,500
700
3,000
1,000
300
3,000
2,500
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
700
1,000
750
1,000
1,000
500
1,000
2,800
900
900
900
900
900
700
300
24
72
3,000
1,000
288
1 760
1 980
75
75
75
2
5,000
40
1,000
14
36
42
40
8
12
40
150
150
150
100
8,000
8,000
1,000
42
8
36
12
15
36
30
36
36
36
36
8
12
9
12
12
6
12
495
102
33
33
33
33
33
25
22
313
36
36
73
4
12
14
29
5
20
1
3
3
2
9
3
43
9
37
12
15
37
30
37
37
37
37
9
12
9
12
12
6
12
496
102
33
33
33
33
33
26
22
314
37
37
73
18
122
137
277
5
20
1
3
3
2
9
3
85
17
73
24
29
73
61
73
73
73
73
17
24
18
24
24
12
24
991
204
66
66
66
66
66
51
44
627
73
73
146
22
134
151
306
10
41
2
5
6
4
18
6
32
49
20
101
1 049
2 327
32
49
20
101
1 299
1 525
65
97
41
203
2 348
3 851
_________________________________
\a comprising of 20 desks (880 each), 20 desk chairs ($200) and 20 visitor chairs ($120) = $22,400
\b Three (3) Regional Offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo)
\c 3 drivers
\d 3 Staff for 3 Regional Offices
\e Three offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo)
\f JMU has 7 people @ 100 days /year gives 14 days/ person per year
\g PMU has 26 people @ 240 days is 9 days per person / year
\h RMU have 24 people at 500 days : year gives 20 days per year/ person - Three (3) Regional Offices (Bulawayo/Mutare/Masvingo)
\i Including all expenses and honoraria for participants
Page 11
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
ZIMBABWE
Project Name:
Horticolture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project ID:
2000003944
Version
1.0
Version Date
22-Aug-22
Prepared by:
Aline Saadeh
Approved by:
Procurement 
Category
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
LCU
USD
LCU
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
Non-Consulting 
Services
Grants
TOTAL
1 087 880.00 
123 000.00 
651 171.00 
20 700.00 
-
1 882 751.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 21 of 31
Printed on: 06/10/2022
Procurement Plan - Goods
ZIMBABWE
Horticolture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project ID: 2000003944
Prepared by: Aline Saadeh
Approved by: 
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
USD
LCU
1 087 880.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Version
1.0
22-Aug-22
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Basic Data
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement 
Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Pre-Qualification
C1.2.1.1
C1.2.1.1
C3.1.4 and C3.2.4
C3.1.4 and C3.2.1 
and C3.2.2 
C3.1.4 and  C3.2.1 
and C3.2.2 
1
2
3
4
5
Supply of equipments for 
demonstartion of labour saving 
technologies
Supply of 4P Promotional and 
visibility Items for capacity building  
Supply of Vehicles and Motorcycles 
for HDC, PMU and RO in 2 lots (LotI: 
11 vehicles for HDC, PMU and 
RPMU) (Lot II: 20 motorcycles)
Supply of IT equipments for HDC, 
PMU and RO in 4 lots (Lot I: 43 
Laptops) (Lot II: 1 Network Server) 
(Lot III: 6 Photocopiers and Printers) 
(lot IV: 23 External Hard Disks)
Supply of 45 Mobile phones for 
HDC, PMU and RO
C3.1.4 and C3.2.1 
and C3.2.2
6 
Supply of office furnitures for HDC, 
PMU and RO (Desks, Chairs and 
visitors chairs)
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
N/A
PMU
N/A
PMU
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
2 lots (LotI: 11 vehicles for HDC, PMU 
and RPMU) (Lot II: 20 motorcycles)
PMU
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Actual
4 lots (Lot I: 43 Laptops) (Lot II: 1 
Network Server) (Lot III: 6 
Photocopiers and Printers) (lot IV: 23 
External Hard Disks)
PMU
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
N/A
PMU
N/A
PMU
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
5 000.00 
-
75 000.00 
-
836 000.00 
-
90 420.00 
-
22 500.00 
-
48 960.00 
-
10 000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
C3.2.3
7
Off the Shelf Accounting Software 
IFAD
N/A
PMU
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 23 of 31
Printed on: 06/10/2022
Procurement Plan - Goods
ZIMBABWE
Horticolture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project ID: 2000003944
Prepared by: Aline Saadeh
Approved by: 
Procurement 
Methods
NS: National 
Shopping 
IS: International 
Shopping 
NCB: National 
Competitive 
Bidding 
ICB: International 
Competitive 
Bidding 
LIB: Limited 
(International) 
Version
1.0
22-Aug-22
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Submission of Draft 
Contract
No-Objection Date
N/A
28-Feb-24
4-Mar-24
N/A
Date
Contract
Signature
8-Mar-24
Enter Date
N/A
1-Feb-24
15-Feb-24
N/A
N/A
22-Feb-24
N/A
1-Feb-23
8-Feb-23
10-Feb-23
12-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
26-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
5-Apr-23
20-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
2-May-23
6-May-23
1-Feb-23
8-Feb-23
10-Feb-23
27-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
17-Apr-23
24-Apr-23
Plan
27-Apr-23
12-May-23
17-May-23
24-May-23
28-May-23
Actual
1-Mar-23
8-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
23-Apr-23
30-Apr-23
Plan
3-May-23
18-May-23
23-May-23
30-May-23
3-Jun-23
C1.2.1.1
C1.2.1.1
C3.1.4 and C3.2.4
C3.1.4 and C3.2.1 
and C3.2.2 
C3.1.4 and  C3.2.1 
and C3.2.2 
1
2
3
4
5
Supply of equipments for 
demonstartion of labour saving 
technologies
Supply of 4P Promotional and 
visibility Items for capacity building  
Supply of Vehicles and Motorcycles 
for HDC, PMU and RO in 2 lots (LotI: 
11 vehicles for HDC, PMU and 
RPMU) (Lot II: 20 motorcycles)
Supply of IT equipments for HDC, 
PMU and RO in 4 lots (Lot I: 43 
Laptops) (Lot II: 1 Network Server) 
(Lot III: 6 Photocopiers and Printers) 
(lot IV: 23 External Hard Disks)
Supply of 45 Mobile phones for 
HDC, PMU and RO
C3.1.4 and C3.2.1 
and C3.2.2
6 
Supply of office furnitures for HDC, 
PMU and RO (Desks, Chairs and 
visitors chairs)
1-Feb-23
N/A
2-Feb-23
16-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
23-Feb-23
N/A
1-Mar-23
N/A
2-Mar-23
16-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
23-Mar-23
N/A
C3.2.3
7
Off the Shelf Accounting Software 
1-Feb-23
N/A
2-Feb-23
16-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
23-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
1-Mar-23
6-Mar-23
N/A
10-Mar-23
N/A
29-Mar-23
3-Apr-23
N/A
7-Apr-23
N/A
1-Mar-23
6-Mar-23
N/A
10-Mar-23
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 24 of 31
Printed on: 06/10/2022
Procurement Plan - WORKS
ZIMBABWE
Horticolture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project ID: 2000003944
Prepared by: Aline Saadeh
Approved by: 
USD
LCU
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
143 700.00
0.00
20 700.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Version
1.0
22-Aug-22
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Non
Consulting
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Basic Data
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement 
Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Nov-23
8-Nov-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Mar-23
N/A
C1.1.1.1
1
 Creation and Capacitation of 
Village Horticulture Gardens in Four 
(4) Provinces (Masvingo, 
Matabeleland South, Midlands, and 
Manic land) in 4 Lots 
C3.2.1 and C3.2.2
2
Office refurbishment for the PMU 
office and for 3 Regional Offices
Yes
Yes
4
ARDA
Plan
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
IFAD
IFAD
N/A
PMU
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
1
1
123 000.00 
-
20 700.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 25 of 31
Printed on: 06/10/2022
Procurement Plan - WORKS
ZIMBABWE
Horticolture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project ID: 2000003944
Prepared by: Aline Saadeh
Approved by: 
Version
1.0
22-Aug-22
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Bid Invitation Date Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Submission of Draft 
Contract
No-objection Date
10-Nov-23
10-Dec-23
N/A
N/A
24-Dec-23
31-Dec-23
Plan
3-Jan-24
18-Jan-24
23-Jan-24
30-Jan-24
Procurement 
Methods
NS: National 
Shopping 
IS: International 
Shopping 
NCB: National 
Competitive 
Bidding 
ICB: International 
Competitive 
Bidding 
LIB: Limited 
Contract Award & Signature
Date
Contract
Signature
3-Feb-24
C1.1.1.1
1
 Creation and Capacitation of 
Village Horticulture Gardens in Four 
(4) Provinces (Masvingo, 
Matabeleland South, Midlands, and 
Manic land) in 4 Lots 
C3.2.1 and C3.2.2
2
Office refurbishment for the PMU 
office and for 3 Regional Offices
2-Mar-23
16-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
23-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
29-Mar-23
3-Apr-23
N/A
7-Apr-23
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 26 of 31
Printed on: 06/10/2022
Procurement Plan - Consulting
ZIMBABWE
Horticolture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project ID: 2000003944
Prepared by: Aline Saadeh
Approved by: 
Total
Amount
Non-
Consulting:
Grants:
USD
LCU
651 171.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Version
1.0
22-Aug-22
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
Grant
Non
Consulting
Funding
Project Area or 
Procuring Entity
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection 
Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
C1.1.1.2
1
Provincial ARDA Manager ToT 
Workshop
C2.1.2
2
Three (3) feasibility Studies on 
Investment and viability of the project 
C2.2.2
3
One (1) Market  study for appropriate  
crop insurance for smallholder farmers
C2.2.3
4
Access to Finance Specialist 
C3.1.1
5
Survey on Women Empowerment in 
Agriculture Index (WEAI)
C3.1.2
6
Technical Assistance on develeopment 
of Targteing and Social Inclusion 
Strategy
C3.1.6
7
Technical Assistance to provide 
community mobilsation specialist
C3.2.6
8
Procurement of Baseline, Mid-line and 
Impact surveys 
C3.2.6
9
Technical Assistance for setting up 
Management Information System  and 
Monitoring and Evaluation plan
C3.2.8
10
Recruitment of National Project 
Coordinator
C3.2.8
11
Recruitment of Senior Procurement 
Officer
C3.2.8
12
Chief Accountant
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFDA
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
IFAD
ARDA
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
No
Prior Review
SSS
232 171.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
30 000.00 
-
Yes
Post Review
ICS
10 000.00 
Post Review
ICS
-
9 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
FBS
60 000.00 
-
Yes
Post Review
CQS
15 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
16 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
FBS
75 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
15 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
72 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
54 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
63 000.00 
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Enter Date
N/A
N/A
1-Apr-23
8-Apr-23
10-Apr-23
1-May-23
15-May-23
22-May-23
26-May-23
2-Jun-23
4-Jun-23
25-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
9-Jul-23
1-Feb-23
N/A
3-Feb-23
24-Feb-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
14-Mar-23
N/A
16-Mar-23
6-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
20-Apr-23
1-Apr-24
1-Feb-24
8-Feb-24
10-Feb-24
2-Mar-24
16-Mar-24
23-Mar-24
27-Mar-24
3-Apr-24
5-Apr-24
20-May-24
3-Jun-24
10-Jun-24
24-Jun-24
1-Apr-24
N/A
3-Apr-24
24-Apr-24
8-May-24
N/A
12-May-24
N/A
14-May-24
4-Jun-24
N/A
N/A
18-Jun-24
1-Apr-23
8-Apr-23
10-Apr-23
1-May-23
15-May-23
22-May-23
26-May-23
2-Jun-23
4-Jun-23
25-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
9-Jul-23
1-Mar-23
8-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
2-May-23
4-May-23
18-Jun-23
2-Jul-23
9-Jul-23
23-Jul-23
1-Mar-23
8-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
14-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
2-May-23
4-May-23
25-May-23
N/A
N/A
8-Jun-23
1-Feb-23
8-Feb-23
10-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
4-Apr-23
6-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
11-May-23
1-Feb-23
8-Feb-23
10-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
4-Apr-23
6-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
11-May-23
1-Feb-23
8-Feb-23
10-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
4-Apr-23
6-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
11-May-23
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 27 of 31
Printed on: 06/10/2022
Procurement Plan - Consulting
ZIMBABWE
Horticolture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP)
Project ID: 2000003944
Prepared by: Aline Saadeh
Approved by: 
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications (shortlist is required for this method) 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection (shortlist is required for this method)
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Selection (Design/PIM): Single Sourcing established in the project design or 
implementation manual
Version
1.0
22-Aug-22
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date Contract 
Award
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract
No-objection 
Date
Contract Award & Signature
Date
Contract
Signature
C1.1.1.2
1
Provincial ARDA Manager ToT 
Workshop
C2.1.2
2
Three (3) feasibility Studies on 
Investment and viability of the project 
C2.2.2
3
One (1) Market  study for appropriate  
crop insurance for smallholder farmers
16-Jul-23
N/A
C2.2.3
4
Access to Finance Specialist 
C3.1.1
5
Survey on Women Empowerment in 
Agriculture Index (WEAI)
1-Jul-24
C3.1.2
6
Technical Assistance on develeopment 
of Targteing and Social Inclusion 
Strategy
N/A
C3.1.6
7
Technical Assistance to provide 
community mobilsation specialist
C3.2.6
8
Procurement of Baseline, Mid-line and 
Impact surveys 
16-Jul-23
30-Jul-23
C3.2.6
9
Technical Assistance for setting up 
Management Information System  and 
Monitoring and Evaluation plan
15-Jun-23
C3.2.8
10
Recruitment of National Project 
Coordinator
C3.2.8
11
Recruitment of Senior Procurement 
Officer
C3.2.8
12
Chief Accountant
18-May-23
18-May-23
18-May-23
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
1-Feb-24
22-Feb-24
27-Feb-24
5-Mar-24
9-Mar-24
N/A
22-Jul-23
5-Aug-23
10-Aug-23
17-Aug-23
21-Aug-23
N/A
26-Apr-23
10-May-23
15-May-23
N/A
19-May-23
4-Jul-24
19-Jul-24
3-Aug-24
8-Aug-24
15-Aug-24
19-Aug-24
N/A
24-Jun-24
8-Jul-24
13-Jul-24
N/A
17-Jul-24
N/A
22-Jul-23
5-Aug-23
10-Aug-23
17-Aug-23
21-Aug-23
2-Aug-23
17-Aug-23
1-Sep-23
6-Sep-23
13-Sep-23
17-Sep-23
N/A
21-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
10-Jul-23
17-Jul-23
21-Jul-23
N/A
24-May-23
7-Jun-23
12-Jun-23
19-Jun-23
23-Jun-23
N/A
24-May-23
7-Jun-23
12-Jun-23
19-Jun-23
23-Jun-23
N/A
24-May-23
7-Jun-23
12-Jun-23
19-Jun-23
23-Jun-23
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 28 of 31
Printed on: 06/10/2022
Day Ranges These tables provide estimated timelines by procurement methods, based on experience and guidance in the Procurement Handbook where specified.
The approximate number of days are used in the default Procurement Plan Formulas. Timelines in the Approx fields/Formulas  are not prescriptive, and may be modified by the project.
Approx figures entered will be highlighted/flagged, if below the Minimun number of days. Zero indicates steps that are not applicable to the method, and are indicated as N/A in the Formulas.
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission of PreQual docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting/
Force Account
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
7
7
5
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Selection Method
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission Deadline
Submission of Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Submission of RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
SSS/
Selection (Design/PIM)
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
14
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
5
5
7
5
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
NOTE
1. Some procurement methods for low-value processes might require No Objections based on the Prior Review Thresholds. Where they do not require, No Objection number of days should be zero.
2. RFP: Request for Proposals: standard procurement document used for Services.
3. RCQ: Requests for Consultants Qualifications: Procurement document used for CQS and LCS. The RFP is used for all other procurement methods
4. Consulting services and Good/Works methods could either be used for Non-Consulting Services
5. All days are calendar days
29
Day Ranges
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid Evaluation Report
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date Contract Award
Submission of Draft Contract
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Single Envelope
3
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting/
Force Account
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
30
45
45
30
45
45
7
30
45
45
30
45
45
21
45
70
70
45
70
70
30
45
70
70
45
70
70
14
30
45
45
30
45
45
14
30
45
45
30
45
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
21
21
14
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
3
3
3
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
14
21
21
14
21
21
7
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
14
14
14
14
14
14
4
14
14
14
14
14
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6
15
15
15
15
15
15
6
15
15
15
15
15
15
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Selection Method
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date Contract Award
Negotiations completed
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
3
FBS (w/Shortlist)
3
LCS (w/Shortlist)
3
QBS (w/Shortlist)
3
CQS (w/Shortlist)
3
ICS (w/Shortlist)
3
QCBS (noShortlist)
3
FBS (noShortlist)
3
LCS (noShortlist)
3
3
QBS (noShortlist)
SSS/
Selection (Design/PIM)
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
45
45
45
21
14
14
45
14
21
21
7
60
60
60
60
30
30
60
30
30
60
30
45
45
45
45
21
21
45
21
25
45
30
14
14
14
14
0
0
14
7
7
14
0
21
21
21
21
0
0
21
21
21
21
0
14
14
14
14
0
0
14
14
14
14
0
7
7
7
7
0
0
7
7
7
7
0
10
10
10
10
0
0
10
10
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
0
0
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
0
14
14
7
7
7
0
7
14
14
14
0
21
21
14
14
14
0
21
14
14
14
0
14
14
14
14
14
0
14
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
10
10
10
0
10
10
10
10
10
0
10
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
3
3
3
3
0
0
3
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
3
0
0
3
3
3
3
0
14
14
14
14
4
4
14
14
14
14
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
15
15
15
15
6
6
15
15
15
15
6
10
10
10
10
7
7
10
10
10
10
7
30
Day Ranges
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission of Draft Contract
No-objection Date
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Approx 
Months/Days
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting/
Force Account
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Selection Method
Negotiations completed
Submission of Draft Contract and MoN
Date
No-objection Date
40
78
93
93
126
141
139
44
88
103
103
136
151
151
58
94
116
116
164
186
186
58
104
137
137
185
207
207
78
123
148
148
208
233
233
101
147
172
172
232
256
256
Date
Contract
Signature
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
28
28
FBS (w/Shortlist)
28
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
28
CQS (w/Shortlist)
14
14
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
28
28
FBS (noShortlist)
28
LCS (noShortlist)
28
QBS (noShortlist)
SSS/
Selection (Design/PIM)
21
15
15
15
15
14
14
15
15
15
15
21
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
1m 27d 
3m 3d 
3m 25d 
3m 25d 
5m 12d 
6m 4d 
6m 4d 
1m 27d 
3m 13d 
4m 16d 
4m 16d 
6m 3d 
6m 25d 
6m 25d 
Min
172
172
172
134
113
113
128
90
97
90
55
Totals
Max
Approx
Approx Months/Days
268
268
268
244
195
195
190
158
160
166
126
193
200
200
179
142
142
145
121
125
124
103
6m 11d 
6m 18d 
6m 18d 
5m 27d 
4m 21d 
4m 21d 
4m 24d 
3m 30d 
4m 4d 
4m 3d 
3m 12d 
31
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE 
HORTICULTURE ENTERPRISE ENHANCEMENT PROJECT 
(HEEP) 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
HEEP RATIONALE, OBJECTIVES AND STRUCTURE ________________________________________________ 1 
1. 
GEOGRAPHIC TARGETING __________________________________________________________________ 5 
2. 
HEEP SOCIAL AND POVERTY TARGETING STRATEGIES ___________________________________________ 12 
3. 
HEEP GENDER STRATEGY __________________________________________________________________ 19 
4. 
HEEP STRATEGIES FOR YOUTH INCLUSION ____________________________________________________ 25 
5. 
STRATEGIES FOR NUTRITION MAINSTREAMING IN HEEP  ________________________________________ 31 
6. 
Appendix 1: Targeting Checklist  ____________________________________________________________ 41 
7. 
Appendix 2: Gender Checklist ______________________________________________________________ 43 
8. 
Appendix 3: Climate Change Adaptation  _____________________________________________________ 46 
9. 
10.  Appendix 4: Environment and Social Safeguards _______________________________________________ 48 
11.  Appendix 5: HEEP Institutional Arrangements and Responsibilities ________________________________ 50 
12.  Appendix 6: Facilitation for Effective HEEP Start-up _____________________________________________ 53 
13.  Appendix 7: TOR for Key HEEP Staff _________________________________________________________ 58 
14.  Appendix 8: Detailed Implementation Guidance ______________________________________________ 130 
15.  Appendix 9: Knowledge Management Plan __________________________________________________ 157 
16.  Appendix 10: SECAP Compliance for HEEP Financed Infrastructure Development  ___________________ 164 
17.  Appendix 11: Screening Checklists and Procedures ____________________________________________ 166 
18.  Appendix 12: Key Project Procedures _______________________________________________________ 173 
19.  Appendix 13: Procurement Guidance _______________________________________________________ 181 
20.  Appendix 14: Financial Management _______________________________________________________ 196 
21.  Appendix 15: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget Templates __________________________________ 214 
22.  Appendix 16: Guidance on Financial Management Quality Assessment  ___________________________ 217 
23.  APPENDIX 17: Quarterly Interim Financial Report _____________________________________________ 220 
24.  Appendix 18: Fixed Asset Register  _________________________________________________________ 224 
25.  APPENDIX 19: Community Contribution Form and Acceptance Statement  _________________________ 225 
26.  Appendix 20: Vehicle Log  ________________________________________________________________ 226 
27.  Appendix 21: Vehicle History Record  _______________________________________________________ 227 
28.  Appendix 22: Sample Recovery Plan ______________________________________________________ 228 
29.  Appendix 23: Sample Audit Terms of Reference  ______________________________________________ 229 
30.  Appendix 24: Sample Templates for Monthly Report for Management Use_________________________ 235 
31.  Appendix 25: List of Smallholder Irrigation Scheme in Zimbabwe  ________________________________ 238 
i 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
1.  HEEP RATIONALE, OBJECTIVES AND STRUCTURE  
1. 
Project  Rationale:  The  Government  of  Zimbabwe’s  strategy  to  transform 
smallholder agriculture  and increase productivity and rural incomes is elaborated in the 
Agriculture  and  Food  Systems  Transformation  Strategy  2020-2025,  as  well  as  the 
Government of the National Agriculture Policy Framework 2018-2030 (NAPF). The aim is 
to  improve  horticulture  development  through  the  implementation  of  the  Horticultural 
Recovery  Growth  Plan  (2021).  The  Plan  seeks  to  transform  the  smallholder  horticulture 
sub-sector through the Presidential Horticulture Scheme as well as the conventional “hub 
and  spoke”  horticulture  model.  Through  this  approach,  smallholder  farmers  who  are 
organised in groups, either village horticulture gardens or smallholder irrigation schemes, 
are linked to anchor firms for the production and high value horticulture crops. The Ministry 
of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Development (MLAFWRD) confirmed the 
Government’s  commitment  to  transform  smallholder  agriculture  by  using  the  private 
sector-led inclusive value chain approach as a critical instrument in this commercialisation 
process.  The  Village  Horticulture  Gardens  will  be  managed  by  the  Agricultural  Rural 
Development Authority.  
As the afore-mentioned strategies/approaches are also at the core of IFAD’s 
2. 
policies for smallholder agriculture transformation, the new HEEP intervention will be based 
on this overall approach of using private sector-led inclusive VCs as crucial instruments for 
climate-smart and commercially viable smallholder development. HEEP is fully in line with 
the  COSOP’s  overall  transformation  target  and  its  objectives  of  reducing  poverty,  food 
insecurity and malnutrition and improving incomes along the VCs, through better market 
access  and  climate-smart  and  more  effective  production  systems.  The  strong  capacity 
building focus and effective targeting of HEEP activities will ensure that IFAD’s corporate 
mainstreaming priorities in CC, gender, youth and nutrition issues are appropriately built 
into the project design. 
3. 
HEEP is the third intervention, after SIRP and SACP, within the framework of 
a  longer-term  programming  approach  in  Zimbabwe.  Furthermore,  key  international 
development  partners  share  the  same  strategic  views  on  smallholder  agricultural 
transformation,  which is  anchored  on  climate  resilience.  The  major  lenders  (e.g.,  World 
Bank and AfDB) are, however, currently unable to invest in Zimbabwe due to arrears. In 
this situation, it is likely that the experiences and results from HEEP implementation will 
influence the project designs of the larger international financiers, too, when their lending 
to Zimbabwe resumes. 
Goal  and  Development  Objective:  The  project  goal is  to  increase  incomes, 
4. 
food  security  and  empowerment  for  SHFs  engaged  in  profitable  and  sustainable 
horticulture value chains. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “Support increased 
and  sustainable  horticultural  production  and  sales  by  SHFs  and  MSMEs  engaged  in 
horticulture value chains”. 
5. 
Project  Structure:  The  activities  of  HEEP  are  organised  in  three  mutually 
interdependent  components:  Component  1:  Village  Horticultural  Garden  and  4P 
Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to  Finance  and  Component  3: 
Institutional Support and Project Management. 
6. 
The first component: VHG and 4P development, will build the capacity of SHFs 
to  produce  horticultural  crops  and  high  value  products  for  commercial  sale,  as  well  as 
support  all  value  chain  actors  to  improve  the  competitiveness  of  the  horticultural  value 
1 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
chain with a focus on inclusive participation by SHFs. This will be provided by a combination 
of  capacity  building,  matching  grants,  and  provision  of  public  infrastructure  to  leverage 
the impact of value chain actors’ investments. The second component, Access to Finance, 
will improve access to finance by the horticultural value chain actors through provision of 
an  export  line  of  credit  provided  through  partner  financial  institutions  for  financing 
inclusive hub and spoke 4Ps. This will be complemented by capacity building in the financial 
sector to improve the development and delivery of appropriate financial products for the 
SHFs in the horticultural sector.   
Component 1:  Village Horticultural Garden and 4P Mobilization and Development 
Component 1 has three subcomponents:  
7. 
Sub-component  1.1:  Village  Horticulture  Garden  Mobilization  and 
Development. HEEP will support the creation and capacitation of VHGs in Matabeleland 
South, Masvingo, Midlands, and Manicaland. The VHGs will include poor, food insecure and 
highly malnourished HHs. The selection of HHs to be part of VHGs will primarily be based 
on their vulnerability to poverty, climate change, food security and nutrition. HHs that are 
headed by women, child, elderly will be given special attention. In addition, HHs that have 
people  with  disabilities,  people  with  chronic  illness,  including  pregnant  and  lactating 
women. The VHGs will be clustered in villages in wards that are close to fully operational 
ARDA  managed  irrigation  schemes  (e.g.,  rehabilitated  by  the  GoZ  through  SIRP  or 
otherwise).  Clustering  the  VHGs  as  spokes  around  the  hub  of  an  operational  ARDA 
managed  irrigation  scheme  will  allow  synergies  in  VHG  management  (e.g.  one  ARDA 
manager per every 3 VHGs), capacity building (e.g. production, storage, processing and 
consumption), access to improved storage infrastructure, and market linkages through the 
irrigation  schemes  and  other  anchor  farms/firms.  The  irrigation  schemes  will  serve  as 
learning  centres  for  the  VHG  beneficiaries,  and  the  VHGs  may  also  be  used  for 
demonstration purposes for SHFs in surrounding communities. 
8. 
Sub-component 1.2: 4P/Hub and Spoke Identification, Mobilization, and 
Capacity  Building.    Under  HEEP,  Private-Public-Producer  Partnerships  (4Ps)  are 
cooperative agreements between a i) private sector anchor farm or firm that creates the 
market,  ii)  the  public  sector  entities  helping  co-finance  and  facilitate  the  4Ps,  e.g.,  the 
funders of HEEP, IFAD and the GOZ, and iii) the producers, the SHFs organized as APGs 
that  will  be  supplying  the  anchor  farm  or  firm.  In  addition,  HEEP  4Ps  may  have  one  or 
more  service  provider  partners,  who  are  direct  or  supporting  value  chain  actors  that 
provide  critical  services  (inputs,  mechanization,  extension,  capacity  building,  crop 
protection,  logistics  transport,  etc.)  to  SHFs  that  support  the  4P  APGs  and  Anchor 
Farms/Firms.  Service  providers  may  be  private  sector  SMEs,  public  sector  government 
agencies,  and  non-profit  organiszations.  4P  APGs  and  SHFs  (and  as  relevant  other  4P 
members)  will  be  provided  technical  and  business  capacity  building  through:  (i)  anchor 
firms (ii) SP partners in the 4P business plan, (iii) Agritex, ARDA, AMA, ZIMTRADE, and 
other government agencies and parastatals (iv) recruited technical specialists. Technical 
assistance  and  training  may  include  farming  as  a  business,  group  organization  and 
dynamics,  contract  farming,  crop  selection,  climate-resilient  agronomic  practices,  value 
chain  logistics,  GALS  and  social  mentoring  and  gender  balance,  women  and  youth 
inclusions, labour saving technologies, conflict resolution, certification (organic, GAP, etc), 
agriculture  processing,  quality  control,  etc.  It  important  to  note  that  HEEP  includes  an 
opportunity  for  graduation  and  some  of  the  VHGs  who  initially  benefitted  from  the 
production and productivity support through Agritex and ARDA can become members of 
the 4Ps as partner APGs. 
2 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
9. 
Sub  component  1.3:  4P  Matching  Grants  (MGs)  and  Public 
Infrastructure. MGs will be provided to APGs and SHFs in the approved 4P business plan. 
The MGs will partially support both fixed and working capital investments necessary for 
the  approved  4P  business  plan.  This  can  include  start-up  inputs,  services,  equipment, 
machinery, and infrastructure, including innovative technologies that are environmentally 
sustainable  and  promote  climate  resilience.  The  MGs  will  specially  provide  attention  to 
youth and women led APGs and SHFs. The selection will try to use an inclusive approach 
that  ensure  poor  young  men  and  women  led  APGs  and  SHFs  are  given  priority  in  the 
selection and supported by MGs. The MGs will require contribution from the APGs, either 
in kind or financial. The use of commercial credit to finance part of the APG (50 per cent 
women  and  30  per  cent  youth  participation)    contribution  will  be  encouraged,  but  not 
initially required, given the current complications in the financial sector caused by the dual 
currency system and especially the very high levels of inflation in the local currency. If and 
when the financial sector stabilizes, the PMU may choose to require or emphasize the use 
of commercial credit as a source for APGs to finance the MGs.  
10. 
This sub-component will also support investments in public infrastructure in the 
4P catchment area. They are public because they are not part of the 4P inclusive business 
plan,  are  not  controlled  by  4P  partners,  and  benefit  all  members  of  the  surrounding 
communities  as  well  as  4P  beneficiaries.  These  public  infrastructure  investments  will 
increase  the  positive  impact  of  4P  on  direct  beneficiaries,  and  provide  benefits  to  other 
rural households, (including infrastructure which is labour saving for women) and MSMEs 
in the 4P catchment area. Examples of public infrastructure investments include farm or 
feeder  roads,  community  storage,  power  and  water  provision,  renewable  energy  etc. 
Potential public infrastructure investments will be identified by 4P partners in consultation 
with  communities  and  the  appropriate  local/district  officials  (e.g.  Rural  District  Council) 
who will be responsible for  oversight of the  construction, operation and maintenance of 
the public infrastructure provided.  
Component 2: Access to Finance 
This component has two sub-components: 
11. 
Sub  component  2.1:  Export  Horticultural  Revolving  Fund  (EHRF):    The 
EHRF will provide short- and medium-term finance (up to 5 years) at commercial rates to 
4P  anchor  firms  and  other  partners  with  export  or  other  hard  currency  markets.  The 
finance  will  be  used  to  source  inputs,  services,  machinery  and  equipment  essential  to 
meeting  market  requirements  for  the  approved  inclusive  4P  business  plan  that  have  a 
direct benefit to SHFs. The EHRF will be managed by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) 
and will be accessible by qualified PFIs that can manage foreign exchange payments and 
receipts, and that accept the stipulated terms and conditions of utilizing EHRF funds. The 
criteria for accessing the EHRF will include the inclusive and equal benefits for women and 
men, taking into account the constraints that women face in accessing financial services. 
Using the EHFR funds, PFIs will extend finance to approved 4P partners. Reflows from the 
EHRF loans to the PFI may be lent again by the PFI under the same terms and conditions. 
If not, then the EHRF reflows will be returned to the RBZ.  EHRF finance may be used by 
the 4P anchor firms and SPs for any operation of the approved 4P business plan. This may 
include value chain finance to provide inputs to SHFs (e.g. seeds and agrochemicals), in 
the  form  of  in-kind  credit,  to  be  repaid  by  the  SHFs  through  deductions  made  from 
payments for their delivered produce. The EHRF may also be used for imported service, 
inputs, machinery, and equipment essential for the SHF produce to reach the 4P's export 
markets. The EHRF will be  structured so that it may accept other like-minded investors 
3 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
over time, e.g. other development finance partners, remittance funds from the diaspora, 
etc. 
12. 
Sub-component  2.2:  Capacity  Building  for  Enhanced  Agricultural 
Lending. To further improve access to finance for SHFs and MSMEs, this sub-component 
will  strengthen  the  capacity  of  financial  institutions  to  develop  and  deliver  inclusive 
financial services to SHFs and MSMEs in commercial horticultural and/or those participating 
in HEEP 4Ps. Commercial banks and building societies will be supported to develop value 
chain,  group,  or  individual  financing  instruments.  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs)  and 
community banks/SACCOs will also be supported to develop and deliver direct financing 
instruments for SHFs and MSMEs, taking into account the neds of men. women and youth. 
Insurance companies will be assisted with the  development  of suitable products for the 
horticultural sector. 
Component Three:  Institutional Support and Project Coordination 
Component 3 has two subcomponents. 
Sub-component 3.1: Institutional Support.   
13. 
The  expected  result  of  this  sub-component  is  to  improve  the  production  and 
marketing information and policy relevant knowledge products on the horticultural sector 
and linkages to mainstreaming themes: for example, case studies on women and youth in 
horticulture and access to land; smallholder horticulture and climate, nutrition nexus. The 
result  of  this  subcomponent  will  benefit  public  sector  policy  makers  and  private  sector 
investors,  and  to  improve  the  governance  of  contract  farming/hub  and  spoke 
arrangements to ensure a fair distribution of risks and benefits to all parties.  
14. 
This  sub-component  provides  institutional  support  that  complements  the 
capacity building support for ARDA and Agritex in Component 1. First, HEEP will support 
MLAFWRD’s  Agricultural  Information  Management  System  (AMIS)  project,  which  was 
revamped in 2020 and collects production, productivity and marketing data on the different 
value  chains  in  the  agricultural  sector  through  annual  surveys.  Specifically,  HEEP  will 
support the carrying out of annual surveys in the horticultural sector, implemented by the 
Division of Strategic Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation at MLAFWRD. HEEP will capitalize 
on  the  findings  for  its  own  planning  and  M&E  purposes.  HEEP  will  also  conduct  an  M&E 
training to strengthen capacity of MLAFWRD staff responsible for M&E. 
15. 
Second,  HEEP  will  support  a  market  linkage  specialist  consultant  at  HDC.  The 
HDC represents export-oriented horticultural producers, and has been designated by the 
GoZ to lead the “Conventional” pillar of the HRGP. The HDC is firmly committed to an SHF-
inclusive model of growing the horticultural sector, using well-coordinated hub and spoke 
models of production. The HDC market linkage advisor (MLA) at HDC will (i) assist in the 
identification and mobilization of 4P arrangements (e.g. hub & spoke and contract farming 
arrangements),  (ii)  develop  clear  and  fair  industry  guidelines  for  fair  4P  arrangements, 
adapting as appropriate Global Accepted Agricultural Practices (GAAP) and other guidelines 
(iii) provide any other support to 4P partners to implement 4P inclusive business plans..   
16. 
Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination. HEEP will become part of the JMU 
MLAFWRD created for SACP and SIRP, ensuring cost-effective and higher quality service 
provision.  The  project  coordination  and  management  costs  will  be  budgeted  under  this 
sub-component. 
4 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
2.  GEOGRAPHIC TARGETING 
17. 
HEEP  will  take  a  two-pronged  approach  to  geographic  targeting  based  on  a 
combination of poverty, food security and nutritional status and potential for commercial 
horticultural development. The project will be implemented in 4 provinces for the Village 
Horticultural Garden (VHG) and in all the provinces for the 4P model, with special emphasis 
in Natural regions I and IIA, which are horticultural hotspots in the country.  
18. 
The  Village  Horticultural  Garden  (VHG)  activities  will  focus  on  Matabeleland 
South, Manicaland, Masvingo, and Midlands Provinces. The VHGs will be sited, using a hub 
and spoke approach, in the wards adjacent to functional ARDA managed irrigation schemes 
rehabilitated by the GoZ through the Smallholder Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (SIRP), 
and Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP). This hub and spoke approach will provide 
important synergies in terms of access to markets, management, and provision of capacity 
building assistance for SHFs both in VHGs and on the schemes. The selection criteria for 
the  VHGs  in  these  wards  will  include:  potential  for  inclusion  in  commercially  viable 
horticulture,  areas  vulnerable  to  climate  change,  availability  of  arable  land  and  water, 
interest of farmers and poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition levels. Special attention 
will  be  given  to  households  (HHs)  that  have  people  with  disabilities,  people  affected  by 
HIV and AIDS, women headed HHs. 
19. 
The 4Ps scope of operations will be demand driven based on market conditions 
and agro-climactic potential through a competitive process. Therefore, the location of the 
4P SHFs will depend on both the demand from anchor firms/farms and the interest and 
potential/ evidence of involvement of SHFs in catchment areas of the anchor firms/farms. 
The 4P catchment areas will include i) well-functioning irrigation schemes (including but 
not limited to the SIRP rehabilitated schemes in the provinces of Midlands, Masvingo, and 
Matabeleland  South)  ii)  high  potential  regions  of  the  Mashonaland  Provinces  and 
Manicaland, that is, those that fall into Natural Regions 1 and 2A. 
Poverty prevalence rates in Zimbabwe are increasing, with 76.9 per cent of the 
20. 
rural  households  classified  poor  compared  to  30.4  per  cent  of  urban  households1.  The 
majority  of  the  population  lives  in  rural  areas  with  livelihoods  mainly  based  on  rainfed 
agricultural production,  characterised by low input use and low productivity. Due to the 
decline in formal employment, many workers are engaged in poorly remunerated informal 
jobs. The data on prevalence of poverty is shown in Table 1:  
1 World Bank 2019 
5 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Table  1:  Poverty  prevalence  and  extreme  poverty  prevalence  by  province  (targeted 
provinces  are  shaded)  Poverty  prevalence  and  extreme  poverty  prevalence  by 
province (targeted provinces are shaded). 
Province 
Population 
Poverty 
Prevalence % 
Extreme 
Prevalence % 
Poverty 
Proportion  of 
rural 
poor 
households % 
Rural  poverty 
prevalence % 
Mashonaland Central 
1,152,520 
81.6 
41.2 
16.1 
84.7 
Matabeleland North 
749,017 
74.3 
33.3 
12.5 
78.6 
Mashonaland West 
1,501,656 
71.1 
31.6 
10.5 
82,7 
Manicaland 
1,752,698 
71 
27.9 
12.2 
78.7 
Mashonaland East 
1,344,955 
65,6 
22.2 
14.0 
71.3 
Masvingo 
1,485,090 
64.8 
20.7 
10.0 
71.5 
Midlands 
1,614,941 
63 
21.8 
11.9 
77.6 
Matabeleland South 
683,893 
62.8 
17.8 
11.0 
68.5 
Harare 
2,123,132 
31.1 
Bulawayo 
653,337 
22.3 
3.8 
0.9 
Total  
13,061,239 
76.9 
Source: PICES 2017 
21. 
According  to  2017  Zimbabwe  Poverty,  Income,  Consumption  and  Expenditure 
Survey2,  targeted provinces rank 3rd, 5th, 6th, and 7th out of the ten Zimbabwean Provinces 
in  poverty  prevalence  for  Manicaland,  Midlands,  Masvingo  and  Matabeleland,  South, 
respectively. In the four targeted provinces, extreme poverty is highest in Manicaland 27,9 
per cent of the population below the food poverty line, followed by Midlands Province with 
21.8 per cent, Masvingo with 20,7 per cent, and Matabeleland South  with 17.8 per cent. 
Of  the  targeted  provinces,  Manicaland  Province  had  the  highest  proportion  of 
22. 
poor  households,  (12.1  per cent)  followed  by  Midlands  Province  with  11.9  per cent, 
Matabeleland South Province at 11.0 per cent, and Masvingo Province with 10,00 per cent. 
2 ZIMSTAT (2019) 
6 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Manicaland has the highest poverty prevalence among the four targeted provinces under 
VHG.  
23. 
Rural  poverty  was  most  prevalent  in  communal  lands  (CL)  (79.2  percent), 
followed  by  resettlement  areas  (RA)  with  76.4  per cent.  Extreme  poverty  was  most 
prevalent in CLs with 34.0 per cent when compared with 29.9 per cent for RAs. In rural 
areas, communal and resettlement farmers constituted 80.6 per cent of the economically 
active population. Moreover, households headed by communal and resettlement farmers 
(old  resettlement  and  A1  farmers)  suffered  from  the  greatest  poverty  prevalence,  82.9 
per cent, compared to other employment types. 
24. 
With  regards  to  nutrition,  the  ZimVac  of  2018  and  2019,  and  the  MICS  2019 
reports3, show that the most vulnerable households for malnutrition are: female and child-
headed households, households headed by aged, unemployed, uneducated, widowed and 
chronically  ill  household  heads  and  households  located  in  the  rural  areas.  The  nutrition 
situation analysis shows that the worst-off provinces are Mashonaland Central and South, 
and Matabeleland North and Matabeleland South. When it comes to WASH, Matabeleland 
North is also facing the largest challenge as the province has the lowest percentage of the 
population  using  both  basic  drinking  water  (51%)  and  sanitation  services  (24%)  (MICS 
2019),  as  well  as  the  highest  proportion  of  the  population  practising  open  defecation. 
According to the Wageningen study report (2020), Smallholder farmers in Mashonaland 
West, Midlands and Mashonaland Central have the highest overall capacities to respond to 
climate change impacts (ranking 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, respectively. Masvingo, Matabeleland 
North  and  South  have  the  lowest  overall  adaptive  capacity4.  In  the  targeted  area,  the 
highest population is in Mashonaland East, which also has the highest female population.  
Table 2: Population in the target districts 
Province/District 
Population 
Males 
Females 
Matebeleland South Province 
Gwanda (24 wards) 
Mangwe (17 wards) 
Beitbridge (15 wards) 
Matobo (25 wards) 
Insiza (23 wards) 
Subtotal 
Manicaland Province 
Chipinge (30 wards) 
Chimanimani (20 wards) 
Mutasa (31 wards) 
Makoni (36 wards) 
Nyanga (31 wards) 
Subtotal 
Masvingo Province 
Masvingo (35 wards) 
115,378 
66,218 
157,111 
93,940 
107,333 
539,980 
298,841 
134,940 
168,747 
272,340 
126,600 
1,001,468 
55,453 
31,159 
73,603 
44,918 
49,338 
254,471 
138,159 
64,745 
79,548 
133,362 
60,461 
476,275 
59,925 
35,059 
83,508 
49,022 
57,995 
285,509 
160,682 
70,195 
89,199 
138,978 
66,139 
525,193 
211,215 
99,271 
111,944 
73-84 
Highest 
Poverty 
prevalence % 
at ward 
73-84 
73-84 
83-96 
73-84 
85-96 
85-96 
73-84 
73-84 
73-84 
85-96 
3 Zimbabwe 2019 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) Report 
4 IFAD – COSOP. 2020. Republic of Zimbabwe Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2020 – 
2025 
7 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Zaka (34 wards) 
Gutu (41 wards) 
Chiredzi (32 wards) 
Mwenezi (37 wards) 
Subtotal 
Midlands Province 
Gweru Rural(19 wards) 
Churumanzu (23 wards) 
Mberengwa (37 wards) 
Zvishavane (19 wards) 
Shurugwi (24 wards) 
Subtotal 
Grand total 
GOZ, Poverty Atlas 2015 
181,298 
203,083 
275,759 
166,993 
1,038,348 
91,806 
80,351 
185,757 
72,513 
77,570 
507,997 
91,806 
82,350 
94,480 
132,879 
77,372 
486,352 
45,239 
38,309 
86,764 
34,694 
37,696 
242,702 
1,241,102 
98,948 
108,603 
142,880 
89,621 
551,996 
46,567 
42,042 
9,.993 
37,819 
39,874 
265,298 
2,388,980 
73-84 
73-84 
84-99 
85-96 
73-84 
73-84 
73-84 
73-84 
73-84 
25. 
Selection of VHG districts: Within the four VHG provinces, there is a total of 
29  districts  and  the  criteria  for  targeting  districts  include:  (i)  poverty  prevalence,  (ii) 
proximity of functional smallholder irrigation scheme, (iii) proximity to a major agricultural 
corridor,  (iv)  agribusiness  and  nutrition  sensitive  horticulture  potential,  and  (v)  agro-
ecological  and  inclusivity  (e.g.,  youth  and  women),  ARDA/anchor  firm  aggregation 
potential. Using this criteria, the following 20 districts are targeted:  Matabeleland Province 
-  Gwanda,  Mangwe,  Beitbridge,  Insiza  and  Matobo  Districts;  Manicaland  Province  – 
Chimanimani,  Chipinge,  Makoni,  Mutsa,  Nyanga  Districts;  Masvingo  Province:  Gutu, 
Chiredzi, Zaka, Masvingo and Mwenezi Districts; Midlands Province – Gweru, Chirumanzu, 
Mberengwa, Zvishavane and Shurugwi Districts. 
26. 
The  selected  districts  overlap  with  IFAD-funded  SIRP  districts,  in  order  to 
promote  lesson  learning  between  the  two  interventions,  but  also  to  encourage 
interlinkages between two projects to maximise impact. 
27. 
 Ward level selection criteria: Ten wards are targeted under each of the 20 
districts that will be organised into production clusters to allow for effective aggregation 
and economies of scale with the adjacent smallholder irrigation scheme. The VHGs will be 
located  in  wards  adjacent  to  the  functional  irrigation  schemes.  This  will  reinforce  and 
deepen the impact of SIRP, which is also focused on these four provinces. The selection 
criteria for wards include: proximity to the ARDA-managed smallholder scheme, poverty 
prevalence,  vulnerability  to  climate  shocks,  and  interest  of  the  farmers.  HEEP  will 
implement a participatory approach, including the community and their leaders, for the 
selection of areas for VHG. This hub and spoke approach will provide important synergies 
in  terms  of  access  to  local  markets,  management,  and  provision  of  capacity  building 
assistance for SHFs both in VHGs and on the schemes. The selection criteria for the VHGs 
in these wards will include: poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition prevalence, technical 
and  finacial  feasibility,  ARDA  interest,  potential  for  eventual  inclusion  in  commercially 
viable  horticulture,  areas  vulnerable  to  climate  change,  availability  of  arable  land  and 
water,  interest  of  farmers  to  contribute  towards  operation  and  maintenance  and 
replacement costs and engage in market-led production. Three VHG will be implemented 
for each ward selected. The key horticulture crops include nutritional -sensitive horticulture 
crops grown specifically to fulfil mutational needs on the 0,25 hectares and the commercial 
horticulture crop on one-hectare garden. Individual vulnerable households will benefit from 
fruit  trees,  seedlings,  vegetable  seeds  and  water  harvesting  tanks  for  their  homestead 
integrated  gardens  that  are  expected  also  to  contribute  to  household  food  security  and 
nutrition. 
8 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Target Area under 4P intervention 
The location of the 4P activities, which include mostly poor rural households with 
28. 
more  immediate  opportunities  for  commercial  horticulture,  will  be  based  on  market 
conditions  and  agro-climatic  potential,  and  selected  through  a  competitive  process. 
Therefore,  the  location  of  the  4P  SHFs  will  depend  on  both  the  demand  from  anchor 
firms/farms and the interest and potential of SHFs.  The 4P households will be located in 
i) well -functioning irrigation schemes throughout the country and ii) high potential regions 
of the Mashonaland Provinces and Manicaland, that is, those that fall into Natural Regions 
1 and 2A. Zimbabwe has 450 smallholder irrigation schemes of which 250 are functional 
schemes. The list of irrigation schemes is included in Appendix 30  
TARGETING AND MAINSTREAMING STRATEGIES. 
Project target group: HEEP will implement an inclusive targeting strategy to 
29. 
ensure  project  benefits  to  a  large  number  of  poor  smallholder  farmers,  in  particular 
supporting poor women and youth. HEEP will implement 620 VHG targeting 31,000 poor 
smallholder farmers in 20 districts in the four targeted provinces. The 4P intervention will 
benefit 800 Agricultural Production Groups (APGs) nationwide, consisting of 20,000 poor 
smallholder  households  who  will  be  members  of  these  APGs.  These  will  benefit  from 
receiving capacity building and financial services from the project to further develop their 
livelihoods.  An  additional  20,000  labourers5 will  benefit  from  employment  opportunities 
created by APG, Climate Smart investments, and Anchor firms.  
30. 
Furthermore,  around  50,000  households  not  participating  directly  in  HEEP 
activities, who will benefit from improved farm and feeder roads and aggregation centres, 
as  well  as  long  term  indirect  benefits  of  economic  development  in  the  targeted  villages 
including indirect job creation in services and trade sector. 
31. 
The total HEEP support is projected to cover approximately 71,000 beneficiary 
households  corresponding  to  355,000  household  members  -  one  beneficiary  represents 
five persons which is the average size of the household in Zimbabwe. The HEEP’s primary 
target group in all project activities, including village horticulture gardens, matching grants 
to APGs, will include a minimum of 50 per cent women and 30 per cent youth (aged 18 to 
35  years).  Table  3  provides  details  on  poverty  categorisation  of  rural  households  in 
Zimbabwe and on the projected number of HEEP beneficiaries in each household category. 
In Table 4, the numbers of HEEP-supported smallholder farming households in the target 
area and Table 6 showing the distribution of beneficiaries per poverty category. 
5 each of the 20 anchor firms will employ 800 to 1000 or more labourers who work in grading and 
packaging. The labourers consist mainly of youth who are mostly unemployed. 
9 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Table 3: Poverty Categorisation of directly targeted HEEP beneficiaries 
Category 
A 
B1 
B2 
C 
Household type 
Chronically 
and unable 
poor 
food 
Chronically 
and 
insecure 
dependent 
on 
social  safety  nets 
(e.g., 
cash 
transfers) 
Chronically 
but able 
poor 
Often 
chronically 
food  insecure  but 
capable 
of 
becoming 
transitory 
secure 
food 
Characteristics 
  Poor households – little or no land  
  No economically actively people 
  Typically, child or elderly-headed households  
  Below the food poverty live 
  Vulnerable  to  nutrition  and  climate  change 
impact 
HEEP interventions   
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions e.g. VHGs 
  Community investments 
  Collaborate with humanitarian organisations (e.g., WFP) 
  GALS 
  Public Infrastructure 
  Fruit trees 
  Water harvesting equipment 
  Solarised boreholes energy saving stoves,  
No of beneficiaries  
9,928  
(4,964 women) 
 
Poor  households  with  access  to  land  or 
livestock  and  labour,  and  often  involved  in 
farming or livestock rearing and wage labour. 
  Typically, 1 economically active person 
 
Lack  cash  and  resources  to  purchase  inputs 
and commodities. 
Infrastructure 
 
  Village Horticulture Gardens 
  Empowerment  &capacity  development  &  skills  e.g., 
Training and capacity building CSA &agribusiness, business 
skills,  diversification  of  production,  access  to  markets, 
nutrition 
  Below the total consumption poverty line 
  support to horticulture value chains  targeting women are 
14,882  
(7,441) women) 
Transiently poor 
Transitory 
insecure 
food 
  Emerging smallholder farmers with  land  and 
labour but cash constrained and vulnerable to 
shocks. 
  2-3 economically active people 
  Households  can  increase  productivity  to 
achieve food and income security and become 
engines of rural economic growth. 
Self-sufficient 
Often  food  secure, 
risk  of 
with  a 
transitory 
food 
insecurity 
  Farmers  with  land  and  labour  and  the 
potential  to  enter  into private  sector  market 
linkage arrangements and produce a saleable 
surplus. 
  Typically, 3-4 economically active people 
10 
dominant  
  GALS training & Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
  Promote farmer to framer learning in extension 
  Matching grants for APGs 
  Fruit trees, energy saving stoves, solarised boreholes 
  Marketing and technical skills 
  Business training 
  Marketing access (out-grower, contract framing) 
  Equipment 
  Nutrition through Village Horticulture gardens 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
  Contract framing 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  GALS Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
  Business expansion support 
  New technologies to increase production and productivity 
  Value addition 
 
Innovation  to  increase  production  and  marketing  of 
commodities 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
36,298 
(18,149) women) 
9,892 
(4,946 women) 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Category 
Household type 
Women 
Characteristics 
  Able  to  withstand  shocks  without  external 
assistance. 
  Limited decision making  
 
limited access to means of production (land, 
inputs, capital, technology, seeds etc.)  
  Heavy workload and time poverty 
 
limited  access  to  finance,  vulnerable  to 
nutrition and climate change impact 
 
 
 
 
HEEP interventions   
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
  GALS 
 
 
improved economic and social welfare 
Improved  decision  making  by  women  at  HH  and 
community level, joint decision making enhanced 
Improved participation in VHG,APG, leadership skills 
reduced workload, sharing of care work, improved access 
to finance 
Improved well-being and nutrition, resilience to shocks 
improved 
adoption 
production/productivity 
Improved entrepreneurial and business skills 
Improved market access through 4P 
 
  Reduced Gender Based Violence  
 
  Knowledge and adoption of labour-saving technologies 
  Access to matching grants 
 
 
 
Improved BDS skills 
improved Agribusiness 
improved  Leadership  skills,  improved  decision  making, 
ownership of assets 
Improved digitalization and adoption of technologies 
Improvised employment opportunities through 4P 
Improved production, productivity and income 
improved 
CSA, 
of 
No of beneficiaries  
35,500 
(included in A, B1, B2, 
C and youth) 
21,300 
71,000 
Youth 
  Lack of access to means of production 
  High unemployment 
Total  
 
 
 
11 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
3.  HEEP SOCIAL AND POVERTY TARGETING STRATEGIES 
32. 
Appointment of the Social Inclusion and Targeting Officer: HEEP will share 
a  Social  Inclusion  and  Targeting  Officer  with  SIRP  and  SACP  at  national  JMU  and  GOZ 
Social inclusion Officers will  be attached to HEEP PMU in each of the three regional PMU 
(see TORs in this PIM). They will be responsible for the coordination and implementation 
of the targeting and social inclusion strategy. 
33. 
Partners that will implement the targeting strategy: HEEP will hire a Social 
Mobilisation Specialist (see TORs in this PIM), to work with the RPMU Targeting and Social 
Inclusion  Officer  and  Agritex  extension  officers  to  implement  the  targeting  strategy.  
Targeting  will  also  be  validated  through  the  local  NGOs,  community  workers  from  the 
Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  Community  and  Small  and  Medium  Scale  Enterprises 
Development,  Community  workers  from  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Child  Welfare, 
Department  of  Social  Welfare,  WFP,  District  officials  under  the  Ministry  of  Local 
Government, Councillors, Religious Leaders, Traditional Leaders, and School authorities.  
34. 
Targeting  process:  The  project  targeting  approaches  include  (i)  community 
targeting and (ii) a mixture of self-targeting and menu-based measures. Community based 
targeting allows the communities to select beneficiary groups using their own definition of 
poverty and a mixture of self-targeting and menu-based measures, where the community 
groups  are  informed  at  a  public  meeting  about  HEEP  objectives,  eligibility  conditions, 
application process and awarding process.  
35. 
Community targeting: VHG will apply community targeting for the selection of 
the 50 poor smallholder farmer beneficiaries per each garden. The farmers will agree on 
their own local definition and criteria of poverty. However, the project will provide advice 
to  ensure  that  the  poorest,  food  insecurity  and  nutritionally  vulnerable  households  are 
given special attention during the selection by communities and their needs are considered 
and  consulted.  A  wealth  ranking  exercise  will identify  the  poorest  households  mostly  in 
category A and BI. The selected individuals should be willing to participate in the VHG and 
should not be involved in irrigation schemes and other development projects. The process 
will  be  facilitated  by  the  Community  Mobilisation  Officer  or  Agritex  extension  staff  and 
traditional leaders. The selected beneficiaries will include 50 per cent women and 30 per 
cent youth divided equally between male and female youth. The list of the VHG scheme 
beneficiaries will be made public. About 2000 beneficiaries consists of PWD. PWD is a new 
target group for  IFAD in Zimbabwe. As discussed in the PIM, the project  will work  with 
traditional  leaders,  PWD  organisations  and  religious  organisations  to  identify  the  target 
group and opportunities to engage them. Lessons learned will be captured to sharpen the 
strategy. 
36. 
Self-targeting: Anchor firms such as ARDA and private sector entities will apply 
and respond to a call for Expression of Interest (EOI) by HEEP. The proposals are assessed 
and  selected  using  predetermined  criteria.  Training  in  financial  literacy  and  business 
planning, financial literacy, sustainable APG, and Business Plan Development Support will 
be  provided.  Horticulture  value  chains,  which  will  be  selected  for  HEEP  support,  should 
also benefit women, youth and other vulnerable groups either in employment or as APGs 
beneficiaries linked to anchor firms. In addition, there will be a need to select technologies 
that address women’s labour constraints. The promotion of group approaches limits the 
elite capture since the wealthier households are not interested in group activities.  
12 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
37. 
Direct Targeting: HEEP applies a quota system: 50 percent for women and 30 
percent  for  youth  for  both  participation  in  project  activities  and  the  representation  and 
leadership  in  APGs  and  VHGs  management  committees.  The  targeting  selection  criteria 
will be set to ensure that the most vulnerable, poor and disadvantaged women and youth 
(male and female) are given due consideration. The technical assistance will be targeted 
at strengthening the capacity of women and youth to engage and lead value chain activities 
as sustainable and profitable business. Approaches such as participatory wealth ranking 
by  the  community  themselves,  could  be  used  in  order  to  rank  the  communities  into 
different wealth groups. In approving application forms from a group, HEEP will take into 
consideration the number of female-headed households and youths to benefit 
38. 
The following targeting approach will be applied: 
39. 
A call for proposals for  the lead anchor firms  will be made. The  expression  of 
interest for this call will inform HEEP on the key VC to focus on with the APGs. The anchor 
firm  will indicate the VC and the number of smallholder farmers to be involved. 
40. 
The local Agritex extension officer will notify the communities about the date of 
the 4P meeting for APGs. This will be done through village leadership and the schools, and 
the notice for the public meeting will be posted at shopping centres, public notice boards, 
and dip tanks. Agritex will also inform the local CBO, other NGOs active in the area, as 
well as government organisations working at community level. Meetings should be held at 
convenient times and venues to allow the participation of women.  
41. 
The  project  will  hold  consultation  meetings  in  the  wards  of  the  functional 
irrigation scheme and the meetings will involve men, women and youth in the identified 
cluster areas.  The purpose  of the meeting will be to inform the community about HEEP 
and how to take part in HEEP activities. Anchor firms will be invited to attend the meetings 
to share with the APGs their focus on value chain and their engagement. APG membership 
is made up of the project target group composed of the poor and meeting the set quota 
for women and youth as well as the plot of up to 5 ha. The project will supply forms that 
will be filled in by each of the members of the APG. The forms contain basic socio-economic 
information to be able to determine the wealth ranking of the group members according 
to the social categorisation (category A, B1 B2 and C). 
Category  A  farmers  will  benefit  from  nutrition  sensitive  interventions,  mostly 
42. 
under VHGs as well as infrastructure under Component 1.4. The eligibility criteria for VHGs 
includes  members  meeting  the  poverty  criteria  of  Category  A,  B1  and  B2  farmers.  The 
selected group of 50 farmers should comprise 30 per cent youth aged 18 to 35 years) and 
50 per cent women. The inclusion of vulnerable groups e.g., people living with disabilities 
and or chronic illness (e.g. HIV and AIDS) will be required. 
43. 
The selection criteria for 4P investments for SHF includes: 
Interest to commercialize their SHF production. 
  Expressed commitment to join in a 4P agricultural production group (APG).  
 
  <2 ha of farmland suitable for horticulture  (>90 per cent of target group). 
  Up to 5ha of farmland suitable for horticulture in (<10 per cent of target group).  
44. 
In addition, the APGs should meet the criteria for 50 percent women beneficiaries 
and 30 per cent youth divided equally between male and female. The anchor firm will be 
responsible  to  identify  APGs  to  work  with  following  the  criteria.  A  consultative  and 
13 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
validation process ensures that the process is carried out transparently and that the target 
group  is  reached  to  avoid  elite  capture.  The  risk  that  the  marginalised  groups  or 
households within a community can be excluded will be mitigated through ensuring that 
those facilitating the exercise have a thorough understanding of the communities and are 
respected by them. The target group for HEEP 4P include the poor smallholder in category 
B1 and B2 and PWD (30% youth, 50% women)  who are in line with the IFAD target group. 
The categories of farmers will be included in the call for expression of interest including 
the need for inclusive targeting. The APGs will be required to respond to the expression of 
interest, specifying the type of farmers that are involved.  For  eligibility of the expression 
of interest, 70% members of the targeted APGs members should consists of IFAD’s priority 
target  group  in  order  to  avoid  excessive  elite  capture.  HEEP  is  targeting  rural  poor 
households who are able to take advantage of the opportunities to be offered. In line with 
PIM, the target group for HEEP is focussing on category B1 (chronically poor but able) and 
B2 (transiently poor and transitory food insecure) including 50% women, 30% youth and 
2000 people with disabilities. The characteristics  of the target groups are highlighted in 
PIM Table 3 on Poverty, categorisation of directly targeted HEEP beneficiaries. The anchor 
firm will provide the profile of the beneficiaries and how there expect to benefit from HEEP. 
The selection of the target group will be verified by PMU together with the local community-
based  organisations  already  operating  in  the  target  area.  The  selection  criteria  for 
proposals from the anchor firm includes gender and youth related criteria. 
45. 
Complaints  and  grievances:  HEEP’s  GRM  will  be  in  line  with  norms  of  the 
communities as well as laws of the country and will build on the existing local government 
structures from Village to national levels. The GRM will consist of three parallel systems 
which are; i) a community-based  system, ii) a formal system and iii) the  IFAD Redress 
System.   Initially,  grievances  will  be  resolved  at  APG  level  (VHG/Irrigation)  by  the 
responsible management committees with the help of AGRITEX, ARDA and DoI technicians 
on  the  ground.   Any  grievances  that  cannot  be  resolved  at  these  levels  will  be  taken 
through the local Government structures that include the area Headman and/or Paramount 
Chief  up  to  the  District  Administrator’s  office  in  the  RDC.   Beyond  the  District  Council, 
grievances will be addressed through provincial and national councils as necessary. The 
national and regional project teams will provide information on the GRM available as well 
as  convey  the  zero  tolerance  for  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  (SEA)  as  well  as  the 
preventing  fraud  and  corruption  policies.  The  information  on  the  policies  will  be  made 
available  through  all  HEEP  contracts  and  on  project  documents  such  as  leaflets  and 
matching  grants  proposal  templates.  Project  sites  will  have  the  information  on  notice 
boards  with  local,  regional  and  national  contact  details  of  responsible  persons/offices 
where grievances can be safely lodged.  
Empowerment  and  capacity  building  measures:  HEEP  will  implement  a 
46. 
range of capacity building interventions for APGs and SMSEs as well as support institutions 
working  with  these  groups.  HEEP  will  provide  training  in  BDS  and  financial  literacy  in 
addition to the development of a business proposal. A community-wide GALS training will 
be conducted in order to better address the underlying root causes to inequality between 
men  and  women  specific  constraints,  including  land  access  and  ownership.  It  will  also 
integrate nutrition education as part of GALS to support and encourage consumption. In 
addition,  IFAD’s  empowerment  indicator  using  a  project  level  WEAI  (pro-WEAI)  will  be 
conducted  in  order  to  measure  empowerment,  agency  and  inclusion  of  women  in  the 
agricultural sector. Pro-WEAI seeks to identify development obstacles and may be used to 
track  gender  equality  in  relation  to  three  domains  of  empowerment:  intrinsic  agency 
(power to), instrumental agency (power within) and collective agency (power with). The 
14 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
project will also address youth constraints and obstacles such as youth skills, knowledge 
and empowerment as business entrepreneurs.  
47. 
Enabling measures: HEEP will provide training to the target group and support 
to ARDA and Agritex which will be working with farmers. The training will build of the best 
practices with the ongoing SIRP and it will cover both in technical and social issues. HEEP 
will  also  provide  matching  grants  for  APGS,  climate  smart  investments,  innovation 
investment, access to loans through  the anchor firms. Technical assistance is provided for 
the development of business proposals.  
Operational  measures:  A  Targeting  and  Social  Inclusion  Expert  will  be 
48. 
recruited as part of the PMU as well as in each of the three regional PMUs. The Expert will 
be responsible for the supervision and implementation of the poverty, gender and targeting 
strategy,  and  for  the  development  of  capacity  building  tools  for  the  implementation  of 
activities under the two components and for the provision of leadership, supervision and 
support capacity building and social mentoring activities for gender mainstreaming. 
15 
of 
rural 
in 
No 
households 
Zimbabwe 
[No.  of  persons 
indicated 
in 
brackets] 
107,500 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Table 4: Categorization of rural households in Zimbabwe  
Category 
Household type 
Characteristics 
Type of support 
A 
B1 
B2 
Chronically  poor 
and unable 
food 
Chronically 
and 
insecure 
on 
dependent 
social  safety  nets 
(e.g., 
cash 
transfers) 
Chronically  poor 
but able 
Often chronically 
food  insecure  but 
capable 
of 
becoming 
transitory 
secure 
food 
Transiently poor 
Transitory 
food 
insecure 
· Poor households – little or no land  
· No economically actively people 
· Typically,  child  or  elderly,  female, 
widowed, 
ill-headed 
chronically 
households  
· Below the food poverty live 
Nutrition-sensitive Interventions e.g. 
(nutrition gardens and small ruminants) 
Community investments 
Collaborate with humanitarian organisations (e.g. WFP) 
 
 
 
 
  GALS and nutrition sensitive interventions 
 
Infrastructure 
in 
to 
resources 
cash  and 
farming  or 
· Poor households with access to land 
or  livestock  and  labour,  and  often 
involved 
livestock 
rearing and wage labour. 
· Typically,  1  economically  active 
person 
· Lack 
purchase inputs and commodities. 
· Below 
poverty line 
· Emerging smallholder farmers with 
land and labour but cash constrained 
and vulnerable to shocks. 
· 2-3 economically active people 
· Households 
increase 
productivity  to  achieve  food  and 
income security and become engines 
of rural economic growth. 
consumption 
total 
can 
the 
 
 
 
Infrastructure 
Empowerment  &capacity  development  &  skills  e.g.,  Training 
and  capacity  building  CSA  &agribusiness,  business  skills, 
diversification of production, access to markets, nutrition 
support  to  value  chains  where  women  are  dominant  e.g., 
horticulture 
322,000 
  GALS training & Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
 
  Matching grants for APGs 
Promote farmer to framer learning in extension 
890,000 
Business training 
Equipment 
Nutrition 
  Marketing and technical skills 
 
  Marketing access (out-grower, contract framing) 
 
 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  GALS Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
Contract framing 
16 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
C 
Self-sufficient 
Often food secure, 
risk  of 
with  a 
transitory 
food 
insecurity 
· Farmers  with  land  and  labour  and 
the  potential  to  enter  into  private 
sector market  linkage  arrangements 
and produce a saleable surplus. 
· Typically,  3-4  economically  active 
people 
· Able  to  withstand  shocks  without 
external assistance. 
 
 
 
 
Business expansion support 
New technologies to increase production 
Value addition 
Innovation 
commodities 
to 
increase  production  and  marketing  of 
215,000 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
 
Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
TOTAL 
1,534,500 
Source: Amended after Table A in AusAID (2011) AusAID Food Security Delivery Strategy for Zimbabwe, 2912-16. Canberra and Harare; in DFID/FAO Livelihoods and 
Food Security Programme (2014 -2018).  
17 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
49. 
The  target  group  poverty  profiles  include:  Category  A  –  chronically  poor  and 
unable (9,928 beneficiary households), B1 – chronically poor but able (14,882 beneficiary 
households), B2 - transiently poor (36,298 beneficiary households) and C – self-sufficiency 
(9,892)  beneficiary  households).  The  calculation  on  the  distribution  of  the  beneficiary 
households  based  on  the  country  level  distribution  of  the  poverty  groups  in  shown  in 
Table 5. 
Table 5:  Distribution of HEEP beneficiaries along poverty categories 
Poverty 
Category 
Women 
Men 
A 
B1 
B2 
C 
Total 
4,964 
7,441 
18,149 
4,946 
35,500 
4,964 
7,441 
18,149 
4,946 
35,500 
Youth 
(of  which  50% 
young women) 
2,978 
4,465 
10,889 
2,968 
21,300 
Total 
9,928 
14,882 
36,298 
9,892 
71,000 
50. 
The total outreach will be 71,000 beneficiary households, which is equivalent to 
355,500  household  members,  since  it  is  assumed  that  one  beneficiary  represents  five 
persons, which is the average size of the household in Zimbabwe.  
51. 
Women:  Interventions  on  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment  will 
focus on strengthening women’s economic empowerment, decision making and achieving 
workload  balance.  At  the  same  time,  the  project  will  strengthen  women’s  voices  in 
determining  household  priorities,  spending  patterns,  and  in  addressing  their  own  well-
being. Gender roles and relations are tackled involving men and women. In line with IFAD’s 
focus  on  promoting  transformation  of  gender  relations,  the  project  will  carry  out 
community  Gender  Action  Learning  Systems  (GALS)  to  address  underlying  cultural  and 
traditional  norms  (women  access  to  land),  attitudes,  behavioural  systems,  as  well  as 
gender and age stereotypes. Women will consist of 50 percent of beneficiaries, which is 
equivalent to 35,500 beneficiaries. IFAD’s empowerment indicator based on project-level 
Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  (pro-WEAI) 6  will  be  used  to  identify 
constraints  and  opportunities  for  women  around  the  three  domains  of  intrinsic, 
instrumental and collective agency. Based on the outcome, HEEP will design appropriate 
strategies to address the constraints faced by women and men. Women will benefit from 
matching grants under APGs, climate smart investments and anchor firms. Women will be 
empowered through training in business development, climate smart agriculture, financial 
literacy training among others.  
Youth: have limited productive resources, skills and capital. HEEP will target the 
52. 
youth  directly  by  identifying  skilled  and  unskilled  youth  interested  in  horticulture 
production  or  post-production  activities  such  as  processing,  packaging,  marketing, 
6 IFAD’s empowerment indicator includes 10 of the 12 dimensions for the pro WEAI dimensions, 
following those IFAD can influence through its supported activities. The pro-WEAI dimensions are 
mapped with three domains of empowerment: intrinsic agency (power to - autonomy in income, 
self-efficacy and attitudes about intimate partner violence); instrumental agency) power within – 
input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, access to decisions  on financial 
services, control and use of income and work balance),  and collective agency (power with – group 
membership, and membership in influential groups) 
18 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
artisanry or casual labour. The APGs will allocate 30 per cent of membership to interested 
youth and will serve as a model for youth mentorship, upskilling and transfer or indigenous 
knowledge.  With  a  target  of  71,000  beneficiaries,  HEEP  will  provide  opportunities  for 
21,300 young women and men between the ages of 18 and 35. Horticulture value chain 
analysis will be done to identify opportunities for youths disaggregated by age and gender 
to ensure that appropriate opportunities are available to young men and women of all the 
age groups (18-24 and 25-35). In addition, youth that are interested in being part of the 
APGs will benefit from technical assistance on business plan development, climate-smart 
agriculture and financial literacy and planning, and technical training related to the specific 
operations of the enterprise. Youth led climate smart investments will also be supported 
through matching grants.  
53. 
Secondary target group: These are critical players in the overall functioning 
of targeted horticulture value chains. They will be supported through capacity building and 
training. The stakeholders identified include: the small to medium enterprise agro-dealers, 
rural  buyers,  processors,  and  emergent  farmers  providing  support  services  to 
smallholders. Whilst a significant part of this target group is likely to be non-poor, these 
services at all levels of the value chain are essential for inclusive horticulture value chain 
growth.  Public  extension  officers  will  also  be  targeted  through  training  and  capacity 
building to sensitise them on gender, youth and nutrition-sensitive interventions.  
54. 
Indirect target group: In addition to the direct target group, is estimated to 
be 50,000 households, which includes in particular the villagers who live in direct vicinity 
of the supported agribusinesses and rural road construction sites, but are not immediately 
part  of the  HEEP  value  chain production systems.  They will benefit from improved  road 
access to district centres, marketplaces, health and education, as well as long term indirect 
benefits of economic development in the targeted villages including indirect job creation 
in services and trade sector. 
55. 
Mitigating the risk of elite capture: HEEP will mitigate the risk of elite capture 
in the following ways: (i) Making information on beneficiary selection and financing widely 
available; (ii) Setting up a complaints mechanism and creating a provincial mechanism for 
the  resolution  of  grievances;  (iii)  Community  self-targeting  for  VHG,  APGs  group 
membership,  following  HEEP  eligibility  criteria;  (iv)  Adoption  of  government  poverty 
classification  for  target  households;  (v)  provide  empowerment  and  capacity  building 
measures to build strong producer organisations; (vi) verification by the independent BDS 
service unit and project monitoring system. This triangulated mechanism will be developed 
and supported by an independent Service Provider. Furthermore, a HEEP Anti-Corruption 
Plan will be developed at the project start-up, which will include adequate grievance and 
redress mechanisms. 
4.  HEEP GENDER STRATEGY 
HEEP recognizes that women are key to the transformation from subsistence to 
56. 
commercially  oriented  agriculture,  and  interventions  will  seek  to  address  constraints 
hindering the achievement of gender equality and women’s empowerment. HEEP will build 
on SIRP and SACP interventions to (i) promote economic empowerment to enable women 
to  have  equal  opportunities  to  participate  in  and  benefit  from  profitable  activities;  (ii) 
promoting 50 per cent women representation in decision making committees of APGs and 
other rural institutions; (iii) achieve a more equitable balance in workload and sharing of 
economic and social benefits between women and men through GALS social mentoring, 
and (iv) monitor changes in norms and values around gender equality. 
19 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
57. 
Evidence  shows  that  women  account  for  the  greatest  number  of  smallholder 
farmers, produce most of the food and yet own less land. In SIRP, women irrigation plot 
holders are 37% and men 63% yet women form the majority of the people working on the 
land.  Most of the land is governed by customary laws that discriminate against women 
limiting their land property rights. That means that women farmers have access to land 
through their husbands, sons or male family members. When the male family members 
move to cities, the women are left behind to tend the land which they have no right to 
own, use as collateral. However, they may enjoy the output from the land or have to sale 
output  with  consent  from  men.  There  are  also  positive  experiences  of  women  have 
approached the traditional leaders to request for allocation of portions of land. In the case 
where  women  have  access  to  productive  resources  as  men,  they  have  increased  yields  
and  ploughed  back  profits    to  their  household  to  provide  nutritious  food  to  the  family. 
Zimbabwe  is  predominantly  patriarchal  and  women  consistently  marginalised  due  to 
societal  norms.  Through  GALS  that  bring  women  and  men  together,  HEEP  will  come  up 
with  solutions  to  close  the  gap  on  women  access  to  land  and  land  ownership  rights  to 
provide evidence for policy options. The project has adopted an affirmative action through 
targeting 50% women and 30% youth. In addition, HEEP will promote women and youth 
only  Agricultural  Producer  Groups.  The  land  required  for  horticulture  is  less  than  other 
crops. 
58.  Inclusive targeting of women and youth is an eligibility criterion for receiving matching 
grants. Women will be included in management committees of APGs and VHGs  and will 
benefit  from  GALS  training.  There  is  alignment  of  the  gender  activities  to  the  activities 
under horticulture VC. The project will engage with the traditional leaders to ensure that 
women have access to land. Through the engagement in HEEP, women are expected to 
benefit  from  economic  empowerment  through  improvement  in  infrastructure,  resources 
through the matching grants, improved income, wage employment. The GALs intervention 
will ensure that the women use their income.  The project will also result in creased voice 
and  influence  through  involvement  in  women  in  leadership,  strengthening  women’s 
organisations and improved status of women in society. 
59.  Results  from  a  Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index  (WEAI)  survey  will  be 
used to inform strategies for women’s empowerment, building on the work of SIRP.7 SIRP 
is carrying out the GALS approach in the targeted area and HEEP will scale up the approach 
to reach different beneficiaries. Based on past evidence, GALS can promote collaboration 
between  vulnerable  and  powerful  horticultural  value  chain  actors. 8  HEEP  will  promote 
economic empowerment of women through access to Matching Grants provided through 
anchor  firms.  The  project  will  encourage  women-led  4P  APGs  to  access  and  engage  in 
productive  and  pro-women  horticulture  enterprises.  Alleviating  women’s  workload  and 
enhancing  the  equal  sharing  of  economic  benefits  is  central  to  achieving  gender 
transformation.  HEEP  will  facilitate  women’s  access  to  Climate  Smart  Agriculture 
technology that does not increase the workload for women, as well as increasing women’s 
knowledge  through  technical  and  business  capacity  development.  Training  will  be 
conducted close to women’s homes, arranging for child-care sessions to facilitate women’s 
7 SIRP carried out Abbreviated WEAI; by carrying out pro-WEAI,  HEEP is expected to give specific guidance to 
project intervention. 
8 Wageningen (2020), Pre Design Report “Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Measures for Nutrition co-benefits in IFAD 
Investments in Zimbabwe 
20 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
participation  in  training  while  easing  their  workload.  The  technologies  that  reduce  the 
burden on women from traditional gender roles will be promoted such as solar powered 
boreholes, drip irrigation kits, biogas, mechanized threshers, motorised weed control tools, 
energy/labour saving cooking stoves, and family nutrition trainings. 
60. 
The project will involve men and women as GALS and nutrition champions. In 
addition, gender messaging via social media, gender dialogues, gender learning events, 
road shows and commemoration of the international women; days. Direct targeting will 
ensure 50 per cent quota (35,000 women) for women participation is met. Dedicated PMU 
staff will be responsible for implementation, monitoring using gender sensitive indicators 
and ensuring adequate resource for the achievement of women and men’s empowerment  
61. 
HEEP  will  target  35,000  women  household  members.  HEEP  recognizes  that 
women  are  key  to  agricultural  transformation,  but  various  obstacles  and  economic 
constraints  limit  their  contribution  to  their  households  and  communities.  Women  lack 
economic empowerment and decision-making power and are faced with heavy workloads. 
In addition, they lack business skills and have limited access to markets, and face time 
constraints. Women also have weak representation in decision-making bodies dealing with 
productive  and  economic  issues  due  to  their  traditional  and  social  role.  Due  to  their 
domestic  and  reproductive  roles  and  gender  relations,  women  spend  more  time  doing 
agriculture and domestic work. Female-headed households are amongst the poorest and 
their  economic  progression  is  hindered  by  a  combination  of  social  and  structural 
constraints. Their access to land, knowledge, inputs, finance, high-value agriculture value 
chains is heavily curtailed by traditional gender roles that undermine their participation. A 
50 per cent selection quota will be implemented to prioritize their participation and HEEP 
implementation and management arrangements will be gender sensitive. 
62. 
Interventions  on gender  equality and women’s empowerment  will focus  on (i) 
promoting economic empowerment to enable men and women to have equal opportunity 
to  participate  in  and  benefit  from  profitable  activities;  (ii)  enabling  women  and  men  to 
have equal voice and influence in rural institutions and organisations; and (iii) achieve a 
more equitable balance in workload and a sharing of economic and social benefits between 
women and men. HEEP will focus on strengthening women’s economic opportunities and 
decision  making.  At  the  same  time,  the  project  will  strengthen  women’s  voices  in 
determining  household  priorities,  spending  patterns,  and  in  addressing  their  own  well-
being. Gender roles and relations are tackled involving men and women  
63. 
In line with IFAD’s focus on promoting transformation of gender relations, the 
project will focus on addressing the root causes of gender inequalities through Household 
methodologies  such  as  Gender  Action  Learning  Systems  (GALS)  to  address  underlying 
cultural and traditional norms, attitudes, behavioural systems, as well as gender and age 
stereotypes. Potential entry points to empower women include:  
64. 
empowering women and promoting gender transformation. These are:  
Given  the  above  constraints,  HEEP  will  implement  the  following  pathways  for 
a)  IFAD’s  empowerment  indicator  using  project-level  Women  Agricultural  economic 
Index  (WEAI)  survey.  This  will  be  carried  out  in  order  to  identify  obstacles  to 
women’s empowerment, agency and women’s inclusion in the agricultural sector. 
Gender  analysis  is  necessary  in  transforming  gender  relations  and  social 
inequalities. 
21 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
b)  Development of a HEEP Gender Strategy. The PMU Targeting and Social Inclusion 
Specialist shall develop and implement a gender strategy for the project to ensure 
that  gender  concerns  are  mainstreamed  in  all  project  activities  throughout  the 
implementation period, in order to  offer  equal opportunities under the project to 
men, women, women-headed households, youth and other disadvantaged groups. 
Technical Assistance will be hired for one month to assist with the development of 
the strategy. 
c)  The development of GALs Training Manual will be designed jointly in the first year 
of  the  project  by  the  PMU  Targeting  and  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  (see  TOR)  in 
collaboration  with  gender  focal  persons  in  relevant  government  institutions.  The 
manual is already developed by SIRP.  
d)  Community  wide  gender  sensitisation.  The  NPMU  Targeting  and  Social  Inclusion 
Specialist  and  Agritex  will  use  the  GALS’  manual  to  carry  out  community  wide 
Gender  Sensitization.  Encouraging  active  participation  and  targeting  women  and 
men  in  rural  communities  may  be  sensitive.  A  way  to  overcome  this  is  to 
communicate clearly the expected benefits for the broader community and its local 
economic development. Women and men GALS champions will be trained.  
e)  Establishment of quotas to reach women. HEEP quota for women could amount to 
50 per cent of the targeted beneficiaries and 30 per cent for the youth (youth target 
is  equally  divided  between  men  and  women).  In  addition,  gender  targeting  will 
currently focus on households instead of targeting only the head of the households, 
which implies that women are automatically left out.  
f)  Work with groups versus individuals. Experiences from other projects recommend 
working with formal or informal women’s groups rather than on an individual basis. 
Strengthening  capacities  of  organised  female  groups  have  proven  to  be  less 
sensitive. 
g)  Stakeholder review meetings to share lessons learnt and best practices in relation 
to mainstreaming youth and gender in micro and small enterprises. 
h)  Support Policy Dialogue on the promotion of women land rights. 
i)  Promote women leadership across value chain activities. Identify successful women 
within different parts of the value chain and bring them together in for example a 
leadership platform. They can become a source of inspiration for other women and 
in addition they can foster collaboration among value chain actors. A recurrent issue 
raised in the interviews was the need to improving linkages within value chains: 
farmers to the processors, to retailers, to consumers, etc.  
j)  Invest in value addition for women: there are untapped opportunities in capacity 
building in  value addition. For  example,  currently during the Covid 19 lockdown, 
many communities grow perishable products such as tomatoes which are thrown 
away,  due  to  lack  of  market.  If  they  would  have  had  training  in  processing  and 
preservation technology, they would have been able to still earn money from these 
crops.   
k)  Climate smart technologies that reduce labour burden: in order to engage women 
and get them interested in training and adoption of climate smart technologies, it 
is recommended to select those technologies that reduces time and labour burdens 
for  women.  Among  different  technologies  the  following  will  be  promoted:  labour 
saving  processing  and  preservation  technology  (e.g.  solar  dryers),  labour  and 
energy saving cooking stoves, and etc. 
22 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
l)  Promote a safe working environment. Rural women are often involved in production 
as some other activities along the value chain might not be safe. Safety issues are 
related to female unfriendly facilities, harassment on markets, unfair prices, unsafe 
transportation,  and  travelling  by  night.  If  women  are  to  be  encouraged  to  work 
along the entire value chain, these issues need to be tackled.  
m) Include  men  in  women’s  empowerment  activities.  A  common  phrase  is  that  we 
need  both  women  and  men  to  address  gender  inequality.  Therefore,  an  overall 
recommendation would be to critically analyse for which activities it is effective (or 
necessary) to invite and include both men and women.  
n)  Include men and women in nutrition education activities: It is common practices in 
some communities that women are responsible for caring and feeding their families. 
Involving  both  men  and  women  using  nutrition  education  and  awareness  raising 
platforms  to  encourage  men  to  take  active  part  of  feeding  and  caring  for  their 
families, including the importance of sharing household responsibilities.  
Gender mainstreaming in the project components 
65. 
Under Component 1, the participation of women in mobilisation meetings will be 
promoted through ensuring that the notification for the meetings reaches the women on 
time.  The  meetings  should  be  held  at  venues  and  times  when  the  women  are  free  to 
attend. The project will deliberately include a selection of women VHGs. This will promote 
acceptability,  and  at  the  same  time  the  project  will  upgrade  the  VHGs  to  increase 
production  and  income  for  the  women.  Where  the  male-dominated  horticulture  value 
chains are adopted, women will benefit from paid employment. For the technical training, 
the project will ensure that the material is simplified to include local language, role plays 
and practical examples. Technical training such as business training and financial services 
training should also be run in conjunction with non-technical training such as confidence 
building, prevention of gender-based violence, and reproductive health rights in order to 
attract  the  participation  of  women.  The  provision  of  labour-saving  technologies  such  as 
drip irrigation and solar pumps will alleviate the workload on women.  
66. 
The  provision  of  childcare  facilities  would  also  enable  women  to  attend  the 
training. In terms of CSA technologies, care should be taken not to introduce technologies 
that  increase  the  workload  for  women.  However,  through  GALS  (sub-component  1.2), 
HEEP will promote equitable work balance between men and women. The use of female 
extension workers will also promote the participation of women. The technical committee 
for the selection of eligible proposals will be composed of a gender balanced membership. 
The project adopts participatory approaches to ensure the participation of men, women 
and youth. Women will receive mentoring in leadership and will be encouraged to take up 
leadership  roles  in  management  committees  for  APGs  and  VHGs.  The  matching  grants 
(sub-component 1.3) provide an opportunity for economic empowerment for the women 
and  women  will  benefit  from  matching  grants.  The  provision  of  WASH  facilities 
(subcomponent  1.3)  will  address  the  time  poverty  for  women  who  have  to  walk  long 
distances to fetch water. The support through nutrition education and awareness raising 
on family caring and feeding and shared responsibilities, including introduction of labour 
and energy saving technologies will benefit women. Economic empowerment for women 
will be enhanced through access to matching grants (sub-component 1.3) and Inclusive 
EHRF and Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending (component 2)  
23 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
67. 
equality and women’s empowerment, agency and women’s involvement in agriculture.  
The M&E system will ensure gender and sex disaggregated data to track gender 
68. 
Community wide gender sensitisation using the Gender Action Learning 
System  (GALS)  approach  will  be  adopted  for  achieving  gender  transformation.  It  is  a 
community-led empowerment methodology that can be complementary to a food system 
or  a  value  chain  development  approach.  Poor  women  and  men  are  put in  the  centre  of 
GALS  and  are  perceived  as  drivers  and  shapers  of  their  own  development  rather  than 
victims. Through participatory processes and simple mapping and diagram tools, men and 
women jointly identify and address obstacles in their environment. This enforces them to 
have  more  control  over  their  personal,  household,  community  and  organisational 
development  to  improve  income,  food  and  nutrition  security in  a  gender-equitable  way. 
Ultimately, GALS can promote collaboration between vulnerable and powerful value chain 
actors.9 The risk that men will take over lucrative value chains is mitigated through GALS 
which targets the whole family and joint planning will ensure that the benefits are shared among 
the  family  members.  Issues  of  gender-based  violence  (GBV)  are  also  addressed  using  the  same 
methodology.  Interventions  in  GALS  has  been  effective  in  reducing  GBV  among  SIRP  targeted 
beneficiaries.  
69. 
Draft targeting activities during the start-up phase include: 
a)  The strategy and implementation plan for targeting poverty groups will be reviewed 
and validated with PMU staff during the start-up workshop.  
b)  Potential  participants  from  poverty  groups  will  be  pre-identified  and  reached 
through information and social mobilization campaigns using local languages, radio 
stations, organization of meetings at times of day at which women will be able to 
attend.  
c)  Communication on radio, television, press by the Permanent Secretary to inform 
the  public  about  the  project  -are  of  coverage,  the  objectives,  target  group  and 
expected results.  
d)  The  community  mobilisers  together  with  Agritex  and  social  inclusion  officers  will 
hold cluster meetings to inform the communities about the project  
e)  The start-up phase will be used to identify the VHG and raise awareness of APGS 
and  anchor  firms’  involvement.  Women  and  youth  will  be  informed  about  the 
project and encouraged to participate 
f)  The project will design forms needed for beneficiary registration for VHG. 
g)  The team will make a recognisance of the poverty groups to establish if they meet 
the target group criteria. For instance, 70% of the APG composition should meet 
the target group eligibility criteria.  
9 Wageningen (2020) 
24 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
h)  The community targeting and selection of VHG beneficiaries will be promoted. The 
criteria  for  the  selection  of  VHG  beneficiaries  will  include  30%youth  and  50% 
women.  
1)  Design the Calls for Expression of Interest for anchor firms.  
70. 
HEEP will work in partnership with locally based World Food Programme (WFP) 
teams in order to draw lessons and best practices on the way in which they conduct their 
targeting.  WFP  is  present  in  all  districts  where  there  are  HEEP  targeted  food  insecure 
households. This partnership will contribute in building the capacity of the HEEP team in 
poverty  targeting.  Other  partnerships  will  include:  Agritex,  Ministry  of  Women  Affairs, 
Community, Small Medium Scale Enterprise, NGOs, CBOs who have the capacity to reach 
the poor, UNCT, agribusinesses and farmer organisations.   
  For the targeted poorest households, HEEP interventions will complement WFP, UNICEF 
and other partners providing social protection for this particular group.  
  The poorest will benefit from VHGs, capacity building interventions, nutrition training, 
Gender  Action  Learning  System  and  infrastructure.  They  will  also  benefit  from 
increased employment from the main project activities.  
  A  policy  dialogue  workshop  will  be  organised  to  share  the  experience  and  lessons 
learned from IFAD to inform quick wins in targeting, scaling up and policy dialogue.  
  A participatory M&E will be used, including project staff, APGs members, women and 
youth,  both  recipients  and  participants.  Indicators  for  quality  of  participation  in 
infrastructure, such as employment creation and time savings are developed to assess 
the benefits provided to the poorest and vulnerable. 
  At the end of this section of the PIM, Appendix 1 presents the HEEP Targeting Checklist 
and Appendix 2 covers the Gender Checklist. 
5.  HEEP STRATEGIES FOR YOUTH INCLUSION 
71. 
The  Government  of  Zimbabwe  (GoZ)  recognises  the  demographic  and  socio-
economic significance of young people between the ages of 15 and 35 and considers them 
a  priority  for  economic  and  national  development.  The  National  Youth  Policy  (2013) 
commits  to  addressing  the  youth’s  development  and  empowerment  needs  in  social  and 
economic spheres. The objectives of the first goal of the National Youth Policy identifies 
the following priorities for  empowering youth to participate and contribute to the socio-
economic  development  of  the  nation:  (i)  provision  of  opportunities  for  sustainable 
livelihoods and decent work for all young men and women; (ii) assisting youth in attaining 
knowledge,  skills  and  experiences  required  to  enable  them  to  effectively  participate  in 
national development and society as a whole; (iii) promotion of the rights and freedoms 
of youths paying special attention to empowering previously marginalised sections such 
as  young  women  and  girls,  youth  with  disabilities,  youth  living  with  HIV,  out  of  school 
youth and youth living in rural areas; (iv) involving youth at the planning, decision making, 
implementation  and  evaluation  levels  of  all  youth  development  programmes;  and  (v) 
promoting  gender  equality  and  equity  among  the  youth,  in  particular,  in  education  and 
25 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
training,  socio-cultural,  political,  economic  and  legal  spheres.  HEEP  takes  into  account 
these five priorities in its youth inclusion strategies.  
72. 
Youths access to loans: Access to loans remain difficult for young people since 
they lack collateral such as land to obtain credit from financial institutions. The constraints 
will be addressed through:  (i) The anchor firm can obtain loans for youths who don’t have 
land as a collateral. One of the selection criteria for anchor firms will be the inclusion  of 
30% youth as part of the APGs. (ii) Youth have an option of obtaining pieces of land from 
their parents or traditional chief and can lease land. (iii) HEEP will adopt good practices 
from IFAD country programmes and other good projects will be captured and analysed. 
73.  In relation to youth, HEEP will empower them through matching grants, 30% youth 
participation  quota,  across  all  activities,  BDS  training  to  improve  the  profitability  and 
resilience of their businesses, and selection of horticulture value chains which the youth 
are already engaged. The project will liaise with traditional leaders  regarding the access  
to land by groups of young people.  
74.  Zimbabwe  is  a  youthful  country,  with  approximately  68  percent  of  the  population 
below the age of 35 years10. The population structure could potentially yield a demographic 
dividend,  but  over  80  per  cent  of  the  productive  youth  have  not  been  able  to  access 
employment in permanent paid work11. Although unemployment is high in both urban and 
rural areas, it is much higher in rural areas where about 48.9 percent of rural male and 
55.2 percent of rural female youths are unemployed12. The challenge for youth economic 
inclusion is higher in rural areas where agriculture is the main economic sector. To escape 
unemployment and poverty rural youth are migrating to cities and to neighboring South 
Africa and Botswana. Through value chain development and investment that improve the 
productive capacity of agriculture HEEP will unlock rural economies to create inclusive and 
decent employment opportunities for rural young men and women in agriculture and off-
farm activities. HEEP will directly target young people in the ages of 18 to 35 years. The 
86,000  beneficiary  households  that  will  be  targeted  will  consist  of  30  per  cent  youths 
(25,800  household  members)  of  which  50  per  cent  will  be  young  females  (12,900 
household members). 
75. 
Inclusive  value  chain  development:  According  to  the  Pre-design  Study 
conducted by the Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation (WCDI), effective youth 
inclusion should be closely linked to the selection of value chains. In order to select value 
chains that meet the youth’s interests and attainable capital and skill requirements, HEEP 
shall  involve  the  youth  in  community-level  participatory  value-chain  development 
consultations. From the beginning of the project, HEEP shall be aware of the diversity of 
youth populations (gender, age group and VC commodity activity preference) and target 
10 https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Youth/ZimbabweHRCommission.pdf 
11 Zimbabwe Investment Youth Case Study JMAT August 2016 
12 Zimstat (2019). Labour force and child labour survey  
26 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
value-chain analysis accordingly13 to ensure that appropriate opportunities are availed to 
young  men  and  women  of  all  the  age  groups  and  are  aligned  to  their  interests  and 
capacities.  Thus,  the  project  will  provide  tailored  approaches  to  the  different  youth 
populations.  
76. 
HEEP  shall  also  involve  young  men  and  women  in  the  Sub-component  1.1: 
Village  Horticulture  Garden  Mobilization  and  Development.,  in  consultations  of 
location  of  gardens,  selection  of  beneficiaries  and  crops  to  grow.  The  WCDI  Pre-design 
report  highlighted  that  youth  are  often  particularly  sensitive  to  the  expectations  and 
opinions  of  those  they  are  close  to  and  particularly  elders,  which  can  influence  their 
selection of which value chains to engage in and in what capacity. Component 1 community 
consultations  shall,  therefore,  be  done  in  an  age-disaggregated  manner  to  create  an 
environment  where  youth  can  freely  express  their  thoughts  and  ideas  without  fear  of 
judgement or intimidation. The project will use innovative ways to gauge youth interest 
during  value  chain  development.  This  will  include  sending  out  youth-specific  calls  for 
proposals to scope the kinds of enterprises that youths are interested in within the clusters. 
Web-based platforms and social media (e.g. Facebook, WhatsApp) and local youth forums 
will be considered for crowdsourcing of ideas on the kinds of enterprises that youth in the 
target areas would be interested in 
77. 
In selection of value chains tailored for youth, HEEP will prioritise ventures that 
have low capital and skill requirements, and provide quick and high returns: short cycle 
crops such as beans, mobile processing units such as peanut butter and maputi (popcorn) 
making  machines,  mobile  solar  dryers  and  mobile  marketing  services  for  women  and 
youth14. Youth will be prioritised for projects that promote innovative (e.g. solar irrigation 
pumping, water harvesting and etc.) irrigation development for horticulture production as 
youth  like  quick-win  projects15.  Landless  youth  that  do  not  have  the  opportunity  to  use 
family  land  or  lease  surplus  land  will  be  encouraged  to  participate  as  MSME  service 
providers,  adding  value  by  providing  such  services  as  crop  protection  (spraying  service 
providers), or land preparation and cultivation (mechanized service providers). 
78. 
Access  to  matching  grants  and  youth  specific  calls:  One  of  the  biggest 
impediments to youth participation in economic activities in agricultural value chains is the 
lack of capital and financial resources. To alleviate this challenge, HEEP will provide access 
to  matching  grants  for  young  women  and  young  men  in  all  three  categories.  APGs  and 
enterprises applying for matching grants in HEEP should have a youth membership of at 
least 30 per cent. To ensure that youth are also provided opportunities in off-farm value 
chain activities, anchor firms applying for matching grants will need to demonstrate youth 
inclusion in their proposals. During short-listing, proposals that show a quota of youth that 
will get capacity building from the venture will be considered favourably. HEEP recognises 
13  Bakker  et  al.,  (2020).  Pre-Design  Report  “Climate  adaptation  and  mitigation  measures  for 
nutrition  co-benefits  in  IFAD  investments  in  Zimbabwe”.  Wageningen  Centre  for  Development 
Innovation. Wageningen, May 2020 
14 Zimbabwe COSOP (2020-2026) 
15 The experience of the Food and Agriculture Organisation in Midlands Province, documented in 
the Zimbabwe Youth Investment Case, 2016. 
27 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
that the majority of youth prefer off-farm jobs that have quicker returns and less capital 
requirements. As such, HEEP will avail youth specific calls for micro-enterprises operated 
by young women and  men to apply for matching grants for purchasing food processing 
and preservation units (e.g., mobile solar driers, juice making units, etc.) and technologies 
for  packaging  and  branding  of  value  chain  commodities,  among  others.  To  facilitate 
efficient operation youth will be assisted to register their micro-enterprises and to register 
for financial services such as eco-cash. These micro-enterprises led by youth and women 
on  food  processing  and  preservation  will  receive  training  on  food  safety  and  nutrition 
retention to ensure quality and safety of products.  
Other activities that could be promoted to attract youth participation will include: 9i\0 the inclusion 
of high and quick returns horticultural value chains; (ii) youth involvement in the development of 
market platforms; (iii) provision of transport for produce to the market, provision of marketing inputs 
and output and processing; (iv) Youth are relatively more educated and could be trained to provide 
advisory services as lead farmers for the APGs; and Internet technology will be promoted to increase 
production and make farming profitable for youth. 
79. 
Skills  transfer  and  training  of  youth:  Some  of  the  main  drivers  of  youth 
unemployment in Zimbabwe include a mismatch between skills and industry requirements; 
youth  also  lack  business,  managerial,  technical  and  leadership  skills,  which  would  be 
relevant for running SMEs. To empower young men and women to participate effectively 
in economic activities, HEEP will place a requirement for all APGs that will be funded under 
the  matching  grants  facility  to  have  a  youth  membership  of  at  least  30  per  cent.  This 
model  will  allow  for  skills  transfer  and  mentorship  of  youth.  Youth  will  be  trained  in 
business  skills  development  services  and  thereafter  provided  with  mentorship  through 
PMU,  ARDA,  anchor  firms    and  other  service  providers.  In  addition,  youth  that  are 
interested in being part of the APGs will benefit from technical assistance on business plan 
development,  climate-smart  agriculture  and  financial  literacy  and  planning,  as  well  as 
technical training related to the specific operations of the  enterprise. Additional training 
will be provided to the youth on budgeting, financial management entrepreneurial skills, 
life skills, FAAB, life skills and youth savings groups for peer to peer influence to save and 
build capital for future ventures. Youth specific calls for proposals will require that youth 
APGs  have  up  to  40  per  cent  adult  membership  for  mentorship,  skills  and  indigenous 
knowledge  transfer  to  youth.  Youth-owned  companies  will  also  be  considered  provided 
they  have  had  sufficient  experience  in  the  targeted  agri-businesses  and  demonstrable 
success. Youth are interested in horticulture crops which are high value crops, which can 
increase their earning potential. Most of the horticulture crops are not only high value, but 
they have shorter growth cycles that the staple crops. This provides an opportunity for the 
youth to make quick cash, which is a motivating factor in employment opportunities and 
decision  making.  In  addition,  horticulture  crops  can  be  grown  on  small  plots  of  lands, 
allowing  youth  easier  access  to  get  involved  and  manage  production.  Since  youth  are 
interested in digital skills, this also provides an opportunity for digital marketing platforms 
for horticultural produce. Some youth will be involved in grading, packaging, processing, 
transportation and marketing of produce. Horticulture requires less land than other crops 
and links well to the fact that youth and women lack access and ownership of land. Special 
attention  will  be  given  to  involve  women  youth  and  PWD  through  promotion  of  mobile 
training. 
80. 
Anchor  firms  will  be  encouraged  to  provide  opportunities  for  work-related 
learning  (attachment  for  tertiary  students)  for  youth  in  higher  education  to  acquire 
industry skills and to promote innovation (e.g. food technology students can innovate on 
minimum processing technologies and food preservation methods that can be done at HH 
28 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
or community level with minimum resources at the same time retain quality, safety and 
nutritional value; IT students can innovate with ICTs for improving logistics, management 
or marketing in VCs etc.). 
81. 
Creation of conditions that foster participation of young women: Gender 
disparities still exist in youth employment in Zimbabwe where young men are more likely 
to  secure  employment  compared  to  young  women.  The  WCDI  Pre-Design  Report  noted 
that youth will participate in activities that are acceptable for personal safety and health. 
Consultations  with  Harvest  Plus16 during  the  HEEP  remote  design  mission  revealed  that 
Harvest  Plus  experienced  greater  participation  among  married  young  women  who  got 
involved  in  value  chain  activities  together  with  their  spouses  compared  to  single  young 
women. This was noted as possibly arising from safety concerns for the young women by 
their families.  HEEP will explore the use of innovative ways to increase the participation 
of single young women by involving them more in women’s APGs more than mixed APGs; 
and  processing/value  addition  facilities/units  that  are  closer  to  their  homes.  Another 
reason  keeping  young  women  away  from  economic  activities  could  be  the  burden  of 
housework  and  other  unpaid  care-work.  The  GALS  methodology  will  be  applied  to 
determine and find solutions to the underlying challenges and concerns that limit young 
women’s participation in value chain activities 
82. 
Youth role models and mentorship: Many studies and development projects 
in Zimbabwe have found that very few young women and men have interest in primary 
agriculture  production17 .  Successful  youth  in  agriculture  are  a  powerful  role  model  for 
changing the face of agriculture and attracting other youth. HEEP will collaborate with the 
youth desk in the MLAFWRD to identify and profile successful youth in horticulture across 
the  target  provinces,  to  serve  as  champions  and  to  provide  mentorship  to  other  youth. 
HEEP will also explore opportunities to partner with young celebrities – such as musicians, 
actors, TV presenters – in the country to serve as ambassadors for youth in agriculture 
and to make agriculture ‘cool’ for the youth. HEEP will also explore the opportunity to have 
annual  youth  excellence  awards  at  youth  forums  to  encourage  youth  participation, 
innovation and excellence in agriculture and related value chain activities. 
83. 
Knowledge  exchange,  networking  and  experience  sharing:  Youths  lack 
knowledge  and  experience  in  running  successful  farm  and  off-farm  enterprises.  To  help 
narrow  this  gap,  HEEP  will  make  use  of  innovative  forms  of  knowledge  exchange  and 
capacity building such as youth exchange visits with other projects within the country such 
as  SIRP  and  the  Zimbabwe  Agricultural  Growth  Programme;  exchange  visits  with  other 
programmes within the Southern Africa Region, field days at farms or processing facilities 
run  by  successful  youth,  youth  exhibitions,  international  Youth  Days  and  networking 
events at the Zimbabwe Agricultural Show; youth networking page on the project website 
and  utilisation  of  social  media  platforms  such  as  Facebook,  WhatsApp  for  creating 
communities of practice and youth knowledge-sharing platforms. The Zimbabwe Farmers 
Union’s  Young  Farmers  Clubs  will  also  be  important  for  networking  and  peer  to  peer 
knowledge exchange for HEEP young farmers. 
16 Harvest Plus has experienced success with youth inclusion in its iron bean value chain. 
17  https://www.unicef.org/esa/sites/unicef.org.esa/files/2019-04/Investment-Case-for-Youth-in-
Zimbabwe-%282016%29.pdf  
29 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
84. 
Fostering  youth  innovation  and  capturing  the  voice  of  the  youth:  The 
WCDI  Predesign  report  noted  that  there  is  currently  low  youth  participation  in  rural 
governance  and  community  decision  making  with  youth  often  excluded  from  planning 
processes. Successful youth inclusion in HEEP will encompass not only youth participation 
in value-chain activities but also the active participation of young women and young men 
in planning processes, governing bodies, and decision-making positions in APGs and other 
value chain processes. It is important that the voice of the youth be heard in both local 
value-chain processes and informing policy. Innovations for capturing the voice of young 
men and women in HEEP will include, workshops; use of the GALS methodology to give 
young women and men a platform to identify the challenges that limit their participation 
and draw solutions; and community theatre to address  sensitive issues and to promote 
community social behaviour change with the aim to stimulate greater active participation 
of youth. Youth will also be invited to policy dialogue platforms and given an opportunity 
to engage in policy discourses concerning agriculture, food and nutrition security and rural 
development  policy  issues.  Policy  dialogue  platforms  such  as  the  FNC  platforms  will  be 
leveraged for these purpose 
85. 
following organisations.  
Partnerships  for  strengthening  youth  inclusion  in  HEEP  will  include  the 
a.  The  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  has  relevant  experience  in  targeted 
interventions (focus on women and youth) and models of small scale agro-processing 
and post-harvest that could benefit smallholder farmers in reducing food wastage and 
post-harvest  losses.  HEEP  will  collaborate  with  ILO  on  issues  of  youth  knowledge 
sharing and capacity building. 
b.  The  Youth  Desk  in  the  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water,  Climate  and  Rural 
Settlements is currently implementing the National Young Champion Farmer Program 
to develop a database of young farmers in the 10 Provinces of the country. HEEP will 
collaborate  with  the  Youth  Desk  for  the  identification  of  youth  in  horticulture, 
innovation, irrigation and mechanisation, farm infrastructures and ICT. 
c.  Ministry of Youth, Sports and Recreation (MYSR) is responsible for policy on youth and 
empowerment. HEEP will collaborate with the MYSR on issues of youth empowerment.  
d.  Youth Development and Employment Department is responsible for youth employment 
and  will  be  an  important  partner  for  the  HEEP  which  seeks  to  create  employment 
opportunities for the youth; and promote gender equality and equity among the youth, 
in  particular,  in  education  and  training,  socio-cultural,  political,  economic  and  legal 
spheres. HEEP takes into account these five priorities in its youth inclusion strategies.  
Strategies for Inclusion of People with Disabilities  
86. 
About 2000 beneficiaries will consists of PWD. The PWD is an important segment 
of  the  population  but  a  new  target  group  for  IFAD  in  Zimbabwe  as  the  IFAD  country 
programme has not targeted them directly or even indirectly in the previous or ongoing 
projects. The project will work with traditional leaders, PWD  organisations and  religious 
organisations to identify more precisely the target group, to understand their specific need 
and define opportunities to engage them. The engagement process will involve outreach 
30 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
to  inform  people  about  HEEP  and  what  it  offers  and  to  call  for  their  participation,  to 
identification  and  registration  processes  and  needs  assessments  and  to  the  selection  to 
verify  people’  eligibility.  The  targeting  mechanism  could  involve  community  targeting 
including  identification  of  households  with  disabled  members  in  partnerships  with 
organisations for people with disabilities, schools, religious and traditional leaders. Lessons 
learned  will  be  captured  to  assess  both  successes  and  difficulties  and  to  sharpen  the 
strategy as deemed necessary. During implementation HEEP may also try to engage with 
IFAD funded projects in neighbour countries with experiences  with the PWDs and share 
experiences.  
6.  STRATEGIES FOR NUTRITION MAINSTREAMING IN HEEP 
Approaches to Improved Nutrition and Food Security: HEEP is expected to 
87. 
increase marketed agricultural output and improve the target households’ income levels. 
In principle, the increase in income could lead to dietary improvements in the household 
by enabling the purchase of more nutritious and diverse foods, as well as improving access 
to healthcare, better water and sanitation, and better education. However, this link is not 
automatic.  Evidence  shows  that  there  are  a  number  of  factors,  especially  low  nutrition 
awareness and women’s social status that can prevent increases in income from leading 
to  improvements  in  nutrition.  Therefore,  to  ensure  that  an  increase  in  income  leads  to 
improvements  in  nutrition,  HEEP  will  mainstream  three  specific  nutrition  related 
approaches into the value chain activities aimed at increasing both availability and demand 
for diversified and nutritious food. 
The  first  approach  builds  on  increased  income  to  be  associated  with  nutrition 
88. 
education and Social and Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) activities, which will 
boost the demand side by stimulating the consumption of more nutritious foods. Specific 
activities are elaborated hereunder. 
89. 
Nutrition  education  and  SBCC:  HEEP  will  stimulate  the  demand  and 
consumption of nutritious foods through targeted nutrition education and SBCC aimed at 
positively changing social behaviours among beneficiaries of the project. Component 1 will 
provide annual training on nutrition and its application in nutrition-sensitive value chains 
(NSVCs) to the HEEP beneficiaries. Considering that HEEP is  a value chain development 
project,  nutrition  education  will  also  raise  awareness  on  the  net  benefit  of  consuming 
rather than only selling the nutritious foods18. Nutrition education and SBCC will be tailored 
made for different value chain actors, including beneficiaries of Component 1 (VHG) and 
Component 2 (MSMEs).  
90. 
In 2006, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), in 
close  collaboration  with  the  Food  and  Nutrition  Council  (FNC),  the  Nutrition  Unit  in  the 
18 IFAD (2019). Mainstreaming Nutrition in IFAD Action Plan 2019-2025. 
31 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Ministry of Health and Childcare (MoHCC) and Agritex in the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, 
Water, Climate and Rural Resettlement, developed the Healthy Harvest Training Manual as 
a  tool  for  training  community-based  extension  workers  in  good  nutrition,  including 
growing, preparing and processing of nutritious food. The manual has been used since its 
publication,  to  train  hundreds  of  governments  and  NGO  extension  workers  to  deliver 
nutrition  messaging  to  farmers19.  HEEP  will  explore  partnership  with  Agritex  which  has 
well-developed  and  extensive  extension  system  in  the  target  districts,  which  could  be 
capacitated to integrate nutrition education into the sub-project activities of beneficiaries 
while  promoting  wider  similar  effects  to  non-beneficiaries.  Also,  the  MoHCC,  Agritex, 
UNICEF and other UN agencies and NGOs in Zimbabwe currently make use of the MoHCC’s 
care-group  model  for  holistic  impact  and  to  deliver  production,  nutrition  and  WASH 
messaging to communities, with one voice.  HEEP will converge with these actors in the 
HEEP target districts for coordinated delivery of extension and nutrition education.  
The second approach focuses on the supply side and aims at making the selected 
91. 
value  chains  nutrition  sensitive,  by  ensuring  that  investments  in  crops/animal  sourced 
foods have a nutrition value in addition to being market and cash oriented. On the supply 
side,  increased  market  availability  of  nutritious  food  will  also  be  associated  with 
community-based interventions to promote household food production and diversification 
(integrated  horticulture  gardens,  small  livestock,  forestry  products  for  household 
consumption, etc.). Below are the detailed specific activities. 
Selection  of  value-chain  commodities  with  high  nutritional  impact: 
92. 
Because the selection of the value chain commodities will to a large extent determine the 
project’s success on climate and nutrition-related outcomes, the Pre-design Study Report 
produced  by  the  Wageningen  Centre  for  Development  Innovation  (WCDI)  identifies 
commercially  viable  commodities  that  are  recommended  to  co-benefit  climate  and 
nutrition  while  also  enabling  youth,  gender,  and  environmental  considerations  to  be 
addressed through the selected value-chains. The HEEP project will make use of the matrix 
to  guide  value-chain  commodity  selection  as  well  as  evaluation  of  matching  grant 
proposals to be funded in Component 1. The value chain analysis that will be conducted in 
Component  1  will  identify  the  constraints  in  the  selected  value  chains  that  could  be 
addressed  by  the  project  to  make  them  nutrition-sensitive  while  increasing  household 
incomes,  improve  livelihoods  and  contribute  to  nutrition  outcomes.  For  APGs,  Climate-
Smart Productivity Enhancement Technical Assistance including e-extension solutions will 
be  systematically  delivered  to  the  established  APGs  and,  among  the  topics  that  will  be 
covered, will be best practices for crop selection, variety selection and nutrition-sensitive 
value-chains. 
19  https://www.g-fras.org/en/world-wide-extension-study/216-nutrition-for-ras-library/training-
resources/1004-healthy-harvest.html 
32 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
93. 
Adoption  of  biofortified/improved  crops  can  increase  the  diversity  and 
nutritional  value  of  production20 .  In  its  selected  value-chains,  among  its  beneficiaries, 
HEEP  will  promote  the  adoption  of  drought-tolerant  and  heat-resilient  and  bio-fortified 
varieties  as  well  as  improved  livestock  breeds.  During  the  HEEP  remote  design  mission 
consultations,  Harvest  Plus indicated  keen  interest  to  partner  with  HEEP  and  to  expand 
into HEEP target districts to increase production, processing and utilization of commercially 
viable nutrient-rich biofortified staple varieties  – such as vitamin A and zinc rich maize, 
iron  pearl  millet,  vitamin  A  sweet  potato  and  iron  beans  –  and  other  nutrient-rich 
commodities21. The benefits that Harvest Plus would bring to HEEP target areas include 
development  of  district-level  farmer-led  seed/vine  multiplication  centres  for  supply  of 
biofortified seeds or vines to other local farmers, specially their integration into VHG. HEEP 
will explore partnership with Harvest Plus for training on food preparation and processing 
for  nutrient  preservation  and  for  increasing  utilization  of  diverse  nutrient  dense  and 
biofortified foods. 
94. 
Post-harvest  loss  management:  Poor  post-harvest  management  leads  to 
high levels of food loss and waste as well as nutrient losses. Making value-chains more 
efficient helps to reduce losses and waste of particularly nutritious food, increases market 
availability  of  nutritious  food  and  increases  producers’  incomes.  HEEP  will  therefore 
minimize food and nutrient loss and waste in its value chains as recommended in the WCDI 
Pre-design  report.  Under  Category  1  of  Component  1  matching  grants,  APGs  and  their 
members can apply for finance to invest in, among other areas, technologies that reduce 
pre- and post-harvest food losses and waste. Examples include bird scaring technologies 
to reduce pre-harvest loss of small grains, grain dryers that reduce the moisture content 
of maize to avoid aflatoxins and metal silos that minimize loss due to rodents, pests, water 
etc,  including  improved  storage  facilities.  APGs  and  micro-enterprises  can  apply  for 
matching  grants  to  invest  in  cold  storage  facilities  and  or  processing  and  preservation 
equipment that reduce loss due to spoilage of highly perishable agricultural commodities. 
Additionally,  in  Component  1  Climate  Smart  Productivity  Enhancement,  HEEP  will 
systematically  deliver  agricultural  technical  assistance  and  e-extension  to  established 
APGs and topics will also include effective management of food loss and waste, including 
importance of retaining quality and nutritional value of foods. 
95. 
Improving market availability of nutritious foods: It is envisaged that HEEP 
will improve market availability of nutritious foods through Component 1 and Component 2 
investments  that  are  aimed  at  increasing  production  and  marketing  of  nutritious  foods. 
Investments that will increase production  of nutritious food include the improvement  of 
irrigation  water  supply  under  Component  2  and  provision  of  CSA  technical  assistance; 
matching  grants  for  APGs  to  improve  their  production  and  productivity;  and  matching 
grants  criteria  for  selection  of  proposals  that  demonstrate  nutritional  impact  under 
Component  1.  Investments  that  will  increase  marketing  of  nutritious  foods  include  the 
construction/rehabilitation of local level feeder roads under Component 2 to promote both 
production and marketing of large quantities of quality produce and reduce the time and 
https://www.agtalks.org/documents/38714170/40237450/Scaling+up+note+on+nutrition-
20 
sensitive+agriculture+and+rural+development/b0b49ae7-fc72-4967-9a60-d591ceb9e6af 
21 HEEP remote design mission consultations (2020). 
33 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
cost of transport to the markets. This will also contribute to the reduction of food waste 
due to spoilage. 
96. 
Community-based interventions to promote household food production 
and consumption will include the promotion of nutrition gardens, small livestock with a 
short-production cycle and the sustainable harvesting and consumption of forest products 
such as wild fruits and edible insects (particularly in Matabeleland North and Mashonaland 
central  where  these  are  commonly  consumed).  It  is  hoped  that  HEEP  will  benefit  from 
ASAP+  or  the  Green  Climate  Fund  resources,  should  that  be  successful  HEEP  would 
consider  providing  its  beneficiaries  with  starter  kits  for  development  or  revitalisation  of 
nutrition gardens. Nutrition gardens would be supported by Component 2 investments to 
improve village-level water supply systems for year-round access to safe water for multi-
purpose  use  such  as  domestic,  gardening  and livestock  use.  In  addition,  the  household 
gardens will also be linked to Village Horticulture  Garden Mobilization and Development 
sub-component  1.1.,  that  will  supply  fruit  tree  nurseries  and  vegetable  seeds  to  the 
households for encouraging their production diversification at household levels. Activities 
related to nutrition education and SBCC will also include households and encourage the 
production and consumption of nutritious foods. 
97. 
Workshops  for  value  chain  stakeholders  on  nutrition  issues:  Nutrition 
education in HEEP will not only be limited to APGs, but will also be provided to other value-
chain  stakeholders  through  workshops  where  issues  of  NSVCs  will  be  deliberated.  The 
workshops will provide an opportunity to raise nutrition awareness among all actors in the 
food value chains including processors, handlers, transporters, retailers and consumers. 
In these workshops, the value-chain actors will have an opportunity to identify nutrition 
mainstreaming opportunities along the supported value chains and to proactively establish 
appropriate  solutions  for  any  challenges  identified.  This  will  also  benefit  the  market 
availability of nutritious foods. 
98. 
The  third  approach  relates  to  women’s  empowerment  in  ways  that  improve 
nutrition.  This  consists  of  different  interrelated  components,  such  as  women's  use  of 
income for food and non-food expenditures, the ability of women to care for themselves 
and their families, and women's energy expenditure. Specific activities will include: 
99. 
Investment  in  technologies  that  reduce  women’s  time  and  energy-
demands:  Some  of  the  constraints  faced  by  rural  women  include  heavy  workload  and 
limited  access  to  clean  energy.  Women  are  more  commonly  associated  with  on-farm 
processes that have high labour, time and energy demands, thereby reducing time for self- 
and  childcare.  Under  the  Component  1  matching  grants,  beneficiaries  can  apply  to  be 
funded for labour-saving on-farm and primary processing technologies such as tractors, 
no-till planters, threshers, dehullers, shellers and grain cleaning technologies. These would 
greatly reduce time and energy spent by women doing on-farm work. Also, women often 
have to travel long distances to source water and fuel (e.g. fire wood) for household use. 
Under Component 2 (Climate Proofed Infrastructure Investments), HEEP will also invest in 
public  infrastructure  such  as  small  water  and  energy  projects  (e.g.  solar-powered 
boreholes) to support crop and livestock production for the targeted value-chains. Under 
Matching grants, women can also apply for energy and  labour-saving improved cooking 
stoves  in  addition  to  small  scale  food  processing  equipment  (milling,  pound  erring  and 
etc.)  that  can  reduce  time  for  cooking/preparing  meals  for  families,  including  time  for 
gathering fire woods. These will bring safe  water sources  closer to households, thereby 
reducing the time that women travel to get potable water for household use. Furthermore, 
to  minimize  the  HEEP  VC,  gender  and  nutrition  training  time  demands  on  women,  all 
34 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
training  will  be  carried  out  close  to  their  homes,  and  the  trainings  will  be  scheduled  to 
avoid coinciding with meal preparation times and busy times in the agricultural calendar. 
In  addition,  alternative  childcare  arrangements  will  be  made  for  women  with  young 
children so that they can attend training with minimal distraction. 
100. 
Women's  use  of  income  for  food  and  other  nutrition  and  health-related 
expenditures.  HEEP  will  accompany  income  generation  activities  with  strategies  to 
empower women and men so that household decisions on use of income may contribute 
to  nutrition.  In  Component 1,  training  shall  also  include  household  budgeting  to  benefit 
women’s decision making on use of income for food and non-food expenditures. HEEP will 
make use of GALS methodology to encourage joint decision making on use of household 
income. Research has shown that income that is controlled by women in more associated 
with higher household food expenditure and nutrient intake than income controlled by men 
(Thomas,  1997)22.  HEEP  shall  empower  women  through  BDS  activities  in  Component  1 
and  also  make  use  of  innovative  strategies  that  will  be  identified  though  the  GALS 
methodology to increase women’s participation in higher income activities along the value 
chains  in  order  to  increase  the  amount  of  income  reaching  women’s  hands.  The  HEEP 
targeting strategy also makes provisions for women to account for a minimum of 50 per 
cent  of  all  project  beneficiaries.  This  will  increase  women’s  income  for  nutrition-related 
needs (such as purchase of nutritious foods, seeking health care, children’s education) and 
other household expenditure. 
Increasing women’s ability to care for themselves and their families. As 
101. 
women frequently bear the responsibility of childcare and other unpaid household work, it 
is important to encourage fathers and other household members to share the burden of 
childcare, feeding their families and other household work to enable women to have more 
time to care for themselves and their families. Reconfiguring gender roles and household 
responsibility can be a sensitive topic that requires to be handled carefully. As such HEEP 
will make use of the GALS methodology to enable beneficiaries – men and women together 
– to reconstruct household norms on distribution of  childcare, preparing meals,  feeding 
family and other household responsibilities. HEEP will also employ community theatre, a 
tool  proven  to  be  effective  in  generating  dialogue  on  sensitive  issues  in  a  manner  that 
invigorates spectators to take action that brings about the desired change at household 
and community levels. Community theatre will allow the target group, particularly women 
to freely and openly talk about the challenges they are facing in a non-threatening and 
non-intimidating manner23 
102. 
More  details  on  the  women’s  empowerment  activities  that  will  co-benefit 
nutrition are provided above in this PIM in sections about gender mainstreaming in HEEP. 
A growing body of evidence indicates that access to safe drinking-water, sanitation, and 
22  Thomas,  1997. “Incomes, Expenditures and  Health  Outcomes: Evidence  on  Intra-Household 
Resource  Allocation’,  in  L.  Haddad,  ed.,  Intra-household  Resource  Allocation  in  Developing 
Countries, Models, Methods and Policy, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins university Press. 
23 http://www.ngopulse.org/article/theatre-development  
35 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
hygiene  (WASH)  services  has  an  important  positive  impact  on  nutrition 24 .  Poor  rural 
households  in  Zimbabwe  have  disproportionately  less  access  to  potable  water  and 
sanitation  facilities.  One  fifth  of  households  in  Matabeleland  North  spend  more  than  30 
minutes to fetch water. Matabeleland North has the highest levels of open defecation (more 
than 50 per cent in all its districts), with Binga district having up to 74.3 per cent25. Limited 
access to safe water affects particularly women, as they have to walk long distances to 
fetch  water.  A  large  proportion  of  women  (33  per  cent)  also  experience  challenges 
accessing health facilities due to distance with the highest being in Mashonaland Central 
(49.1 per cent)26. According to the IFAD Upscaling Note on Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture 
and  Rural  Development,  WASH  interventions  are  particularly  important  because 
“consistently unsafe water and unhygienic conditions can lead to repeated bouts of illness 
that  can  affect  the  individual’s  need  for  and  ability  to  benefit  from  food  and  results  in 
chronic undernutrition”. HEEP will address WASH through a combination of Component 2 
investments and strong SBCC and nutrition education. 
103. 
The sub component 1.4 participatory planning processes involving both women 
and  men  beneficiaries  for  the  identification  of  HEEP-supported  cluster  infrastructure 
investments  will  present  an  opportunity  for  beneficiaries  to  consider  potable  water  and 
sanitation infrastructure. This will improve domestic water supply (solar powered protected 
wells/boreholes and springs) and sanitation facilities in wards in the target areas. This will 
increase access to safe drinking water and sanitation in the target communities. To support 
decision making on WASH infrastructure and to promote better WASH practices, HEEP will 
pursue partnership with the MoHCC, UNICEF as well as other development partners who 
are  involved  in  WASH  promotion  and  ending  open  defecation  to  support  HEEP  project 
beneficiaries with WASH messaging and related services. 
COVID-19  mitigation:  The  impacts  of  the  Covid-19  pandemic  have  been 
104. 
experienced  on  a  global  level  and  it  is  not  yet  known  how  extreme  the  ultimate 
consequences will be particularly for developing countries such as Zimbabwe, that have 
high malnutrition, poor  food security, poor  WASH, and a poor health system.  The HEEP 
design provides for potential mitigation and recovery from COVID-19 related shocks in the 
following  ways:  increasing  safe  community-level  water  sources  for  household  use  and 
sanitation (Component  2); improving production, productivity and market  availability of 
nutritious  foods  (Component  1)  for  improved  nutrition  and  health;  and  localised  value-
chain  development  and  cluster  approach  which  decreases  the  need  to  travel  between 
provinces.  HEEP  will  assess  the  COVID-19  situation  during implementation  and  develop 
appropriate adaptation measures to ensure the continued effective functioning of the value 
chains/clusters.  To  ensure  continued  support  to  the  APGs,  HEEP  will  make  use  of  e-
extension  and  mobile  software  applications  such  as  the  Kurima  Mari  app  in  Zimbabwe, 
which is designed to address challenges associated with mobility restrictions and maintain 
social  distancing  rules  by  eliminating  the  need  for  physical  interaction  and  allowing  for 
24  Bakker  et  al.,  (2020).  Pre-Design  Report  “Climate  adaptation  and  mitigation  measures  for 
nutrition  co-benefits  in  IFAD  investments  in  Zimbabwe”.  Wageningen  Centre  for  Development 
Innovation. Wageningen, May 2020 
25 ZIMVAC (2019). Rural livelihoods assessment report. 
26 Zimbabwe Demographic Health Survey of 2015 
36 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
knowledge transfer through a safe digital channel. The project will also support extension 
workers where possible with resources for mobility (motorbikes and fuels, where feasible) 
to  increase  farmers’  access  to  one-on-one  extension  services,  that  promote  social 
distancing, instead of group extension. 
105. 
TA  for  research  to  support  nutrition  mainstreaming  in  HEEP:  HEEP 
benefited  from  the  multi-country  grant  funded  under  ASAP  2  (The  Adaptation  for 
Smallholder Agriculture Programme, Phase II), entitled “Technical support in climate and 
nutrition linkages in IFAD’s investments”, implemented in collaboration with Wageningen 
Centre  for  Development  Innovation  (WCDI).  The  grant  aims  at  increasing  nutrition  co-
benefits  for  poor  smallholder  farmers  and  their  families  while  strengthening  IFAD’s 
capacity of addressing the bidirectional relationships between climate and nutrition in IFAD 
project  design.  A  Pre-design  Report  “Climate  adaptation  and  mitigation  measures  for 
nutrition  co-benefits  in  IFAD  investments  in  Zimbabwe”  was  produced  in  May  2020  to 
inform the best ways to strengthen the integration of nutrition as well as gender equality 
aspects into CSA and productivity enhancement actions of HEEP. The identified activities 
have been included in the detailed description of activities above and some of them will be 
implemented by HEEP either through ASAP+ or Green Climate Fund Grant Resources, to 
be requested at a later stage. 
106. 
Coordination  for  nutrition  impact:  Linking  with  country  level  nutrition 
coordination  bodies  is  important  for  lesson  learning,  knowledge  exchange  and  policy 
dialogue. Important coordination platforms that HEEP will link with include the Scaling-Up 
Nutrition,  a  global  platform  which  also  has  national  structures  for  sharing  experiences 
between countries and network partners through its thematic country meetings, regional 
workshops and Annual Global Gatherings. The Food and Nutrition Council (FNC) is the lead 
agency responsible for the multisectoral coordination, of a cohesive national response and 
national dialogue on food and nutrition security in Zimbabwe between the government and 
development partners and is a critical partner for HEEP country level policy engagement 
on issues of nutrition. The Food and Nutrition Security Committees (FNSC) are institutional 
structures for coordinated multi-sectoral implementation of the Food and Nutrition Security 
Policy and programmes, at all administrative levels from the national to the  ward level. 
HEEP will partner with the FNSCs particularly for lesson learning, knowledge exchange and 
capturing the voices of the communities for food and nutrition security country-level policy 
engagement. 
107. 
Strategic partnerships: HEEP recognises that it does not have the breadth and 
resources  to  minimize  every  contributor  to  malnutrition  in  the  target  area.  Hence 
partnerships and coordination with other UN agencies,  Government departments,  NGOs 
and other relevant institutions will be important for effective implementation of nutrition 
mainstreaming  strategies  in  HEEP.  HEEP  will  explore  partnerships  with  the  following 
organisations, as well as others that will be identified during implementation: 
i.  Agritex  a  department  in  the  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water, 
Climate and Rural Development (MLAFWRD) has specialist branches, provincial and 
district  offices  that  provide  technical  and  advisory  services,  regulatory  services, 
farmer  training,  food  technology  (including  post-harvest  processing  and  product 
development)  dissemination  of  technologies  and  provide  market-oriented 
extension  for  sustainable  farming.  Currently  Agritex  is  rolling-out  country-wide 
training  of  its  extension  staff  on  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture.  It  would  be  a 
strategic  partner  for  the  delivery  of  nutrition  education  at  ward-level  and  for 
providing extension support to the smallholder farmers.  
37 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
ii. 
The  Ministry  of  Health  and  Child  Care  (MoHCC)  adopts  essential  nutrition 
actions  for  improving  maternal,  new-born,  infant  and  young  child  nutrition  and 
health at health facility and community levels. Partnership with the MoHCC will be 
important  for  ensuring  better  access  of  the  HEEP  target  group  to  healthcare 
services  as  well  for  delivery  of  nutrition  education,  and  for  delivery  of  health 
services for those suffering from HIV and AIDS. 
iii.  Harvest  Plus  promotes  rural  nutrition  through  increased  production  and 
consumption  of  bio-fortified  crops.  During  the  HEEP  remote  design  mission 
consultations,  Harvest  Plus  indicated  keen  interest  to  partner  with  HEEP  and  to 
expand into HEEP target districts to increase production, processing and utilization 
of commercially viable nutrient-rich biofortified staple varieties – such as vitamin A 
and zinc maize, iron pearl millet, vitamin A sweet potato and iron beans – and other 
nutrient-rich  commodities.  The  benefits  that  Harvest  Plus  would  bring  to  HEEP 
farmer-led  seed/vine 
target  areas 
multiplication centres for supply of biofortified seeds or vines to other local farmers. 
Harvest Plus also provides training on food preparation and processing for nutrient 
preservation and for increasing utilization of nutrient dense biofortified foods.  
include  development  of  district-level 
iv. 
The Zimbabwe Agricultural Growth Programme (ZAGP) is an EU-supported 
programme  focusing  on  livestock  value  chains  in  all  10  provinces  of  Zimbabwe. 
Partnership  with  ZAGP  will  be  important  for  increasing  access  to  small  livestock 
which is important for the livelihoods of women and for increased access to animal 
source protein. ZAGP is developing an Agricultural Extension Training App that will 
be  used  by  extension  staff  for  on-the-job  training.  HEEP  can  add  content  on 
nutrition and other topics to the trainings once up and running. 
v.  UNICEF in Zimbabwe works to improve water and sanitation services as well as 
basic hygiene practices. It is currently leading the initiative to end open defecation 
in Zimbabwe by 2030. It works in 45 districts and would be a strategic partner for 
the delivery of WASH interventions in the HEEP project target districts.  
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
The  International  Crops  Research  Institute  for  the  Semi-Arid  Tropics 
(ICRISAT)  a  CGIAR  organization  that  conducts  agricultural  research  for 
development in the drylands, focusing on crop and livestock production of relevance 
to smallholders. ICRISAT would be a strategic partner for the supply of seeds for 
iron-rich millet and other small-grains that are of nutritional importance in the HEEP 
project.  These  seeds  will  also  be  of  cultivars  that  are  drought-  and  heat-stress 
tolerant. 
Econet  Wireless  has  a  subsidiary,  ECOSURE  that  has  a  new  facility  to  enable 
small-scale farmers to access cold-chain facilities for enhanced market access and 
high-value  crop  production.  Access  to  such  cold-chain  facilities  by  HEEP’s 
horticulture  value-chains  has  potential  to  reduce  post-harvest  food  loss  from 
spoilage. 
International Labour Organization (ILO) has relevant experience in targeted 
interventions  (focus  on  women  and  youth)  and  models  of  small  scale  agro-
processing and post-harvest that could benefit smallholder farmers in reducing food 
waste and post-harvest losses.  
38 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
108. 
Nutrition Mainstreaming Knowledge Management (KM): HEEP will employ 
KM tools in promoting sharing of nutrition mainstreaming lessons learnt, innovation and 
good practices within the project, at national level as well as with other countries in the 
region and globally. For this purpose, HEEP will collaborate with WCDI to conduct research 
related to nutrition mainstreaming in HEEP. This will generate evidence on what works in 
improving  nutrition  outcomes  through  NSVCs  in  a  unique  situation  such  as  Zimbabwe 
where food prices are ever increasing. There is competition from cheaper imported goods 
and HH already spend about 70 per cent of their income on food but are still malnourished 
and food insecure. Findings will be published and will help to inform implementation, policy 
engagement as well as scaling up. The collaboration with WCDI will also provide an added 
benefit  of  building  the  capacity  of  project  implementers  to  deliver  better  on  nutrition 
mainstreaming in HEEP.  
109. 
HEEP will conduct field technical workshops and exchange visits with other IFAD 
co-funded projects such as the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP) in 
Zimbabwe and the Smallholder Market-Led Project (SMLP) in Eswatini. These will promote 
sharing  of  lessons  learnt  and  knowledge  exchange  on  nutrition  within  the  Zimbabwe 
country programme and other country programmes in the IFAD portfolio. 
110. 
HEEP  will  develop  a  system  for  consistent  capturing  of  stories  from  the  field 
including  engaging  a  journalist  to  capture  written,  video  and  picture  stories  from  HEEP 
beneficiaries and other innovative tools such as community theatre for capturing the voices 
of beneficiaries (particularly women) for the purposes of country level policy engagement 
to inform nutrition mainstreaming considerations in policy and programmes. HEEP will link 
with the FNSCs to utilise their policy dialogue platforms at district, provincial and national 
levels.  Additionally,  HEEP  will  produce  how-to-do  manuals  on  successful  nutrition 
mainstreaming innovations  from  implementation;  as  well  as  document  and  disseminate 
good practices in nutrition mainstreaming for out-scaling.  
111. 
Monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E):  HEEP  recognises  the  importance  of 
making use of IFAD’s Core Outcome Indicators on nutrition in generation of evidence on 
nutrition  mainstreaming.  HEEP  will  therefore  include  the  following  core  outcome  and 
output indicators in its logical framework: 
  Output level: Number of households provided with targeted support to improve 
their nutrition  
  Outcome  level:  Number  of  Households  with  improved  nutrition  Knowledge 
Attitudes and Practices  (KAP). HEEP will also conduct a nutrition baseline survey 
before any value-chain activities commence to identify the status of food security, 
food consumption patterns, status of malnutrition, childcare practices and WASH in 
the target areas for informing selection of value-chain commodities and nutrition-
sensitive interventions that are contextualized to the target areas, and importantly, 
to provide baseline values for the selected set of nutrition indicators. HEEP will also 
make  use  of  the  IFAD’s  empowerment  indicator  based  on  project-level  Women’s 
Empowerment in Agriculture Index (pro-WEAI) tool to measure HEEP beneficiaries’ 
empowerment in three domains27: decisions about agricultural production; access 
27 https://weai.ifpri.info/versions/pro-weai/  
39 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
to  and  decision-making  power  about  productive  resources;  control  of  use  of 
income; and leadership in the community and time allocation, which also have an 
impact on household nutritional outcomes and women’s dietary diversity. 
112. 
with an associated logical framework.  
Nutrition mainstreaming strategy. HEEP will also develop a nutrition strategy 
113. 
Implementation  arrangements.  Nutrition  mainstreaming  activities  will  be 
financed under Components 1 and 2. Agritex will be the main implementing partner which 
will provide the important interface with beneficiaries for provision of nutrition education. 
A  Social  inclusion  and  Nutrition  specialist  will  be  recruited  at  the  HEEP  National  PMU 
supported by Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officers at the Provincial PMU. 
40 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
7. 
Appendix 1: Targeting Checklist  
Targeting checklist 
Design 
1. Does the main target group – those expected to 
benefit most – correspond to IFAD’s target group as 
defined by the Targeting Policy (poorer households 
and food-insecure)? 
Yes, HEEP will target the poor smallholder farmers in the rural 
areas  where  rural  poverty  is  most  prevalent  and  farmers 
experience  food  and  nutrition  insecurity  due  to  recurring 
droughts.  
2.  Have  target  sub-groups  been  identified  and 
described  according 
their  different  socio-
economic  characteristics,  assets  and  livelihoods  – 
with  attention  to  gender  and  youth  differences 
(matrix on target group characteristics completed)? 
to 
Yes,  target  sub  groups  are  identified  and  include  poor 
smallholder  farmers  classified  into  poverty  groups  -Category 
A, B1, B2 and C, including youth and women. The matrix on 
target group characteristics has been completed.  
3.  Is  evidence  provided  of  interest  in  and  likely 
uptake  of  the  proposed  activities  by  the  identified 
target sub-groups? What is the evidence (matrix on 
analysis of programme components and activities by 
principal beneficiary groups completed)? 
4. Does the design document describe a feasible and 
operational  targeting  strategy  in  line  with  the 
Targeting  Policy,  involving  some  or  all  of  the 
following measures and methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on poverty data 
or  proxy  indicators  to  identify,  for  area-based 
projects  or  programmes,  geographic  areas  (and 
within these, communities) with high concentration 
of poor people; 
4.2 Direct targeting – when services or resources 
are  to  be  channelled  to  specific  individuals  or 
households; 
4.3  Self-targeting  –  when  good  and  services 
respond to the priority needs, resource endowments 
and livelihood strategies of target groups; 
Yes,  the  interventions  are  a  solution  to  the  analysis  of  the 
challenges  faced  and  hence  the  farmers  are  most  likely  to 
adapt to the activities.  
Yes,  the  design  describes  a  multi-pronged  and  inclusive 
targeting strategy.  
Yes, HEEP targets all rural provinces of Zimbabwe where there 
is a high concentration of the rural poor, in particular women 
and  youths,  and  where  there  is  climate  vulnerability.  The 
project will  be  implemented  in  20 districts with  high  poverty 
prevalence,  potential  for  smallholder  commercialisation  and 
value chain development and potential for private sector value 
chain development for VHG. However, the 4P interventions will 
be  nationwide  with  a  special  focus  in  the  Mashonaland  and 
Manicaland provinces with high horticulture potential. 
At  least  50  per  cent  of  total  beneficiaries  should  be  female-
headed  households  and  another  30  per  cent  unemployed 
underemployed youth  (young  men  and  young  women).  Poor 
smallholder  farmers  will  be  identified  through  a  call  for 
proposals  in  the  agricultural  producer  groups.  However,  for 
eligibility,  the  APG/VHG  should  have  the  majority  of  poor 
farmers.  
HEEP  provides  an  opportunity  for  the  participation  of  poor 
farmers,  in  particular  women,  youths  in  VHGs,  APGs  and 
microenterprises. The greatest amount of the matching grant 
is in APGs. The matching grant contribution is low enough for 
the  farmers  to  afford  and  in-kind  contribution  is  also 
considered.  This  ensures  that  the  services  respond  to  the 
needs,  endowments  and  livelihood  strategies  of  the  target 
group. The promotion of group approaches is not attractive to 
wealthier groups. 
41 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
– 
Empowering  measures 
4.4 
including 
information  and  communication,  focused  capacity- 
and  confidence-building  measures,  organizational 
support,  in  order  to  empower  and  encourage  the 
more  active  participation  and  inclusion  in  planning 
and  decision-making  of  people  who  traditionally 
have less voice and power; 
strengthen 
4.5  Enabling  measures  – 
stakeholders’ 
and 
partners’ 
commitment  to  poverty  targeting,  gender  equality 
and  women’s  empowerment, 
including  policy 
dialogue, awareness-raising and capacity-building; 
to 
attitude 
and 
GALS  will  be  used  to  address  the  underlying  root  causes  for 
gender  inequality.  HEEP  will  raise  gender  awareness  at 
community level. Community based targeting will be used to 
identify  the  poor. In  addition,  community-based  consultation 
will  be  used  for  the development  of  infrastructure.  HEEP will 
strengthen  groups 
financial 
management  training.  In  addition,  GALS  will  strengthen 
women,  men  and youth  in  leadership  as  well  as  reduce  GBV 
and  workloads  due  to  equitable  labour  balance.  HEEP  will 
disseminate information about the project in order to increase 
transparency.  
through  BDS,  CSA,  and 
Capacity  building  and  support  for  APGs  in  terms  of  building 
their capacity in CSA technologies, BDS and financial literacy. 
HEEP  will  carry  gender  sensitive  training  and  provide 
facilitators.  The project will also sensitise project staff and use 
including  several 
participatory  methodologies 
awareness raising and policy dialogues are envisaged.  
for  M&E, 
4.6  Attention  to  procedural  measures  –  that 
could militate against participation by the intended 
target groups; 
The project will liaise with the Ministry responsible for SMSE to 
ensure  that  the  APGs  are  registered  at  local  level.  Legal 
registration will not be a requirement for the groups. Groups 
will be provided with technical assistance to develop proposals, 
engage with different activities   
4.7  Operational  measures  –  appropriate 
project/programme  management  arrangements, 
staffing,  selection  of  implementation  partners  and 
service providers. 
The  design  includes  recruitment  of  a  Gender  and  Social 
Inclusion advisor as PMU staff, Technical Assistance to design 
a  gender  strategy,  youth  strategy,  nutrition  strategy  and 
gender training manual and appropriate budgets for involving 
intermediary  organizations  and  service  providers  with 
expertise on community development, social inclusions, for the 
implementation of the targeting strategy   
5.  Monitoring  targeting  performance.  Does  the 
design document specify that targeting performance 
will be monitored using participatory M&E, and also 
be  assessed  at  mid-term  review?  Does  the  M&E 
framework  allow  for  the  collection/analysis  of  sex-
disaggregated  data  and  are  there  gender-sensitive 
indicators  against  which  to  monitor/  evaluate 
outputs, outcomes and impacts? 
Yes, the design document specifies that targeting performance 
will be monitored using participatory M&E and will be assessed 
through  COI  based  surveys  conducted  at  baseline,  mid-term 
and  completion.  WEAI  survey  will  be  conducted  as  part  of 
baseline data and M&E systems will be disaggregated by sex 
and  gender  and  target  groups.  Participatory  monitoring  and 
evaluation  systems  will  be  established,  and  gender  sensitive 
monitoring  indicators  would  be  used  to  evaluate  outputs, 
outcomes and impacts.  
42 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
8. 
Appendix 2: Gender Checklist  
Gender checklist 
Design 
1.  The  programme  design  report  contains  –  and  programme 
implementation  is  based  on  –  gender-disaggregated  poverty 
data and an analysis of gender differences in the activities or 
sectors concerned, as well as an analysis of each programme 
from  the  gender  perspective  to  address  any 
activity 
unintentional barriers to women’s participation. 
Yes, the gender strategy outlines the strategic gender 
equality and women’s empowerment activities as well 
as pragmatic interventions to mainstream gender in 
all project components.  
2.  The  programme  design  articulates  –  or  the  programme 
implements – actions with aim to: 
● 
access to and control over productive and household assets; 
Expand  women’s  economic  empowerment  through 
Strengthen  women’s  decision-making  role  in  the 
● 
household  and  community  and  their  representation  in 
membership and leadership of local institutions; 
● 
workload balance between women and men. 
Achieve  a  reduced  workload  and  an  equitable 
43 
Yes,  activities  in  component  1  ensure  that  women 
participate  in  VHG  and  ensure  that  women  have 
access 
to  matching  grants  under  4P  APGs, 
microenterprises  and  anchor  firms.    In  addition, 
women will also benefit from the training on BDS, CSA 
and  financial  management.  Through  the  training  in 
GALS,  the  women  and  men  will  start  to  realise  the 
benefit in equitable balance to access and control of 
productive  household  assets.  In  addition  to  their 
access and control of assets, access to technologies, 
improved business acumen, and income from market 
access,  women  will  gain  more  self-  confidence  to 
negotiate confidently in market transactions and with 
service  providers  and  have  greater  voice  and 
influence  in  management  committees.  Women  also 
stand to benefit from the horticulture revolving fund 
(component  2)  and 
infrastructure 
interventions.  
the  public 
Yes, Women in VHG, APGs will be encouraged to take 
up  leadership  positions  in  management  committees 
and at household level women’s social capital will be 
strengthened through their participation and voice in 
community  institutions,  particularly  the  VHGs  and 
APGs. Women led |MSME will be promoted.  Through 
GALS  men  and women  are  encouraged  to  negotiate 
equitable  balance  in  decision  making.  The  GALS 
approach  will  promote  equitable  working  conditions 
for  men  and  women.  A  “men  and  masculinities” 
approach  will  be  integrated  in  awareness  raising 
activities to address gender stereotypes, behaviours 
and expected roles and responsibilities. 
Equitable workload balance between men and women 
will be promoted through GALs. HEEP will select CSA 
technologies  that  will  not  add  more  workload  on 
women.  Technologies  that  reduce  women  workload 
and time burden will be carefully introduced, among 
others the following technologies may be considered: 
labour saving processing technologies, solar irrigation 
equipment, drip irrigation, Additionally, the times and 
venues for training will be in such a way that they are 
suitable  for  women  to  attend.    Value  addition 
infrastructure  will  target  labour  saving  technologies 
to ease the workload burden for women. Knowledge 
about  the  benefits  at  the  different  types  of 
during 
be 
technologies 
disseminated 
could 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
association  meetings  or  by 
intermediary 
institutions. GALs will make men and women realise 
the benefit of sharing the workload balance. 
the 
3. The programme design report includes one paragraph in the 
targeting  section  that  explains  what  the  programme  will 
deliver from a gender perspective. 
Yes,  an  explicit  gender 
described. 
targeting  strategy 
is 
4. The programme design report describes the key elements 
for  operationalizing  the  gender  strategy,  with  respect  to  the 
relevant programme components. 
Yes, the gender strategy outlines strategic activities 
for gender equality and women’s empowerment, and 
more pragmatic activities for integrating gender in all 
project components.  
5. The design document – and the programme implements – 
operational measures to ensure gender-equitable participation 
in,  and  benefit  from,  programme  activities.  These  will 
generally include:  
5.1  Allocating  adequate  human  and  financial  resources  to 
implement the gender strategy. 
5.2  Ensuring  and  supporting  women’s  active  participation  in 
programme-related  activities,  decision-making  bodies  and 
committees, including setting specific targets for participation. 
that 
Ensuring 
5.3 
project/programme  management 
arrangements  (composition  of  the  project  management 
unit/programme coordination unit, project terms of reference 
for  staff  and  implementing  partners,  etc.  reflect  attention  to 
gender equality and women’s empowerment concerns. 
5.4  Ensuring  direct  project/programme  outreach  to  women 
(for example through appropriate numbers and qualification of 
field staff), especially where women’s mobility is limited. 
5.5 Identifying opportunities to support strategic opportunities 
with  government  and  other  development  organizations  for 
networking and policy dialogue. 
44 
The JMU will include a staff member on Targeting and 
Social  Inclusion  and  one  of  each  in  the  3  regional 
PMU.  These  will  be 
for  gender 
mainstreaming  in  all  project  components  as  well  as 
monitoring the implementation of the gender specific 
empowerment activities.  
responsible 
Yes, 50 per cent of all the project beneficiaries will be 
women.  Women  will  be  represented  equally  in 
management  committees 
in  VHGs,  APGs.  The 
components will focus on promoting gender equality 
and  women’s  empowerment.  Gender-sensitive 
activities proposed for all GALS will be carried out at 
community level in order to address the root causes 
for  gender  inequality.  Women  will  also  benefit  from 
Horticulture Finance. 
The  PMU  will recruit  4  targeting  and social  inclusion 
experts  as  part  of  the  HEEP  staff.  They  will  be 
responsible  for  designing  the  HEEP  gender  strategy 
and action plan. 
Women will be active participants in APGs, VHG and 
MSEs.  Training  will  take  place  using  field  extension 
staff and community facilitators at local level. Women 
and  men  will  participate  in  various  training  such  as 
financial literacy, BDS and financial literacy training.  
HEEP  will  carry  out  a  pro-WEAI  survey  in  order  to 
identify the constraints and opportunities for women 
empowerment  in  relation  to  production,  resources, 
income, leadership and time poverty. The results will 
inform the interventions in terms of addressing areas 
where the women are disempowered in particular on 
land rights. Women forums will be promoted.  
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
6.  The  programme’s  logical  framework,  M&E,  MIS,  and 
learning systems specify in design – and programme M&E unit 
collects,  analyses  and  interprets  sex-  and  age-disaggregated 
performance and impact data, including specific indicators on 
gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
schedule.  This  will 
Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  poverty  targeting, 
gender  and  youth  focus will  be part of  the  project’s 
include  one 
supervision 
supervision  mission  and  one  follow-up  mission 
annually; and a Mid-term Review. Progress on these 
issues  will  be  reported  in  the  project’s  bi-annual 
progress reports. All people-centred indicators will be 
disaggregated  by  gender  and  age  and  enriched  by 
qualitative  information  and  analysis.  Reporting  on 
poverty targeting, gender and youth focus will be part 
of the reporting requirements. 
45 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
9.   Appendix 3: Climate Change Adaptation 
114. 
To  address  the  increased  vulnerability  due  to  climate  change  risks  enhanced 
climate adaptation including multi options are recommended.  These will include climate-
resilient  agricultural  practices,  adapting  to  new  agronomic  practices  strengthening 
diversification and integration of a variety of activities, such as conservation agriculture, 
growing drought-tolerant crops/varieties, precision agriculture (which in turn also requires 
better  access  to  inputs  of  seeds  and  fertilisers  including  compost,  animal  and  green 
manure), and agroforestry to improve  soil quality and productivity.  Increased access to 
water  by  implementing  water  harvesting  and  storage  system  in  drought-prone  areas; 
installation of boreholes; irrigation water infrastructures, drip-irrigation systems; climate 
and  weather  forecasting  and  related  advisory  services,  strengthening  early  warning 
systems; 
sustainable 
management  of  catchment  areas.  Development  of  appropriate  insurance  products  for 
crops and equipment is recommended. 
renewable  energy;  and 
climate-proofing 
infrastructure; 
Promotion of Climate-smart Technologies 
Under  the  Programme,  five  interventions  have  been  included  in  the  list  of 
115. 
climate-smart  technologies:  (i)  Climate  Resilient  Varieties  including  Good  Agronomic 
Practices; (ii) Conservation Agriculture; (iii) Smart Irrigation Technologies; (iv) Integrated 
Pest  Management  Approach  and  (v)  Protected  Cultivation  Technologies  for  horticulture 
Production. 
116. 
In  order  to  ensure  effective  facilitation  and  dissemination  of  climate-smart 
technologies, the participation of AGRITEX will be critical. Among others, the core activities 
expected to be carried out will include: 
a.  Development of training materials on climate-smart technologies or building-up from 
documents developed for SACP. 
b.  Training of extension officers on climate-smart technologies 
c.  Technical  assistance  to  extension  officers  and  FOs  on  the  establishment  of 
demonstration  units  (irrigation  technologies,  conservation  Agriculture,  improved 
varieties, good agronomic practices, protected agriculture technology) and training on 
IPM. 
d.  Extension  Officers  and  other  key  stakeholders  will  be  trained  on  CSA  and  related 
technologies.  Other  existing  and  well-established  Agricultural  Universities  may  be 
engaged as well. 
Improved agricultural technologies 
117. 
The identified improved agricultural technologies will be essential in adapting to 
climate change. Drip irrigation will be promoted to improve irrigation efficiency and reduce 
the water required compared to traditional irrigation. In contrast, a suite of smart irrigation 
and precision farming solutions can be used to tailor watering strategies to respond to on-
farm  conditions  and  requirements.  Increasing  irrigation  efficiency  increases  coping 
potential  in  extreme  drought  conditions  and  the  resilience    irrigation  systems.  Water 
harvesting and the use of storage facilities also increase resilience. The development and 
adoption of crop varieties that are more resistant to heat, drought, or flooding will increase 
46 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
the  resilience  of  local  cropping  systems  and  can  include  varieties  developed  through 
traditional  breeding  approaches.  The  project  targets  switching  to  new,  improved  crops 
more suited to changing conditions as an adaptation strategy. However, market demand 
and nutritional value will be considered when selecting the horticultural crops.  
 Climate Information and risk management  
118. 
The provision of climate information, in the form of seasonal forecasts, or early-
warning systems, will be promoted to increase the resilience of farmers to climate change. 
Effective  seasonal  forecasts  can  allow  farmers  to  adjust  sowing  and  harvest  dates  or 
choose  a  different  combination  of  crops  for  the  season,  while  flood  or  drought  early-
warning  systems  can  reduce  losses  from  extreme  events.  Promotion  of  index-based 
insurance schemes can be an effective risk transfer mechanism and allow farmers to better 
recover from climate impacts.   
Agro-ecological and Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA)   
119. 
These approaches emphasise increasing the diversity of cropping systems, while 
enhancing local biodiversity and ecosystem services, and strengthening and empowering 
local  communities.  Diversification  of  food  systems  provides  increased  resilience  against 
extreme events, while the maintenance and enhancement of local environmental services 
can  provide  a  buffer  against  climate  shocks.  Examples  include,  agro-forestry  and 
conservation agriculture approaches aimed at maintaining soil fertility and improving water 
retention. Reducing water demand for irrigation in this way can help to adapt to reduced 
water availability.  In many cases there are existing good examples of these approaches 
with potential to be scaled up.  
1.  Catchment approaches to ecosystem-management can also be used to adapt to increases 
in flood risk, for  example increasing floodplain connectivity to reduce  downstream flood 
peaks, or managing valley slopes to increase water retention and slow through-flow. 
47 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
10.  Appendix 4: Environment and Social Safeguards 
120. 
To manage environmental, social and climate risks associated with the project, 
the following documents were developed: Environment, Social and Climate Management 
Framework (ESCMF) which includes an ESCMP, Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and 
Stakeholder  Engagement  Plan  (SEP);  Pesticides  management  plan  (PMP)  and  targeted 
climate  risks  assessment  as  well  as  a  grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRM),  during  the 
design phase. The documents will be disclosed in-country and IFAD’s website. The GRM 
contains  provisions  to  address  grievances  relating  to  sexual  exploitation  and  abuse  and 
sexual harassment and this will be further adapted for the specific needs of the proposed 
project  as  appropriate  while  the  ESCMF  provides  an  overview  of  the  project  and  its 
components,  the  applicable  legislative  and  regulatory  frameworks  and  policies,  an 
overview of the baseline conditions, and a summary of key anticipated environmental and 
social impacts. It also provides mitigation and monitoring measures and a screening tool 
for  assessing  and  classifying  impacts  at  the  subproject  level.  At  subproject  level 
ESIA/ECSMPs  will  be  developed  upon  measures  set  out  in  the  ESCMF  and  ESCMP.  The 
documents  will  be  cleared  by  EMA,  prior  to  commencement  of  subproject  activities  and 
associated works. 
121. 
ESCMF:  The  environmental,  social  and  climate  safeguards  and  issues  of  the 
project  will  be  run  by  an  Environmental  Safeguards  Specialist  (ESS)  and  a  Gender  and 
Social Inclusion Specialist, who will be based at the National PMU and will be supported by 
the  MLAFWRD  interdepartmental  team  and  the  other  participating  government 
departments and quasi-government agencies in the 6 Provinces and Districts (Refer to SEP 
for detailed Stakeholder Mapping).  
At  PMU  Head  office,  the  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  Safeguards 
122. 
Specialists will focus on the planning, supervision, reporting and support to Provincial and 
District Technical Teams.  
At  each  Provincial/District  office  the  MLAFWRD  interdepartmental  team  will 
123. 
support  Provincial/District  project 
the 
communication with the central PMU. They will coordinate all Environmental, Social and 
Climate Safeguard issues and oversee the implementation of the ESCMF and GRM under 
the oversight of the Environmental, Social and Climate Safeguards Specialists Safeguards 
Specialists (ESCSS) and a Social Inclusion Mobilisation Specialist. 
implementation  activities  and 
facilitate 
124. 
The  Provincial/District MLAFWRD  interdepartmental  team  Led  by  the  AGRITEX 
Department will help the 4Ps NGOs in preparing their sub-projects applications to avoid or 
minimize  adverse  environmental  and  social  impacts.  The  interdepartmental  teams  will 
assist to screen the sub-projects and develop site specific ESCMPs for the sub-projects. 
For  screening,  they  will  use  the  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate  screening  form  (see 
Annex 1 and 2) together with information on typical sub-project impacts and mitigation 
measures.   
125. 
ESCMP: The ESCMP will include a detailed safety plan, comprising: (i) a plan for 
construction supervision for infrastructure and quality assurance; (ii) an instrumentation 
plan; (iii) an operation and maintenance plan; and (iv) an emergency preparedness plan, 
all  of  which  should  be  consulted  upon,  publicly  disclosed,  reviewed,  and  approved  by 
qualified  engineers  in  accordance  with  IFAD  and  GoZ  policies.  Likewise,  the  ESCMP 
contains provisions to ensure that HEEP engages experienced and competent professionals 
for  the  supervision  of  the  design  and  construction  of infrastructure,  as  well  as  to  adopt 
48 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
and implement safety measures during the design, bid tendering, construction, operation, 
and maintenance of all infrastructure. 
126. 
Environment & social safeguard officers will be designated at provincial level to 
closely  follow  and  oversee  proper  implementation  of  the  Environmental  and  Social 
Safeguards. The officers will require additional training to be able to monitor and manage 
the  environmental  and  social  risks  of  this  new  project  that  will  be  governed  by  the 
Environmental Social and Climate Management Framework (ESCMF). 
49 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
11.  Appendix 
5:  HEEP 
Institutional 
Arrangements 
and 
Responsibilities 
11.1  Project Governance and Management Structures 
Lead Agency and Programme Oversight 
127. 
MLAFWRD will be the Lead Agency of HEEP, with Permanent Secretary (PS) of 
the Ministry as the responsible officer. MLAFWRD will establish a Joint Management Unit 
(JMU) that will include the functions of both the Project Management Unit of HEEP, the PCU 
of the SIRP project and the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) of the new SACP. 
This unit will be responsible for the management of the implementation of HEEP. The JMU 
arrangement is expected to bring synergies and focus to the implementation of the IFAD 
country programme and provide broader and deeper expertise to tackle rural development 
challenges of Zimbabwe.  
128. 
A joint Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted for SIRP, SACP and 
HEEP. The PSC will be responsible for programme oversight and strategic guidance. The 
PSC, chaired by the MLAFWRD, will be made up of senior representatives of the principal 
stakeholders including ministries relevant to SIRP, farmer organisations, and the private 
sector.  to  (i) provide  strategic  guidance  to  programme  implementation,  (ii)  oversee 
programme  planning,  (iii)  review  the  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPB)  prior  to 
submission to IFAD, and (iv) review implementation progress and impact. The PSC shall 
meet  twice  a  year  and  otherwise  when  required.  The  PSC  will  be  chaired  by  the  PS  of 
MLAFWRD  and  the  membership  of  the  PSC  would  be  reviewed  during  programme 
implementation and there is scope to widen it further or to invite stakeholders depending 
on the topic under review. The PSC will meet bi-annually to review and approve physical 
and financial progress, assess management effectiveness, decide on corrective measures 
where appropriate, review lessons learned and good practices, and approve AWPBs and 
Programme  Procurement  Plan  (PP).  Minutes  of  the  meetings  will  be  included  in  the 
programme’s progress reports for review by IFAD. 
129. 
The  PSC  will  be  chaired  by  the  PS  of  MLAFWRD  and  comprise  of  the 
representatives of the following public sector departments/institutions and private sector 
organisations that are expected to play key roles in the HEEP efforts to develop rural value 
chains in Zimbabwe: Department of Strategic Policy and Business (DSPPB), Department 
of Mechanisation and Irrigation (DOI), and Department of Agricultural Extension Services 
Agritex)  of  MLAWRR;  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  (MOFED); 
Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  Community  and  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise  Development 
(MWACSMED);  Ministry  of  Environment,  Tourism  and  Hospitality  (METH);  Ministry  of 
Youth, Sports and Recreation (MYSR); Horticulture Development Council and the Chamber 
of Commerce. The PSC will also include two senior members of the WUOs and APGs from 
the provinces, representing SIRP and SACP beneficiaries. The JMU will act as a secretariat 
for the PSC meetings. 
     Project Management and Staff  
130. 
The JMU staff will consist of a mix of dedicated staff for each project and shared 
officers working for SIRP, SACP and HEEP. The staff is either hired or seconded/attached. 
The JMU and the PMU of HEEP will be based in Harare. The viability of the construction of 
offices for  IFAD funded  projects will be explored, the GoZ would contribute the land for 
50 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
the construction of offices. The HEEP National Coordinator, Chief Accountant, Procurement 
Officer,  Senior  Value  Chain  and  Agribusiness  Advisor,  Senior  Climate  Smart  Agriculture 
Advisor, will be recruited from the market for the duration of the project. The recruitment 
process  will  be  as  broad  as  possible  trying  to  reach  out  a  wide  range  of  interested 
professionals, including diaspora. While several specialists, particularly the key ones, are 
dedicated  to  only  one  project,  HEEP  shares  an  Office  Secretary,  Senior  Social  Inclusion 
Specialist and KM/Communication Specialist with SIRP and SACP. 
131. 
To  manage  the  field  operations,  HEEP  will  establish  three  Regional  Project 
Management Units (RPMU), in Bulawayo, Mutare and Masvingo. The list of all NPMU and 
RPMU officers in the four HEEP provinces is provided in Table 1 below. Their draft TORs are 
presented in this PIM at the end of this Section. At the district level, the implementation 
will  be  carried  out  through  AGRITEX  extension  network,  which  forms  implementation 
teams in 20 HEEP districts covered by the project. The extension will also work with ARDA. 
The districts level field operations will be supported by HEEP-resourced staff from other 
public institutions and private sector service providers. The HEEP budget includes adequate 
resources for field staff mobility and good telephone and internet connectivity to facilitate 
easy outreach to the HEEP-supported communities and to improve the chances of reaching 
the  HEEP  implementation  targets  in  an  effective  manner.  The  illustration  of  the  full 
organisation of HEEP is shown in Figure 1 below.  
Figure 1: The HEEP organogram is presented below: 
51 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
2.  The following table presents the staffing levels for HEEP 
Table 1: HEEP Staff Composition 
No. 
National Level 
Position 
National Project Coordinator 
1 
  Chief Accountant 
  Senior Procurement Officer 
  Senior Horticulture and Agribusiness Advisor 
  Climate Smart Agriculture Advisor 
  Horticulture and Agribusiness Specialist 
  Senior 4P/Partnership  Specialist 
  Farming as Business Advisor 
  Senior Export Finance Advisor 
  Access to Finance Advisor 
  Nutrition Garden Specialist 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Recruited,  
Seconded/Attached 
Shared 
or 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Seconded/Attached 
Shared  
Senior  social  inclusion  specialist  (shared  with 
HEEP, SIRP, SACP) 
KM  and  communication  specialist  (shared  SIRP, 
SACP &HEEP) 
M&E and Planning Specialist 
  Social  inclusion Officer 
  Senior infrastructure Specialist 
  Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Integrated Pest  Management Officer 
13. 
14 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
Bulawayo, Mutare and Masvingo Regional Project Management Offices  
Shared  
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Consultant 
Consultant 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Shared  
Seconded/Attached 
  Office Secretary (shared HEEP, SACP &  SIRP) 
  Driver/Office assistant 
  Financial Officer 
  Assistant Horticulture Officer 
Junior Procurement assistant/clerk 
Provincial 
Coordinator X3 
Horticultural  
Specialist/Provincial 
  Agribusiness Specialist X3 
  Climate Smart Agriculture Specialist X3 
Infrastructure Officer X3 
  Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer X3 
  M&E and Planning Officer X3 
Junior Procurement Officer X3 
  Driver/office assistant. X3 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
Seconded/Attached 
52 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
12.  Appendix 6: Facilitation for Effective HEEP Start-up  
132. 
Initial  Start-Up  Operations.  The  HEEP  Financing  Agreement  (FA)  makes 
available a start-up budget of US$ 400,000 in respect of expenditures incurred before the 
completion  of  the  disbursement  conditions.  Priority  conditions  precedent  to  withdrawals 
under  the  FA  include:  (i)  opening  of  the  designated  account  by  MOFED;  (ii)  opening  of 
Programme  Operations  Account  by  MLAFWRD;  (iii)  recruitment  and  secondment  of  key 
NPMU staff28; (iv) finalisation of PIM for approval; and (v) procurement and installation 
of a fully functional accounting software (widening the licence and if needed upgrading the 
existing software used in SIRP and SACP). Other start-up activities include the (i) setting 
up  of  the  Programme  Steering  Committee  (PSC);  (ii)  setting  up  of  the  Technical 
Assessment Committees; (iii) establishment of office space for NPMU (iv) identification of 
office space for PPIUs (v) procurement of goods and services as well as vehicles for NPMU 
and  PPIUs  and  (vi)  initial  mobilisation  and  preselection  of  target  groups.  The  National 
Project Coordinator, Chief Accountant, Agricultural Value chain and Agribusiness Specialist, 
CSA specialist, the M&E and Planning Specialist   and KM and Communication Officers will 
start work from three to one month in advance in order to coordinate the start-up activities 
and to meet the disbursement conditions prior to the establishment of the NPMU.   
133. 
Once the NPMU is in place, it will coordinate the following start-up activities in 
collaboration with the relevant implementing partners: (i) the finalisation of the AWPB for 
the  first  year;  (ii)  finalisation  of  the  Procurement  Plan  for  the  first  18  months;  (iii) 
finalisation  of  PIM;  (iv)  organising  of  the  National  Start-up  Workshop;  (v)  training  for 
programme  for  project  staff  and  key  staff  of  implementing  agencies  coinciding  with 
National Start-up Workshop or organised separately soon after; (vii) holding four provincial 
information meetings; (viii) conducting district information meetings (ix) conducting ward  
level  information  workshops  and  (x)  designing  the  questionnaires  for  socioeconomic 
baseline, pro-WEAI and the nutrition baseline survey.  
134. 
Designated  and  Operations  accounts.  Two  HEEP  accounts  will  be  opened. 
MOFED  (the  Recipient)  will  open  a  single  Designated  Account  denominated  in  US$  (the 
“Designated Account”) at the Bank agreeable to the Government of Zimbabwe, through 
which  the  proceeds  of  the  loan  shall  be  channelled.  The  Lead  Programme  Agency 
(MLAFWRD)  shall  open  one  Project  Operations  Account  denominated  in  US$  (the 
“Operations Account”) at a commercial bank acceptable to the Fund to receive and hold 
the financing transferred from the Designated Account. The accounts need to be opened 
on a priority basis to allow for the receipt of the start-up facility. Subsequently the accounts 
can continue as regular dedicated and operating accounts for the periodic disbursements. 
MOFED will submit account names, banks together with bank names and designations of 
signatories to IFAD prior to submission of any withdrawal application. 
135. 
Submission of start-up budget. For the release of the start-up financing (prior 
to  the  first  disbursement),  a  work  plan  and  budget  and  a  procurement  plan  are  a 
prerequisite and need to be submitted to IFAD for its no-objection by NPC. The NPC will 
work  with  the  various  technical  departments  and  the  Department  of  Finance  and 
1.  28   National  Programme  Coordinator,  Chief  Accountant, 
Procurement Officer and Senior Value Chain and Agribusiness 
Advisor 
53 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Administration in MLAFWRD to finalise the start-up budget and submit to PS MLAFWRD for 
approval. The PS MLAFWRD will submit the budget, procurement plan and the request for 
the disbursement of start-up funds to IFAD through MoFED. 
136. 
Recruitment  and  Secondment  of  key  PMU  staff.  This  activity  will  be  the 
responsibility of the MLAFWRD Human Resources Department and the focal person in the 
Department  of Agricultural Economics and Markets. Staff will be competitively recruited 
and competitively seconded. A system of performance-based contracts will be established 
in which the performance of each staff member will be assessed yearly based on specific 
goals. As indicated above, this draft PIM includes Terms of Reference and specifies required 
qualifications for all HEEP positions. The following steps are foreseen: 
137. 
The MLAFWRD Human Resources Department will contract a recognized 
head-hunting company to advertise the positions for: National Project Coordinator; 
Chief Accountant, Procurement Officer and the following technical advisors: Senior Value 
Chain  and  Agribusiness  Advisor,  Horticulture  and  Agribusiness  Advisor,  Senior  Export 
Finance  Advisor  and  Access  to  Finance  Advisor  and  the  following  specialists:  Senior 
4P/Partnership  Specialist,  and  Farming  as  a  Business  Specialist.  The  applicants  will  be 
given two weeks to respond. 
138. 
MLAFWRD’s  Human  Resources  Department  will  establish  a  panel  of  five 
interviewers  with  representation  from  the  technical  departments,  i.e.,  Departments  of: 
Irrigation,  Agricultural  Extension  and  Agricultural  Economics  and  Markets,  MLAFWRD 
Finance and Administration Department, MOFED and the Accountant General’s Office, to 
be part of the interview panel. The panellists will meet for two days to shortlist applicants, 
come  up  with  interview  questions  and  selection  criteria.  MLAFWRD  Human  Resources 
Department will invite the shortlisted candidates for interviews that will be held over two 
days. After the interviews, the panellists will meet to select the candidates for the various 
positions. 
MLAFWRD Human Resources Department will document the process and attach 
139. 
the CVs and draft contracts for the selected candidates before submitting these documents 
for IFAD’s No Objection via MOFED. The recruitment of all key PCU staff is subject to IFAD’s 
No Objection.   
Following  receipt  of  IFAD’s  “No  Objection”,  MLAFWRD  Human  Resources 
140. 
Department will notify all the winning and losing candidates in writing. After the expiry of 
two weeks following this notification, candidates will commence duty. MLAFWRD Human 
Resources  Department  will  prepare  contracts  for  staff  to  be  signed  between  the  PS 
MLAFWRD  and  key  staff  members  for  respective  duration  of  the  programme  and  also 
following Public Service Commission regulations.  
141. 
The rest of the PMU staff will be competitively seconded/attached by the GoZ. 
The positions will be advertised, and interviews carried out, and the  seconded/attached 
staff  will  resume  their  government  position  on  expiry  of  the  project  duration.  The 
seconded/attached staff will continue to receive the government salary and a top up from 
the project. The PS MLAFWRD will ensure that all the steps as are carried out timely and 
in  a  transparent  manner.  All  staff  shall  be  selected  competitively  according  to  the 
Recipient’s applicable procedures acceptable to the Fund and the hiring and termination of 
the contracts shall be subject to the Fund’s “No Objection”. 
54 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
142. 
Establishment of the  Programme Steering  Committee (PSC):  MLAFWRD 
will establish the PSC for HEEP (see description above). The MLAFWRD drafts a letter, to 
be  signed  by  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  MLAFWRD,  inviting  nominations  for  PSC 
membership at senior position level. After confirmation of the names, MLAFWRD will inform 
IFAD and the first PSC meeting will be organised to coincide with the establishment of the 
NPMU of the project. 
143. 
Establishment of Technical Assessment Committees (TAC): MLAFWRD will 
establish  the  TACs  to  provide  technical  support  to  the  NPMU  on  Component  1 
implementation. There are TACs at two levels, one at national level and one at each HEEP 
province. The TAC at national level will be responsible for the screening of Expression of 
Interests  (EOI)  and  the  business  proposals  from  the  anchor  firms,  while  the  provincial 
TACs  will  screen  the  EOI  and  business  proposals  from  the  APGs  and  microenterprises 
against the set criteria. 
144. 
Office  facilities  for  HEEP  NPMU:  The  MLAFWRD  will  avail  sufficient  office 
space for HEEP NPMU to be housed in in a building near MLAFWRD for the full duration of 
the Project. The office should have good internet connectivity. The office will accommodate 
all the NPMU staff and its operations, as well as supervision missions of the Project. 
145. 
Offices for Regional PMUs: The Department of Finance and Administration in 
MLAFWRD will deploy two of its staff per province to identify office space for each of the 
four  Provincial  PIUs  in  the  four  HEEP  provinces.  Offices  will  be  secured  through  the 
Provincial Administrator.  Depending on the condition of the offices, resources from start-
up  budget  will  be  required  for  their  appropriate  refurbishment,  including  internet 
installation. 
146. 
Finalisation  of  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM):  The  NPMU  will 
organise a workshop to review and finalise this PIM and will submit the final version to 
IFAD  for  approval.  The  timeline  for  the  finalisation  of  the  PIM  is  presented  in  the  Table 
below: 
the 
Action 
Circulate 
to 
implementing agencies and PMU staff 
Submission  of  written  comments  on 
PMU 
draft 
PIM 
Deadline 
April 2023 
April 2023 
Review  comments 
incorporate in the PIM 
submitted  and 
May 2023 
Submit draft. PIM for PSC approval 
Submit draft for IFAD NO objection 
May 2023 
June 2023 
Responsibility 
NPMU Project Coordinator 
Implementing partners and NPMU, PPIU staff, 
NPMU,  PC,  M&E  Specialist,  supported  by 
Chief  Accountant  and  Director,  Agricultural 
Economics and Markets 
NPMU,  PC,  M&E  Specialist,  supported  by 
Chief  Accountant  and  Director,  Agricultural 
Economics and Markets 
PSC 
NPMU Project Coordinator 
147. 
 Initial Salary for NPMU staff: After the NPMU is established, it will require a 
maximum  of  three  months  to  finalise  the  start-up  activities  before  effectiveness  of  the 
programme.  For  this  reason,  a  provision  has  been  made  from  the  start-up  facility  for  a 
salary budget for selected NPMU staff during start-up phase. HEEP staff on secondment 
will receive a top-up on salaries.  
55 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
148. 
Finalisation  of  First  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  and  18-
months Procurement Plan: The NPMU – once established – will submit to IFAD for prior 
review  its  first  18-Month  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  and  its  18-month 
Procurement Plan (PP). The approved AWPB and PP are conditional to the release of the 
initial advance.  
National  Start-up  Workshop:  Assuming  adequate  progress  in  the  above 
149. 
project start-up activities, a national start-up workshop is expected to take place around 
April 2023. The objective of the workshop is to obtain a full buy in from all stakeholders. 
The  workshop  will  be  organised  by  the  NPMU  together  with  MLAFWRD.  In  addition  to 
launching the project, the workshop will be used to: 
  Take stock of preparatory activities carried out; 
 
Introduce the Project to its key stakeholders to raise awareness; 
  Explain the scope, the policy framework and the activities and role of stakeholders 
in the project; 
  Confirm  the  section  criteria  for  beneficiaries  and  area  for  HEEP  components  and 
activities; and 
  Present,  explain  and  discuss  the  implementation  procedures,  as  captured  in  the 
PIM, to HEEP staff and key implementation partners. 
150. 
have a shared view of:  
As a result of the workshop, the HEEP staff and its stakeholders are expected to 
  HEEP objectives, activities and projected results within the framework of national 
and sectoral policies of Zimbabwe; 
  Roles and responsibilities in the implementation of HEEP; 
 
 
Implementation and coordination mechanisms of the Project; and  
and financial procedures underpinning HEEP management.  
Other Implementing Agencies and Partnerships  
151. 
the following national and local GoZ-related implementing agencies/partners: 
When implementing its components and activities, HEEP will work closely with 
  Agricultural  and  Rural  Development  Authority  (ARDA),  responsible  for  managing 
the smallholder irrigation schemes and the village horticulture gardens.  
  Department  of  Agricultural  and  Extension  Services  (Agritex)  is  responsible  for 
agricultural  extension,  dissemination  of  agricultural  market  information,  monitor 
crop  and  livestock  trends,  collate  agricultural  information,  provision  of  capacity 
building to farmers in BDS, marketing and CSA.  
  Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  Community,  Small  and  Medium-Scale  Enterprises  is 
responsible for the registration of the microenterprises and the APGs at local level. 
Capacity building for GALs. 
56 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Rural  District  Councils  are  the  custodian  of  the  communal  land  and  attend  to 
complaints and redress mechanisms in the case of disputes. 
  Environmental  Management  Authority  (EMA)  ensures  adequate  environmental 
safeguards are met in the targeted area. 
  Water  User  Organisations  (WUOs)  will  participate  in  the  participatory  irrigation 
design. 
  Climate Change Management is responsible for coordination of all climate related 
policy in Zimbabwe. 
  Catchment Councils are responsible for the issuance of water permits. 
  Zimbabwe  National  Water  Authority  (ZINWA)  is  responsible  issuance  of  water 
permits.  
  District  Development  Fund  (DDF)  are  responsible  for  the  rehabilitation  and 
maintenance of rural infrastructure including feeder roads. 
  Department of Mechanisation is responsible for post-harvest technologies and soil 
and water conservation. 
  Department  of  Irrigation  (DOI)  is  responsible  for  irrigation  infrastructure 
development and rehabilitation. 
In  addition,  implementation  partnerships,  HEEP  will  provide  an  opportunity  to 
152. 
strengthen the overall implementation of the IFAD-supported SIRP and to harmonise the 
approaches in particular in market and value chain development and the mainstreaming 
topics  such  as  nutrition  and  food  security.  Further,  HEEP  will  benefit  from  SIRP’s 
partnership  with  Harvest  Plus  for  increased  production  and  consumption  of  bio-fortified 
crops.  
153. 
It is also expected that HEEP will collaborate with World Food Programme (WFP) 
in  several  areas  related  to  resilience,  food  security  and  nutrition.  Other  possible 
implementation  partners  include  (i)  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  on  youth 
employment,  (ii)  the  Environmental  Management  Agency  (EMA)  on  compliance  with 
national  regulations  and  the  SECAP  issues  in  HEEP  implementation,  (iii)  the  Climate 
Change Management Department (CCMD) on incorporation of climate change adaptation 
measures  and  monitoring  their  effectiveness,  (iv)  UNICEF  on  the  delivery  of  WASH 
interventions in the HEEP project target districts, and (v) the Ministry of Health and Child 
Care  on  nutrition  education  through its  care  group  model  and  on  the  delivery  of  health 
services to boost maternal and child nutrition. Finally, Wageningen University has provided 
support for the HEEP design as regards the definition of the nutrition and climate resilience 
strategy. Further linkages with Wageningen will be explored during implementation. In the 
Table below, HEEP’s overall partnership strategies are further presented. 
57 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
13.  Appendix 7: TOR for Key HEEP Staff  
154. 
contracted private service providers are presented. 
Below, the draft TOR for all HEEP professional staff in NPMU and PPIUs and the 
155. 
Draft Terms of Reference: National Project Coordinator 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matabeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: National Project Coordinator 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
  The Project Coordinator (PC) will head the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) 
and as such will have overall responsibility for management and coordination of HEEP 
with the objective to achieve an increased smallholder participation in market-oriented 
and climate-smart value chains in the project area. 
  The  PC  assures  that  the  HEEP  is  implemented  along  the  guidelines  provided  by  the 
financing  agreement,  design  report,  implementation  manual  and  following  the 
guidance  given  by  the  lead  ministry  MLAFWRD,  steering  committee  and  supervision 
missions. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
To  promote  efficient  coordination  within  the  Joint  Management  Unit  (JMU)  and  seek 
synergies and complementarities with the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalisation Programme 
58 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
(SIRP), implemented under the same unit, assuring, jointly with SIRP National Director, in 
particular the efficient use of shared assets and human resources;  
  To ensure an optimum use of HEEP resources in achievement of the agreed objectives 
of the project; 
  To expedite and coordinate the timely Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) process 
at  all  levels,  and  ensure  that  these  are  developed  in  a  fully  participatory  manner, 
learning from previous years 
  To  direct  project  implementation  in  accordance  to  agreed  plans  and  to  report  on 
progress  and  outcomes  in  a  methodological  manner,  including  technical  reports  and 
financial reporting; 
  To ensure the project adheres to social, environmental and climate-related safeguards 
and contributes to gender equity, women’s empowerment and inclusive development; 
  To  ensure  full  functioning  of  the  project’s  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  system  that 
captures  and  analyses  disaggregated  data  on  gender  and  social inclusion  and  make 
use of the system as a management tool; 
  To  ensure  accurate  knowledge  management  of  the  project,  including  information 
dissemination about project implementation progress and lessons learned; 
  To  ensure  proper  financial  management,  including  timely  disbursements  and 
comprehensive reporting on expenditures and expenditure forecasts; 
  To ensure efficient procurement in line with the Procurement Plans;  
  To ensure a strong sense of teamwork within the NPMU and wider JMU and to foster 
constructive engagement among the partners involved in Project implementation;  
  To  direct  NPCU  staff  both  at  Head  Office  and  add  provincial  level,  as  well  as  hired 
service providers and consultants, to carry out their agreed duties in a way aimed at 
achieving the Project objectives; 
  To  maintain  liaison  with  provinces  and  districts,  their  leadership  and  their 
representatives in the project area; 
  To  develop,  negotiate  and  implement  agreements  with  project  partners,  including 
communities, private sector, government entities and non-government organisations; 
and others as deemed necessary; and 
  To represent the project to all external stakeholders. 
Qualifications and Competences 
A Master’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or other relevant 
discipline related to Agricultural Development. 
Required Work Experience 
  15-years’ experience in rural development in Zimbabwe, of which five in a managerial 
position; 
  Experience in Project administration, financial management and reporting, preferably 
using systems of international institutions; 
  An  existing  network  of  relations  pertaining  to  community  planning,  smallholder 
agriculture; value chains and financial inclusion; 
  Experience  in  collaborating  across  government  ministries  and  in  public-private 
dialogue; and 
  Strong leaderships skills, including the ability to delegate responsibility within the team 
and to implementing partners. 
59 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited  for  the  total  duration  of  the  project,  initial  contract  for  3  years  (with 
possibility of extension based on performance) 
60 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
156. 
Advisor 
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Senior  Horticulture  and  Agribusiness 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matabeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Senior Horticultural Agribusiness Advisor 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
A.  Reporting to the Project Coordinator, the Senior Horticultural Agribusiness Advisor is 
the  lead  agribusiness  specialist  for  HEEP,  and  will  support  implementation  of  all 
components.  
B.  The Advisor ensures that HEEP 4P and other activities will have the commercial and 
development  impact  intended,  following  the  guidelines  provided  by  the  Financing 
Agreement,  project  design  report,  and  the  PIM;  and  following  the  guidance  by  the 
Project Coordinator, the lead ministry MLAFWRD, the PSC HEEP sub-committee, and 
IFAD implementation support and supervision missions. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Advise the PMU PC, IFAD, MLAFWRD on all agribusiness matters; 
  Ensure that the ARDA VHG business plans are technically and commercially sound; 
  Plan, coordinate, and supervise and ensure the high quality of technical and business 
capacity HEEP provides for (i) 4P EOI/proposal development (ii) Technical and business 
capacity building for 4P APGs/SHFs 
  Plan, coordinate, supervise, and ensure the high quality of the HEEP-supported training 
for ARDA business managers of VHGs and irrigation schemes;  
  Supervise and support HEEPs support for HDC’s for developing and promoting 4Ps, and 
developing clear and fair practices for hub & spoke/contract farming; 
  Review  all  4P  EOIs  and  proposals  to  ensure  that  proposals  are  technically  and 
financially sound; 
61 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Provide  expert  advice  and  mentoring  as  required  to  the  4P  Partnership,  Access  to 
Finance,  Export  Finance,  Farming  as  a  Business,  Nutrition  Garden,  and  other  HEEP 
advisors and staff 
  Maintain and develop contacts and networks with horticultural value chain players in 
the  public  and  private  sectors,  and  as  relevant  attend  meetings,  technical  working 
groups, conferences, etc. to share knowledge, coordinate programmes, and promote 
HEEPs work; 
  Coordinate  with  SIRP  and  SACP  to  identify  synergies  and  potential  areas  of 
collaboration; 
  Provide the horticultural agribusiness development perspective vision and inputs to the 
development of the AWPBs; 
  Contribute to HEEP M&E activities from the agribusiness point of view, including sex 
and age disaggregated data collection and reporting in coordination with the M&E team. 
  Other tasks as may be required by the PC 
Qualifications and Competences 
A bachelor’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or business is 
adequate provided strong work experience.  Advanced degree in these disciplines a plus.  
Required Work Experience 
  15 years’ experience in commercial agribusiness in Zimbabwe or southern Africa; 
  5 years’ experience in the horticultural sector, ideally with substantial experience 
in sourcing or facilitating SHF commercial production of horticultural produce; 
  A strong network of contacts and understanding of the agribusiness, horticulture, 
smallholder development, value chains and financial inclusion; 
  Strong leaderships skills, including the ability to delegate responsibility within the 
team. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited for the total duration of the project, initial contract for 3 years (with possibility 
of extension based on performance) 
62 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
157. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior 4P Partnership Advisor 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field, to manage and coordinate HEEP project activities. The lead agency of the project is 
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Development (MLAFWRD), the 
Village  Horticulture  Gardens  will  be  implemented  through  ARDA  and  HEEP  4P  activities 
include  pro-active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  APG  and  SHF 
members  of  the  farming  community,  service  providers,  and  anchor  firms/farms  in 
horticultural value chains.   
Position: 4P Partnership Advisor 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
A.  Reporting  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  the  4P  Partnership  Advisor  is  the  lead  4P 
partnership specialist for  HEEP, and supports implementation of all components, but 
especially the 4P activities.  
B.  The Advisor ensures that HEEP 4P activities will have the commercial and development 
impact intended, following the guidelines provided by the Financing Agreement, project 
design report, and the PIM; and following the guidance by the Project Coordinator, the 
lead  ministry  MLAFWRD,  the  PSC  HEEP  sub-committee,  and  IFAD  implementation 
support and supervision missions. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Advise the PMU PC, IFAD, MLAFWRD on all partnership matters; 
  Finalizes the 4P Matching Grant Manual liaising with IFAD for NO; 
  Establishes and manages the PMU 4P committee; 
  Leads the outreach and publicity activities of the 4P matching grants;  
  Lead the PMU 4P committee screening and review of 4P EOIs and proposals; 
  Prepares 4P proposal summaries and presents submitted 4P proposals to the PSC HEEP 
sub-committee;  
  Maintain and develop contacts and networks with other actors in the public and private 
sector  that  are  promoting  or  supporting  4P  type  arrangements  in  the  agricultural 
sector, and as relevant attend meetings, technical working groups, conferences, etc. 
to share knowledge, coordinate programmes, and promote HEEPs work; 
63 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Coordinate  with  SIRP  and  SACP  to  identify  synergies  and  potential  areas  of 
collaboration; 
  Other tasks as may be required by the PC 
Qualifications and Competences 
A bachelor’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or business is 
adequate provided strong work experience.  Advanced degree in these disciplines a plus.  
Required Work Experience 
  5 years’ experience in commercial agribusiness in Zimbabwe or southern Africa; 
in 
  5  years’  experience  promoting  private-public  partnerships, 
ideally 
the 
agricultural/horticultural sectors; 
  A strong network of contacts and understanding of the policies and issues relevant to 
establishing and maintaining public-private partnership in Zimbabwe; 
  Self-starter, team player, strong interpersonal skills. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited for the initial 6 years of the project, initial contract for 3 years (with possibility 
of extension based on performance) 
64 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
158. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Farming as a Business Advisor 
Background: The Project 
A.  Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all  provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matabeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field, to manage and coordinate HEEP project activities. The lead agency of the project is 
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Development (MLAFWRD), the 
Village  Horticulture  Gardens  will  be  implemented  through  ARDA  and  HEEP  4P  activities 
include  pro-active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  APG  and  SHF 
members  of  the  farming  community,  service  providers,  and  anchor  firms/farms  in 
horticultural value chains.   
Position: Farming as a Business Advisor 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
A.  Reporting  to  the  Senior  Horticultural  Agribusiness  Advisor,  the  FAAB  advisor  is  the 
agribusiness training specialist for HEEP.  
B.  The  Advisor  ensures  that  all  HEEP-supported  farmer  business  training  activities  will 
have  the  commercial  and  development  impact  intended,  following  the  guidelines 
provided  by  the  Financing  Agreement,  project  design  report,  and  the  PIM;  and 
following the guidance by the Project Coordinator, the lead ministry MLAFWRD, the PSC 
HEEP sub-committee, and IFAD implementation support and supervision missions. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Advise the PMU PC, IFAD, MLAFWRD on all farmer business training matters; 
  Help plan, coordinate, and supervise and ensure the high quality of business capacity 
training HEEP provides for 4P APGs/SHFs 
  Help plan, coordinate, supervise, and ensure the high quality of the HEEP-supported 
training for ARDA business managers of VHGs and irrigation schemes;  
  Advise HDC Market Linkage Advisor on farmer business training as it relates to their 
HEEP-supported and other activities; 
  Maintain  and  develop  contacts  and  networks  with  farming  as  a  business  service 
provider  in  the  public,  private,  academic,  and  NGO  sectors,  and  as  relevant  attend 
meetings, technical working groups, conferences, etc. to share knowledge, coordinate 
programmes, and promote HEEPs work; 
65 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Coordinate  with  SIRP  and  SACP  to  identify  synergies  and  potential  areas  of 
collaboration; 
  Other tasks as may be required by the PC 
Qualifications and Competences 
A bachelor’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or business is 
adequate provided strong work experience.  Advanced degree in these disciplines a plus.  
Required Work Experience 
  5 years’ experience in designing, supervising, implementing farming as a business 
activity in Zimbabwe or southern Africa; 
  5 years’ experience in the horticultural sector, ideally with substantial experience 
in sourcing or facilitating SHF commercial production of horticultural produce; 
  Excellent  understanding  of  agricultural  extension,  SHF  training,  adult  education, 
and the latest developments in farmer business training; 
  Self-starter, strong interpersonal skills. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Initial contract for 3 years, with possibility of extension based on performance and project 
requirements.  
66 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
159. 
Advisor 
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Senior  Climate  Smart  Agriculture 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and  Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Senior CSA Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Reporting  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  the  CSA  Specialist  will  lead  the  work  on  climate 
change adaptation related activities in the project and overall coordination of the CSA and 
Productivity Skills Enhancement under Sub-Component 1.2. The specialist will also support 
policy  dialogue,  institutional  coordination  and  local  level  capacity  building  in  CSA  and 
productivity  skills.  S/he  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  the  other  members  of  the 
NPMU  and  supervise  the  PPIU  CSA  Specialists  and  the  CSA  Service  Provider  that  will 
support the implementation of the relevant activities in HEEP.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The  CSA  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  providing  technical  expertise  in  the  three 
objectives of CSA: (a) sustainably increasing agricultural productivity, (b) building climate 
change resilience and (c) reducing greenhouse gas emissions within the context of HEEP. 
More specifically, the CSA Specialist will perform the following tasks: 
  Provide technical inputs and guidance in the implementation of the sustainable 
agriculture production and climate change adaptation activities under HEEP; 
  Provide  technical  guidance  to  ensure  the  minimisation  of  greenhouse  gas 
emissions resulting from HEEP activities;  
  Provide inputs for measuring climate change resilience and improved agricultural 
productivity among the target men and women beneficiaries of HEEP within the 
67 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
project’s disaggregated data on gender and social inclusion in the Monitoring 
and Evaluation system, in close consultation with the HEEP M&E staff;  
  Ensure the inclusion of climate change resilience and environmental and natural 
resources management data collection in the baseline studies to be undertaken 
as part of HEEP; 
  Liaise with the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement and Ministry 
of  Environment,  Water  and  Climate  counterparts  and  with  the  Project 
Coordinator, and engage in ongoing national and regional level policy dialogue; 
  Undertake the technical review of CSA case studies, maps and technical papers 
being produced under HEEP; 
  Identify  the  appropriate  dissemination  channels  for  the  case  studies, 
vulnerability maps and other publications to be produced as part of the HEEP; 
  Participate in the screening of business plans produced by the APGs to ensure 
integration of feasible CSA practices; 
  Provide training to fill the knowledge and capacity gaps of the  various project 
stakeholders  including  service  providers  and  the  project  team  in  the 
understanding, planning and implementation of CSA measures; 
  Provide strategic orientation in planning, implementation and monitoring stages 
through periodic field visits to project intervention areas; 
  Liaise  with  Environmental  Management  Agency  officials  to  coordinate  the 
development  and  implementation  of  environmental  and  social  management 
plans 
for  the  agricultural  productivity  activities  as  required  by  the 
Environmental Management Act; 
  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB; 
  Contribute to reporting structures as laid out in the HEEP documentation; 
  In collaboration with the other NPMU members, ensure the recruitment for the 
CSA Service Provider, including the development of specific terms of reference, 
preparation of detailed work plans, as well as defining and agreeing on the exact 
nature and timing of the deliverables with the Service Provider; and  
  Undertake any other duties (related to HEEP activities) as may be assigned by 
the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A  Master’s  degree  in  agronomy,  climate  change  adaptation  or  natural  resources 
management.  
  Thorough  knowledge  of  the  institutional  setting  in  Zimbabwe  with  a  specific 
reference to CSA and climate change adaptation as well as familiarity with all the 
governmental and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved in the policy 
dialogue on CSA and climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  Thorough knowledge of the legislative and regulatory framework on agriculture and 
climate  change  as  well  as  ongoing  projects  and  initiatives  focusing  on  CSA  in 
Zimbabwe. 
  Good  knowledge  of  GIS  systems  with  relevant  spatial  skills  for  mapping  project 
areas. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
68 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, Microsoft office 
packages etc.). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
Required Work Experience 
At least six years of experience in the field of Climate Smart Agriculture or Agronomy with 
strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Renewable performance-based contract with an initial duration of one year. 
69 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
160. 
Safeguards Specialists  
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Environmental,  Social  and  Climate 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and  Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Environmental, Social and Climate Safeguards Specialists 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
The Environmental Safeguards Specialist (ESS) will be represented at national level in the 
NPMU and at RPMU working hand-in-hand with ward- based extension staff.  The ESS will 
be  the  technical  custodians  of  the  ESCMF,  its  implementation,  monitoring  and  updating 
where necessary.  In addition, the ESS will have responsibility to: 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
 
Inform  applicants  (4Ps  and  PFIs)  and  other  stakeholders,  including  local 
communities, of the ESCMF and related SECAP requirements.  
  Assist applicants, and subsequently grantees, in the implementation of the ESCMF 
and policy requirements.  
  Review  and  approve  project  proposals,  ensuring  that  they  adequately  apply  the 
IFAD’s Safeguard Policies 
  Screen for projects proposals against the exclusion list  
  Assess  the  adequacy  of  the  assessment  of  project  impacts  and  the  proposed 
measures to address the identified issues.  
70 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Assess  the  adequacy  of  the  consultation  process  and  the  affected  communities’ 
broad support to the project—and not provide funding until such broad support has 
been ascertained; and 
  Monitor project implementation, and include constraints and lessons learned in its 
progress and monitoring reports 
  Reviewing project related environmental and climate related instruments such as 
screening  reports.    They  will  also  ensure  that  the  project  complies  with  SECAP 
standards 1, 2, 6 and 9 requirements.   
  The ESS officer will collaborate with Senior Social Inclusion Specialist in reviewing 
and managing project related socio-political and economic related issues and will 
be  the  focal  person  for  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  and  Labor  and  social 
protection  laws/policies  in  the  project  and  ensure  that  the  project  complies  with 
Standard 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 requirements.  
  The  Safeguards  specialist  will  liaise  closely  with  other  relevant  government 
agencies  and  stakeholders  at  national  and  district  levels  to  ensure  that  the 
implementation  of  the  sub-projects  conform  to  IFAD  and  national  environmental 
and social policies.   
Qualifications and Competences 
  Advanced  degree  in  interdisciplinary  studies  in  environmental  economics, 
environmental  sciences,  environmental  management,  environmental  and 
social  studies,  climate  studies  and  social  impact,  or  natural  resource 
management. .  
  Certification 
or 
training 
in 
environment 
and 
social 
impact 
assessments/safeguards. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Renewable performance-based consultancy contract with an initial duration of one year. 
71 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
161. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Integrated Pest Management Officer 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and  Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Integrated Pest Management Officer 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
According to FAO, 2002, Integrated Pest Management means the careful consideration of 
all available pest control techniques and subsequent integration of appropriate measures 
that  discourage  the  development  of  pest  populations  and  keep  pesticides  and  other 
interventions  to  levels  that  are  economically  justified  and  reduce  or  minimise  risks  to 
human health and the environment. 
It  is  anticipated  that  during  the implementation  of  HEEP  activities,  the  use  of  pesticides 
and agrochemicals will increase as a result of the need to improve productivity, therefore, 
a Pest Management Plan (PMP) that is centred on local farmer needs and is sustainable, 
appropriate,  environmentally  safe  and  economic  to  use  is  needed.  The  requirement  for 
adoption  of  PMP  in  farming  systems  is  emphasized  in  the  IFAD  Guidance  Statement  on 
Pesticides, which supports safe, effective, and environmentally sound pest management 
aspects, such as the use of biological and environmentally friendly control methods. 
The  IPM  approach  to  pest  and  disease  management  within  the  first  objective  is  key  to 
achievement of the food safety agenda. In the past IPM has experienced low adoption due 
to lack of adequate awareness on the available alternative options for pest and disease 
management  besides  chemical  pesticides.  The  objective  of  the  assignment  is  to  equip 
individual farmers, APGs. 4Ps, with the necessary knowledge about IPM and the various 
pest and disease management options available. 
Scope of Work 
72 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
The scope of work will include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following activities: 
  Develop illustrative training materials & tools to guide in formulating IPM approaches 
including but not limited to biological controls for pest and disease management;  
  Develop comprehensive IPM training program; 
  Build  the  capacity  on  IPM  theory  and  practical  application  on  how  to  minimize  risks 
from the use and handling of pesticides and understanding the prohibited chemicals, 
  Promoting the use of the least toxic pesticides as economically and technically feasible; 
  Guiding in implementation and improvements of Integrated Pest Management Systems 
  Design  simple  tools  to  guide  the  development  of  pest  and  disease  management 
plans/programs. 
Assignment requirements 
  A  Bachelor’s  degree  in  agriculture,  Crop  Protection,  Agriculture  Education  and 
Extension or related and relevant field. A master’s degree in similar fields will be 
an added advantage. 
  Relevant professional training in IPM from a recognized institution is mandatory. 
  At  least  5  years’  working  experience  in  pest  and  disease  management  based  on 
IPM approach especially in the small and medium scale farmers’ context. 
  Experience  with  biological  pest/disease  management  options  and  other  non-
chemical pest/disease management methods. 
  Awareness of the available IPM solutions in horticulture 
 
  Good  knowledge  in  horticulture  production  and  pest  and  disease  management 
challenges in the target regions. 
  Demonstrated experience in capacity development of diverse audiences on IPM. 
73 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
162. 
Draft Terms of Reference for Hydrologist Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and  Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Hydrologist Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
The Objectives of the assignment is to support HEEP and Department of Water 
in improving data collection on groundwater exploration: 
  A diagnostic study undertaken by the consultant. 
  Under take hydro-geological study 
  Carry out draw down tests 
  Carry out recovery test 
  GPS Mapping of the existing boreholes 
  Establish zone of influence of one borehole to another 
  Determine Environmental and social impacts   
Responsibilities and Tasks 
The  Consultant  is  expected  to  use  both  secondary  and  primary  data  in  the 
exercise. Secondary data will involve desk study of available information/data 
on existing boreholes, drill logs, reports and maps while primary data will be 
obtained by carrying out field reconnaissance and measurements of existing 
boreholes  and  geophysical  prospecting  within  the  studied  area  using  a 
combination of geophysical methods. The outcome of the consultancy will be 
74 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
a  detailed  hydrogeological  survey  report  giving  details  of  the  findings  and 
recommendations 
The consultant shall report to the Project Management Unit (PMU, Department 
of water and other relevant stakeholders.  
Survey Approaches Required: 
The  hydrogeological/geophysical  investigations  will  be  carried  out  in  a 
multistep approach: 
  Desk study: Review of existing data, topographical maps, satellite images, existing 
studies and borehole site investigations in the area, geological reports and maps 
(if available), borehole and surface water records, etc.  
  Hydrogeological  fieldwork:  Detailed  reconnaissance  survey  of  project  area.  (GPS 
coordinates/P  codes,  water  level  measurements,  condition  of  these  boreholes, 
usage  and  performance,  estimation  of  the  hydraulic  characteristics  from  existing 
well test and aquifer test), vertical geophysical prospecting at known boreholes for 
calibration purpose: measurement of the real resistivity’s of geological formations 
based on the existing borehole logs. 
  Geophysical  measurements  vertical  and  horizontal  electric  sounding,  vertical 
electric  2D  tomography,  EM  method  and  possibly  seismic  refraction  method  are 
recommended for this assignment. 
  Analysis and interpretation of field data for selection of potential sites for drilling. 
  Presentation of the results to the PMU for validation of the best possible sites. 
  Field  validation  of  the  site  to  ensure  there  is  no  obstacle  for  drilling  (risk  of 
contamination).  
  Confirm that the report is comprehensive and cover all hydrological data analysis. 
  Geo-physical survey and local assessment of proposed site for borehole drilling for 
HEEP projects. 
  Environmental  and  social  impact  of  the  drilling  and  required  risks  reduction 
measures. 
Reporting 
The final report will contain the items a) to k) and will be submitted to the PMU. 
The  report  shall  include  all  raw  field  data  in  appendix,  interpretations  and 
justifications, hydrogeological evaluations, conclusions and recommendations 
related to the investigated areas. In addition, appropriate maps, diagrams and 
data plots shall be presented. Of considerable importance will be an objective 
assessment of the applicability and success of the methods to be applied. 
 The outline table of contents of the final report will be as follows: 
  Executive summary (1 pages) 
 
Introduction,  review  of  previous  studies  and  hydrogeological  information  of  the 
studied  area,  including  history  of  groundwater  depletion  or  known  changes  in 
75 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
quality:  mineral  content  including  unharmful  –iron-  and  harmful  -fluorides, 
nitrates; and toxic elements such as arsenic; bacteriological pathogens. 
  Geology  and  hydrogeology  (incl.  Inventory  of  positive  and  negative  boreholes, 
aquifer characteristics–storage and hydraulic- and well characteristics–sustainable 
discharge rate- based on available data., and water quality) 
  Calibration of the geophysical instrument at known boreholes (yield, log) for the 
geophysical characterization of the geological formations, including the aquifer(s). 
  Methods of investigations, including combination of geophysical methods. 
  Geophysical prospecting on different sites. 
 
Interpretation  and  comparison  of  studied  sites:  aquifer  and  borehole  potentials, 
most  suitable  drilling  site  and  justification,  target  aquifer(s)  for  boreholes, 
mentioning assumptions, risks and risk management. 
  Proposed  drilling  method,  with  equipment  characteristics  (incl.  estimation  of  the 
casing and screen positions) 
  Simplified  Environmental  and  social  impact  of  the  drilling  and  required  risks 
reduction measures 
Minimum Qualifications 
  At least a Bachelor’s degree in the relevant field such as, Hydrology and Water 
Engineering, engineering geology, physical, or earth science 
  At least 5 years of professional experience in hydrological development; 
  Ability  to  position  siting,  design  borehole  drilling,  develop  and  capacity  test 
boreholes 
  Ability to work in multi-disciplinary teams; 
  Proof of availability of all the equipment’, personnel and ability to mobilize them 
on  short  notice  (Include  list  of  equipment,  Brand/Manufacturer,  CVs  of  the 
personnel) to perform the survey. 
76 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
163. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Access to Finance Advisor 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matabeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Access to Finance Advisor 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work: The Access to Finance Advisor will be based at the National PMU 
and  will  report  to  the  National  Project  Coordinator.  The  responsibility  of  the  Access  to 
Finance  Advisor  is  to  help  improve  access  to  finance  by  strengthening  the  capacity  of 
financial institutions to develop and deliver financing and insurance products to SHFs, APGs 
and MSMEs in commercial horticulture. This will involve initiating, organizing, leading the 
recruitment  of  expert  advisors,  supervising,  and  evaluating  capacity  building  to 
Commercial  Banks,  Building Societies,  MFIs,  Community Banks,  SACCOs  and  Insurance 
Companies, through workshops and coaching sessions.    
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Provide  strategic  and  operational  guidance  on  all  matters  relating  to  Access  to 
Finance under HEEP. 
  Liaise with PFIs and related entities to identify capacity constraints impacting the 
provision of finance to SHs, APGs, MSMEs and other parties in the value chain. 
  Liaise  with  SHS,  APGs  and  MSMEs  to  understand  and  appreciate  their  pressing/ 
urgent financing needs. 
  Work  with  financing  entities  to  develop  training  and  coaching  curricula  and 
programmes based on, or informed by, the observations made on the supply and 
demand sides. 
  Champion and/or facilitate the development of appropriate financing products on 
the supply side (some of which would be gender sensitive), for the financing entities 
supporting Horticulture. This may include working with insurance companies, too, 
to develop responsive Horticultural insurance products. 
  Conduct  training  and  coaching  workshops  to  help  bridge  capacity  gaps  in  the 
financing entities.  
77 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Facilitate group discussions aimed at identifying specific challenges on the supply 
side. This would include working with Banks, MFIs, and SACCOs. 
  Participate in the launch and roll-out of new financing and insurance products by 
the respective entities.   
  Assist  in  the  documentation  of  “lessons  learned”,  success  stories  on  Access  to 
Finance and exchange of knowledge on an on-going basis. 
  Foster  and  build  relationships  with  PFIs,  SHFs’  representative  bodies,  Insurance 
companies,  the  Zimbabwe  Association  of  Micro-Finance  Institutions  (ZAMFI), 
among others.  
  Liaise  and  work  with  the  Project  Management  Unit  during  Supervision  and 
Implementation Support Missions.  
  Perform other related duties as may be requested by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  University  degree  in  Banking,  Finance,  Business  Administration,  Agricultural 
Economics, or in a related field; advanced degree an added advantage   
  Sound  understanding  of  Zimbabwe’s  regulatory  framework  concerning  banking 
policies, regulations, and systems especially those that affect MSMEs, SHFs, APGs 
access to finance.  
  Demonstrable knowledge of Agricultural Financing for SHFs, APGs, MSMES, with a 
solid grasp of challenges and opportunities.    
  Ability  to  successfully  to  bother  organize  and  deliver  training  and  coaching 
interventions at both senior and junior levels.  
  Sensitivity to cultural, ethnic and gender differences. 
  Proficiency  in  written  and  spoken  English,  conversant  in  one  or  more  local 
languages an added advantage. 
Required Work Experience 
  At  least  5  years  of  professional  experience  in  a  commercial  bank  or  MFI  with 
responsibility for lending to agriculture, MSMEs, SHFs, APGs.  
  Relevant  professional  experience  in  developing  and  delivering  capacity  building 
programmes and financing products for/ to Commercial Banks, MFIs, and SACCOs. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
The initial contract duration for this position will be three years, with potential for extension 
to HEEP’s duration (8 years), based on performance and requirements. 
78 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
164. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Chief Accountant 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Chief Accountant 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work  
Reporting  directly  to  the  National  Project  Coordinator  with  technical  responsibility  to 
Director of Finance MLAFWRD, the Chief Accountant is key personnel of HEEP responsible 
for the overall financial management aspects, implementing   financial policies, strategies 
in line with IFAD and Government of Zimbabwe requirements and international standards. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
 
Implementation and maintenance of the off-the shelf accounting system ensuring that 
the  chart  of  accounts  and  reporting  system  thereof  provides  information  to  link 
between project activities by category, component and funding source. 
  Timely input of budget data into the accounting system and production of monthly and 
quarterly  reports  regarding  aspects  of  Project  financial  monitoring  bringing  out 
variances and advising technical specialist as to the limits of expenditure. 
  Prepare half-yearly consolidated statements of project accounts as an integral part of 
the  Management  Information  System  to  be  submitted  to  the  Project  Steering 
Committee, and subsequently to IFAD. 
  Prepare financial statements in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS) - Accrual basis with the prerequisite disclosures for non-cash items 
79 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
and  liaise  with  external  auditors  to  audit  the  HEEP  accounts  to  meet  the  required 
submission dates by IFAD.  
  Oversee tax matters of the Project, ensuring that tax exemptions and tax refunds for 
the procurement of goods and services for the Project are secured at the appropriate 
time. 
  Provide training and guidance to project beneficiaries and implementing partners for 
AWPB  activity  preparation  and  submissions  and  participate  in  the  development  and 
implementation of plans, and procedures for budget request submission activities to 
ensure that project objectives are achieved in accordance with prevailing government 
practices which are acceptable to IFAD.  
  Calculate the cost of services and associated analyses and propose actions to be taken 
to improve cost-efficiency of services, without affecting quality. 
  Process documentation and follow up on disbursements from the government and IFAD 
to ensure that releases are not delayed. Ensure that funds for Project implementation 
are disbursed in a timely manner to enable project interventions to be carried out on 
time. 
  Prepare and submit regular withdrawal applications to  IFAD and follow up to  ensure 
that the project does not run short of liquidity. 
  Follow up on all project funds released to implementing entities and technical partners 
for timely retirement and proper utilization. 
  Ensure that statements of expenditure (SOEs) are carefully checked for eligibility with 
relevant financial agreements. 
  Maintain effective internal control environment for the project by ensuring  that: 
  All HEEP funds are used in accordance with the conditions of the financing agreements, 
with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which the 
funds were provided; 
  Counterpart funds have been provided and used in accordance with the conditions of 
the financing agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for 
the purposes for which they were provided; 
  Goods  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in  accordance  with  the  financing 
agreement and in accordance with government and IFAD’s rules and procedures; 
  All necessary  supporting documents,  records and accounts are kept in respect of all 
project activities, with clear linkages between the books of account and the financial 
statements presented to the financiers; 
  Designated accounts are maintained in accordance with the provisions of the financing 
agreement and in accordance with the financier’s rules and procedures; 
  Provide any support to the Procurement Unit to assist in procurement for the HEEP in 
accordance with procedures laid down by Financing Agreements of IFAD and OFID. 
80 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  Ensure that fixed assets are well accounted for and annual verification is undertaken 
of the condition of assets and their location. 
  Ensure the effective and efficient operation of administrative aspects of the HEEP. 
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Coordinator 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor’s degree in business or finance, and a professionally qualified accountant with 
Membership of the Zimbabwe Institute of Chartered Accountants.  
  Strong  managerial  skills  and  demonstrated  capacity  to  manage  people  and  interact 
with a wide range of private sector partners and government representatives.  
  Strong organizational skills. Versatility, ability to multi task and meet deadlines. 
  Excellent organisational and analytical skills. 
  Excellent  computer  skills  and  well-versed  in  the  use  of  Excel,  Word  and  accounting 
software. 
  Good communication skills and ability to interact with a wide range of private sector 
partners and government representatives. 
Required Work Experience 
  At least eight years of relevant work experience, including at least four as a financial 
manager or accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Preparing withdrawal applications for external funding agencies.  
  Audit management experience in donor funded program. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
The  total  duration  of  the  contract  is  three  years  and  is  subject  to  annual  performance 
review.
81 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
165. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Assistant Accountant 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village  horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all  provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focussed in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Assistant Accountant 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work  
Reporting  to  the  Program  accountant,  the  assistant  accountant  supports  the  Program 
Accountant to achieve result-oriented objectives of HEEP financial management. Under the 
supervision of the Program accountant, the assistant accountant will take responsibility for 
all  accounts  and  finance  transactions  of  the  HEEP  and  for  maintaining  all  accounting 
documentation in good order. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Support in the preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
  Analysing payment requests and reconciliation with approved documentation including 
purchase orders and contracts 
  Posting  payment  invoices  into  financial  management  systems  in  line  with  approved 
work plans. 
  Assist in preparation of half-yearly consolidated statements of project accounts as an 
integral part of the Management  Information  System to be  submitted to the Project 
Oversight Committee, and subsequently to IFAD. 
  Ensure that fixed assets are well accounted for, and regular verification is undertaken 
of the condition of assets and their location. 
  Ensure  that  supporting  documents,  records  and  accounts  are  kept  in  respect  of  all 
project activities, with clear linkages between the books of account and the financial 
statements presented to the financiers; 
  Preparing bank reconciliations for the project accounts.  
  Assisting  in  review  of  invoices  and  supporting  documents  before  any  payments  are 
processed. 
  Following up on outstanding advances both to staff and service providers. 
82 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Assisting  in  ensuring  budgetary  controls  to  ensure  that  no  payment  is  done  unless 
there is sufficient budgetary provision. 
  Ensuring systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounting records. 
  Prepare the SOE’s and the WA Application to IFAD for timely replenishment. 
  Participating  in  the  Audit  exercises  providing  auditors  will  all  information  and 
documentation they require 
  Follows  up  accountabilities  of  funds  advanced  at  the  level  PMU  and  with  other 
implementing partners. 
  Ensure systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounts records. 
  Ensure  that  salary  and  tax  deductions  are  remitted  in  timely  way  and  that  all 
acknowledgement of receipt is documented. 
  Withholding Tax is recovered from payments, remitted and Tax Certificates are issued 
to suppliers. 
  Any other duties as may be assigned by the Program Accountant. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor’s degree in business or finance, and an affiliate professional accountant. 
  Advanced quantitative and analytical skills. 
  Excellent  computer  skills  and  well-versed  in  the  use  of  Excel,  Word  and  accounting 
software. 
  Good communication skills; Fluency in written and spoken English.  
Required Work Experience 
  At least four years of relevant work experience, including at least four as a financial 
manager or accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Preparing withdrawal applications for external funding agencies. 
  Working with colleagues in geographically separate locations.  
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Seconded  GoZ  staff.  The  total  duration  of  the  contract  is  six  years  and  is  subject  to 
satisfactory annual performance reviews. 
83 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
166. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior Infrastructure Specialist 
Background: The Project 
1.  Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture in Zimbabwe through the Village horticulture model and the 4P hub and spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Senior Infrastructure Specialist 
Duty Station: NPMU 
Overall Scope of Work 
  Reporting  to  the  National  Project  Coordinator,  support  Implementing  Agencies  in 
infrastructure project identification and development ranking. 
  Support  Implementing  Agencies  in  preparing  TORs  for  Feasibility  Studies  &  Detailed 
Designs and other short-term consultancies. 
  Conduct feasibility studies together with Implementing Agencies for selected projects, 
taking into account gender and social inclusion needs. 
  Review feasibility studies and/detailed designs at every stage of the project cycle. 
  Build the capacities of Implementing Agencies through Training of Trainers on planning, 
preparation of feasibility studies & detailed designs, contract management, supervision 
of services and works and operation and maintenance. 
  Prepare training materials for use by beneficiaries and Implementing Agencies staff. 
  Ensure, in collaboration with the respective technical experts, that national, IFAD and 
OFID  environmental  and  social  safeguards  are  adhered  to  during  development  of 
irrigation schemes.  
  Follow up agreed action points of IFAD supervision mission.  
  Support the NPMU in all technical matters. 
84 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Deliverables 
  Guidelines for project identification & development ranking. 
  TORs for feasibility studies and detailed designs. 
  Feasibility study reports for all infrastructure. 
  Site management handbook. 
  Contract management handbook. 
  Operation  and  maintenance  manuals  for  all  infrastructure  developed  under  the 
project.  
Qualification and Experience 
2.  The Senior Engineer should demonstrate the following qualifications and experience: 
  A Master’s Degree in Engineering or equivalent. 
  At  least  fifteen  years  recent  experience  in  rural  infrastructure  development  and 
project  implementation  focusing  on  sustainability  related  aspects  such  as 
establishing/ strengthening user groups, social aspects and value-chain linkages;  
  Proficiency in spoken and written English. 
  Excellent interpersonal skills and team spirit. 
  Experience  of  projects  involving  multiple  and  diverse  stakeholders  including 
Government agencies, private sector, and end users.  
  Registered with a recognized engineering professional board or institution. 
  Computer literacy with proficient knowledge of Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, Power 
Point)  and  conversant  with  modern  engineering  design  software  like  AUTOCAD, 
IRRICAD, GIS etc. 
Contract 
The duration of the contract will initially be for a period of 60 months. 
85 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
167. 
Draft Terms of Reference: M&E and Planning Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture development. The Project operates in the all provinces for the 4P interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: M&E and Planning Specialist at NPMU 
Duty Station: Harare, with frequent travel to project area 
Overall  Scope  of  Work:  Reporting  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  the  M&E  and  Planning 
Specialist will have overall responsibility for the coordination of the timely establishment, 
operation and maintenance of the project M&E system; for the generation of knowledge 
and evidence; and for the communication of project activities, achievements and lessons 
learned.  
Main Tasks and Responsibilities 
The specific tasks of the M&E and Planning Specialist will include: 
  Set up the M&E system for HEEP: 
 
  Revise the project log frame matrix and include gender sensitive indicators. 
  Assist in developing the results oriented-AWPB. 
  Develop the overall framework for the project M&E. 
  Guide the process of reporting against the project key indicators. 
  Prepare and M&E matrix. 
  Set up an MIS system that entails: 
  Development  of  formats  (for  data  collection,  analysis  and  interpretation)  to  track 
project  inputs  and  its  results:  production,  consumption,  sales  and  income  of  the 
producers and traders/buyers at household, group and value chain/cluster level. 
86 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Coordinate with other project staff, especially planning and M&E staff, to ensure MIS 
system  is  appropriately  designed  and  implemented  such  that  they  enable  data-rich 
knowledge  management,  captures  and  analyses  disaggregated  data  on  gender  and 
social inclusion. 
  Define requirements for use of software for a web-based online MIS and off-line tablet-
based devices. 
  Provide technical assistance to recruit, guide and supervise organisations or individuals 
contracted  to  implement  surveys  and  studies  required  for  evaluating  project  effects 
and impacts. E.g. Rolling baseline survey, Annual Cluster Tracking Survey, etc. 
  Develop a capacity-building plan on M&E for the project staff at NPMU and provincial 
level and for business skills and Gender Action Learning System (GALS) mentors from 
Agritex on the cascade training approach: 
  Development of training modules for different stakeholders and partners; 
  Development of operation manuals/guidelines on M&E processes; 
  Use of software for MIS and GIS required for the functioning of the MIS system; 
  Train M&E staff at national and local levels (Training of Trainers); and  
  Set up a cascade training mechanism for Extension Officers seconded fulltime to the 
project, Social Mobilizers and Business Skills Mentors and GALS Social Mentors. 
  Assist the Project Manager in consolidating gender sensitive project progress reports. 
  Advise  the  Senior  Management  by  identifying  areas  of  concerns  that  might  justify  a 
review  of  the  project  M&E  system  and/or  implementation  arrangements,  including 
adverse effects on target groups   as a result of project implementation, and suggest 
remedial measures if necessary. 
  Undertake  regular  field  visits  to  follow-up  recommendations  made  from  previous 
supervision  missions  and  support  the  project  implementation  in  other  ways  as 
requested by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences:  
  Master’s degree in Agriculture, Economics, Statistics, M&E, Development Studies, 
Rural Development, Planning or a related field  
  Solid knowledge of participatory M&E approaches and techniques. 
  Strong knowledge in the development of performance-based indicators. 
  Demonstrated  experience  in  the  techniques  of  data  collection,  data  entry,  data 
analysis and design of management information systems to facilitate the planning 
and decision- making processes within the institution/s 
  Working knowledge of written and spoken English  
  Excellent analytical and report writing skills. 
  Excellent spoken and written English.  
  Strong  knowledge  of  computer  applications,  particularly  MS  Excel,  Word,  Access 
and PowerPoint, STATA and other software packages for data analysis and technical 
reports. 
87 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Required Work Experience: 
At least 8 years of work experience with (a) M&E Design, (b) planning and implementation 
of the M&E systems, (c) data management and analysis, (e) capacity building and training 
in  M&E  development  and  implementation,  (f)  use  of  Geographic  Information  Systems 
technologies, and (g) knowledge management strategy development. 
Mode  and  Duration  of  Contract:    The  contract  will be  three  years,  renewable  based  on 
performance.  
88 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
168. 
Draft Terms of Reference: KM and Communications Specialist  
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: KM and Communication Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare  
Overall Scope of Work: Reporting to the Project Coordinator, the KM and Communication 
Specialist will have overall responsibility for the knowledge management activities of HEEP, 
in  particular  for  the  generation  of  evidence  -based  knowledge  products  and  for  the 
communication of project activities, achievements and lessons learned to stakeholders and 
the wider public. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Specific tasks of the KM and Communication Specialist will include: 
  Develop  and  coordinate  project  KM  and  Communication  strategies  and  annual 
action  plans  to  ensure  systematic,  continuous  learning  and  knowledge  sharing 
about the HEEP activities and achievements. 
  Design, at the project  start-up, a  HEEP communication strategy, geared towards 
the  target  group  and  stakeholders,  project  implementers,  and  to  a  wider  public, 
both within Zimbabwe and outside. 
  Develop  a  functional  approach  for  prioritising  and  implementing  Knowledge 
Management activities and for developing and disseminating knowledge tools and 
products. 
  Coordinate and coach the project staff at NPMU and regional hub level on KM and 
communications. 
  Facilitate Knowledge Management and Communication Platform between the HEEP 
and with other projects in the same field. 
89 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Develop  and  implement  processes  to  ensure  that  lessons  learned,  and  good 
practice,  including  information  of  gender  issues,  are  captured  systematically, 
shared, and used to improve project implementation, including in the development 
of the AWPBs. 
  Support advocacy efforts through providing evidence of impact gathered through 
the  M&E  system,  closely  linked  to  knowledge  management  and  communication 
activities. 
  Provide  technical  backstopping  and  guidance  to  implementing  partner  staff  on 
KM&L. 
  Develop  or  adapt  an  internet  based  and  other  relevant  tools  and  processes  for 
implementing  staff  to  collect,  process/analyse,  store  and  share  information  and 
knowledge, and ensure relevant staff have the capacity to use them. 
  Advise the senior management of HEEP by identifying areas of concerns that might 
justify review of the KMC Strategy and/or implementation arrangements. 
  Ensure  that  innovative  experiences,  learning  and  good  practices  are  captured, 
synthesized, documented and shared continuously within the project and  with in-
country  partners,  IFAD  and  other  regional  and  international  partners,  through  a 
project website and other media. 
  Coordinate the preparation of the work plans and budgets and progress reports for 
knowledge management and learning activities. 
  Coordinate  with  graphic  designers,  subcontractors,  researchers,  other  team 
members  and  partners  and  clients  to  establish  workflows  and  timelines  for 
production of KM and communications materials.  
  Ensure timely implementation and monitor assigned activities against work plans.   
  Assist the M&E and Planning Specialist in consolidating the project progress reports. 
  Undertake  regular field visits to follow-up recommendations made  from previous 
missions and support the project implementation. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor’s  Degree  Media  in  Media  Studies,  Rural  Development,  Planning  or  a 
related field, with preference to candidates with a Master’s degree preferred 
  Ability to solve technical, managerial or operational problems and evaluate options 
information,  resources,  well-rounded  experience,  and 
based  on  relevant 
knowledge.  
  Demonstrated  ability  to  communicate  clearly  and  concisely,  both  orally  and  in 
writing, and lead presentations, training courses, and effective meetings.  
  Experience/knowledge of website and social media technologies and applications.  
  Strong knowledge of MS Office applications.  
  Ability to work both independently and as part of a team.  
  Excellent writing and presentational skills.  
Required Work Experience:   
8 years working experience, with at least 3 years in KM in donor-assisted projects  
Mode and Duration of Contract:  The seconded contract for 3 years, renewable based 
on performance.  
90 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
169. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior Social Inclusion Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Senior Social Inclusion Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall  Scope  of  Work:  The  Senior  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  will  be  based  at  the 
National PMU and will report to the National Project Coordinator. The responsibility of the 
Senior Social Inclusion officer is to support gender mainstreaming social inclusion activities 
for  the  HEEP.  She/he  is  expected  to  provide  strategic  and  analytical inputs  intended  to 
guide  integration  of  socio-economic,  targeting,  youth  and  gender  issues  in  any  project 
activity focusing on targeting and social inclusion, participatory performance assessments 
and capacity building and mentoring.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Provide strategic and day-to-day guidance to projects to integrate gender issues, 
social inclusion and Participatory Performance  Assessments cross-cutting themes 
throughout the project cycle.  
  Develop  and  implement  a  capacity  strengthening  programme  for  IPs  on  gender, 
PPA and social inclusion, and gender transformative and integrated approaches. 
  Provide training on GALs in order to promote gender transformation in HEEP 
  Work in close coordination with and support technical staff in the NPMU and PPIUs 
to ensure that targeting strategy is implemented in line with project requirements 
and also responds to emerging needs. 
  Ensure that all surveys, policy dialogues and studies include a focus on gender and 
youth across relevant socioeconomic strata. 
91 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Conduct  gender  analysis  studies  and  develop  plans  of  action  that  identifies 
opportunities and entry points for mainstreaming gender into the project.  
  Ensure that the plan of action for gender mainstreaming mirrors the project’s log 
frame and include the development of gender specific project components, gender 
responsive targets, indicators and timelines. 
  Lead the implementation of gender and social inclusion AWPB activities and ensure 
targets are met within stipulated time frames.  
  Support  monitoring  and  evaluation  efforts  to  gather  disaggregated  data  for 
beneficiaries  of  different  socio-economic  groups,  gender  and  ensure  that  data 
summaries are used to inform project strategies.  
  Ensure that project level AWPBs reflect the relevant Project´s targeting and social 
inclusion strategy. 
  Review all MOUs/Contracts/TORs to ensure that issues related to gender, youth and 
targeting are adequately integrated, including indicators and information, informed 
by relevant project´s Log frame and project design document.  
  Lead  documentation  of  lessons  learnt,  success  stories  on  social  inclusion  and 
gender mainstreaming and exchange of knowledge on an on-going basis. 
  Foster and build relationships with partners and networks and other government 
entities  that  promote  gender  equality  and  empowerment  and  mainstream  their 
work in project targeted beneficiaries. 
  Support the Project Management Unit during Implementation Support Missions  
  Perform other related duties as may be requested by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Advanced degree in Rural Sociology, Gender Studies, Rural Development, Agricultural 
Economics or other Social Sciences with a focus on gender or social inclusion.  
  Strong familiarity with agriculture, food systems, food security and rural development 
and  their  relationship  with  gender  equality,  women’s  empowerment  and  youth  of 
different socioeconomic categories. 
  Experience  in  organizing  and  facilitating  community-based  training  and  learning 
policy 
together  with 
practical 
learning 
linking 
field 
and 
exchanges 
analysis/development. 
  Sensitivity to cultural, ethnic and gender differences. 
  Demonstrated  experience  in  managing/effectively  working  with  multidisciplinary 
teams, governments and international development partners. 
  Proficiency  in  written  and  spoken  English  and  conversant  with  local languages  is  an 
added advantage. 
3.  Required Work Experience 
  At  least  10  years  of  relevant  professional  experience  in  gender  mainstreaming  and 
promotion of gender equality, women’s empowerment and working with youth in rural 
development interventions.  
92 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Experience in working with Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) 
Mode and Duration of Contract: The duration of the position is for the duration of the 
project, based on performance. 
93 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
170. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior Procurement Officer 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Senior Procurement Officer 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Under the general supervision of the Project Coordinator, the NPMU Procurement  Officer 
will support the day-to-day project procurement activities as agreed with IFAD for HEEP. 
Additionally, S/he will be responsible for supervision of the execution of work by the Junior 
Procurement Officers in the Provincial PIUs of the project. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  S/he  will  take  full  responsibility  on  the  procurement  activities  of  the  project, 
conducting,  overseeing,  and  supporting  the  project  procurement  in  accordance  with 
IFAD procurement procedures and the Project Implementation Manual; 
  S/he will be responsible for preparing and updating the project procurement plans in 
line with the Annual Work and Budget Plan (AWBP); 
  S/he  will  prepare  the  solicitation  documents  for  all  HEEP  purchases  in  line  with  the 
Procurement  Plan  and  the  AWBP  for  goods,  service  and  works  using  standard 
documentation agreed with IFAD; 
  S/he will assist and advise the evaluation committee members in matters related to 
evaluation of tenders and recommendation for the selection and award; 
  S/he will liaise with the various project  stakeholders’ and provide input in preparing 
various Project Management Reports (PMR) to be submitted to IFAD; 
94 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  S/he  will  provide  support  and  guidance  to  the  Junior  Procurement  Officer(s)  in  the 
Provincial Districts to ensure compliance with IFAD procedures; 
  S/he will review cases and all support documents received from Provincial District and 
advise accordingly; 
  Monitor  contractors’  performance  (goods,  works  and  services)  and  ensures  timely 
delivery and quality of services, expedites delivery as appropriate; 
  S/he  will  ensure  management  of  the  contract  recordkeeping  in  a  systematic  and 
organized way; 
  S/he will ensure updating/introducing the actual and correct data in the IFAD contract 
monitoring  tool  CMT  and  in  the  Procurement  End  to  End  system  once  the  latter  is 
deployed; 
  S/he  will  ensure  management  of  the  contract  recordkeeping  in  a  systematic  and 
organized way; 
  S/he will ensure updating/introducing the actual and correct data in the IFAD contract 
monitoring  tool  CMT  and  in  the  Procurement  End  to  End  system  once  the  latter  is 
deployed. 
  Act as a point of reference for all HEEP procurement related matters. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Advanced  university degree  in procurement,  financial management,  supply chain 
management, business administration or related field. 
  A professional qualification from a recognized institution such as CIPS Professional 
certification (minimum level 3) or equivalent in Procurement  and or supply chain 
operations will be considered an asset. 
  Excellent  knowledge  and  understanding  of  public  procurement  and  contract 
management. Excellent experience in the usage of computers and office software 
packages  (MS  Word,  Excel,  etc.).  Good  data  analysis  skills.  Good  organizational 
skills. Excellent interpersonal communication skills and relationship builder. Fluency 
in written and oral English is a requirement.  
Required Work Experience 
5  years  of  experience  in  procurement  or  supply  chain  management.  Familiarity  with  a 
donor-funded project, such as UN system, World Bank or AfDB will be considered an asset. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited for the total duration of the project, initial contract for 3 years (with possibility 
of extension based on performance) 
95 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
171. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Junior Procurement Assistant Clerk 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Procurement Assistant 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Under  the  general  supervision  of  the  Procurement  Officer  at  NPMU,  the  Procurement 
Assistant  will  assist  in  the  day-to-day  project  procurement  activities  and  support  the 
Procurement Unit in conducting procurement-related operations of HEEP.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Assist  the  Procurement  Officer  in  preparing  solicitation  documents  for  the  various 
project procurement activities both at the NPMU and Provincial/District levels; 
  Assist  through  coordination  and  support  the  procurement  evaluation  teams  as 
necessary; 
  Organize  and  maintain  computerized  records  for  procurement  and  contracts  both 
online and paper-based; 
  Provide operational support and capacity development to the various project staff; 
  Maintain and update the project contract register; 
  S/he will assist the Procurement Officer in updating/introducing the actual and correct 
data  in  the  IFAD  contract  monitoring  tool  CMT  and  in  the  Procurement  End  to  End 
system once the latter is deployed; 
  S/he will assist the Procurement Officer in the contract recordkeeping in a systematic 
and organized way; 
  S/he will assist the Procurement Officer in updating/introducing the actual and correct 
data  in  the  IFAD  contract  monitoring  tool  CMT  and  in  the  Procurement  End  to  End 
system once the latter is deployed; 
  Carry  out  any  other  procurement-related  duties  as  requested  by  the  Procurement 
Officer. 
96 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Minimum  Diploma  degree  in  procurement,  supply  chain  management,  business 
administration or related field. 
  A professional qualification from a recognized institution such as CIPS Professional 
certification or equivalent in Procurement and or supply chain will be considered an 
asset. 
  Fluency in written and oral English. 
Required Work Experience 
  2 years of experience of relevant administrative positions 
  Excellent  experience  in  the  usage  of  computers  and  office  software  packages  (MS 
Word, Excel, etc.). 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
A seconded contract for three years. 
97 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
172. 
Advisor/Provincial Coordinator 
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Regional  PMU:  Agribusiness 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Regional Project Coordinator / Agribusiness Specialist 
Duty Station:  Three reginal PMU offices: Mutare, Bulawayo and Masvingo 
Overall Scope of Work 
The Regional Project Coordinator (PPC) will head the Provincial Project Management Unit 
(RPMU) and as such will have overall responsibility for coordination and implementation of 
HEEP  with  the  objective  to  achieve  an  increased  smallholder  participation  in  market-
oriented and climate-smart value chains in her/his respective province. 
The  PPC  assures  that  the  HEEP  is  implemented  along  the  guidelines  provided  by  the 
Financing Agreement, project design report, the PIM and following the guidance given by 
the  National  Project  Coordinator,  the  lead  ministry  MLAFWRD,  the  HEEP  Steering 
Committee and supervision missions. 
As a Senior VC and Agribusiness Specialist, the PPC will directly manage the identification 
and development of enterprise-led smallholder-inclusive value chains in the province and 
its HEEP target districts. The HEEP target per province, over project life, is to provide TA 
and  matching  grants  to  50  microenterprises  and  200  Agriculture  Producer  Groups.  The 
NPMU  will furthermore  engage  40  Lead  Enterprises  to  the  value  chain  investments  and 
upgrading, which will be coordinated by the PPC at province level. Also access to financial 
services is promoted. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
As Province Project Coordinator 
  Direct the HEEP PPIU staff and provide oversight to all HEEP-hired service providers 
and  consultants  operating  in  the  province,  ensuring  that  all  carry  out  their  agreed 
duties professionally and efficiently ensuring the achievement of the HEEP objectives; 
98 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Ensure efficient coordination within the PPIU and seek synergies with other agriculture 
and economic development projects implemented in the same province; 
  Ensure strong sense of teamwork within the PPIU and provide technical backstopping 
and coordination of this team; 
  Lead and support the district network of extensionists that are engaged to implement 
HEEP; 
  Ensure  an  optimum  use  of  HEEP  provincial  resources  in  achievement  of  the  agreed 
objectives of the project; 
  At provincial level, expedite and coordinate the timely Annual Work Plan and Budget 
(AWPB)  process  at  all  levels,  and  ensure  that  these  are  developed  in  a  fully 
participatory manner involving men and women, learning from previous years; 
  Lead the provincial inputs to annual AWPBs and to the Annual Progress Reports; 
  At provincial level, direct project implementation in accordance to agreed plans and to 
report  on  progress  and  outcomes  in  a  methodological  manner,  including  technical 
reports and financial reporting; 
  Oversee  at  province  level  that  the  project  adheres  to  social,  environmental  and 
climate-related safeguards and contributes to gender equity, women’s empowerment; 
  Oversee at province level the full functioning of the project’s Monitoring and Evaluation 
System and make use of the system as a management tool; 
  Ensure proper financial management at province level, including proper planning and 
comprehensive reporting on expenditures and expenditure forecasts; 
  Ensure efficient procurement in line with the Procurement Plans;  
  Meet  and  liaise  with  relevant  provincial  authorities,  district  authorities,  other 
agriculture/business  development  projects  in  the  province,  the  private  sector,  and 
other donors working in agriculture to ensure synergies are created and resources are 
leveraged for a coherent provincial economic development; 
  Attend  relevant  meetings,  technical  working  groups,  conferences,  etc.  to  share 
knowledge, coordinate programs, and promote HEEPs work; 
As Senior Value Chain and Agribusiness Specialist: 
  Lead HEEP’s Value Chain and Agribusiness development efforts in the province; 
  Coordinate the provincial implementation of the BDS services to Microenterprises and 
Agricultural  Producer  Groups,  following  the  detailed  guidance  in  the  Project 
Implementation Manual; 
  Lead the provinces delivery of Matching Grants to Microenterprises and to Agricultural 
Producer  Groups,  following  the  detailed  guidance  in  the  Project  Implementation 
Manual; 
  Ensure  all  APG/ME/LE  Technical  Assistance  and  Financial  Support  are  appropriately 
planned  for,  prepared  and  implemented,  following  the  guidance  in  the  PDR  and  the 
PIM; 
  Support and coordinate the work by District level HEEP extensionists; 
  Coordinate and supervise the activities by BDS service providers in the province; 
  Facilitate  market  driven  linkages  between  agribusiness  producers,  wholesalers, 
processors, and markets within the project areas; 
  Provide capacity building and mentoring to HEEP staff in the province and its districts; 
Qualifications and Competences 
A Master’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or other relevant 
discipline related to Agricultural Development. 
99 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Required Work Experience 
  10-years’  experience  in  rural  development  in  Zimbabwe,  including  managerial 
experience; 
  Experience  in  project  administration,  financial  management  and  reporting, 
preferably using systems of international institutions; 
  An  existing  network  of  relations  pertaining  to  community  planning,  smallholder 
agriculture; value chains and financial inclusion; 
  Experience  in  collaborating  across  government  ministries  and  in  public-private 
dialogue;  
  Strong leaderships skills, including the ability to delegate responsibility within the 
team and to implementing partners. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited, 3 years (with possibility of extension) 
100 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
173. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Regional PMU: CSA Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: CSA Specialist 
Duty Station: Regional PMU: Mutare, Masvingo and Bulawayo 
Overall Scope of Work 
The  CSA  Specialist will lead the  work  on  climate change  adaptation related  activities at 
Provincial  level  to  contribute  to  CSA  and  Productivity  Skills  Enhancement  under  Sub-
component  1.2.  The  specialist will  also support  institutional coordination  and  local level 
capacity building in CSA and productivity skills at provincial level. S/he will work in close 
collaboration with the other members of the PPIU and supervise the CSA Service Provider 
that will support the implementation of the CSA and productivity enhancement activities 
in each Province of HEEP.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  The  CSA  Specialist  will be  responsible  for  providing  technical  expertise  in  the  three 
objectives  of  CSA:  (a)  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity,  (b)  building 
climate  change  resilience  and  (c)  reducing  greenhouse  gas  emissions  within  the 
context of HEEP in each Province. More specifically, the CSA Specialist will perform the 
following tasks: 
  Provide  technical  inputs  and  guidance  in  the  implementation  of  the  sustainable 
agriculture production and climate change adaptation activities under HEEP; 
  Provide  technical  guidance  to  ensure  the  minimisation  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
 
resulting from HEEP activities;  
Identify indicators for reporting on the CSA activities and ensure the inclusion of these 
indicators in the M&E system with disaggregated data on gender and social inclusion;  
  Participate in the screening of Business Plans for the APGs and provide guidance on 
CSA options and technologies; 
  Undertake the technical review of CSA case studies, maps and technical papers being 
produced under HEEP in the particular Province; 
101 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Provide  training  to  fill  the  knowledge  and  capacity  gaps  of  the  various  project 
stakeholders including service providers and the PPIU in the understanding, planning 
and implementation of CSA measures; 
  Provide  strategic  orientation  in  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  stages 
through periodic field visits to project intervention areas; 
  Liaise  with  Environmental  Management  Agency  Provincial  officials  to  coordinate  the 
development and implementation of environmental and social management plans for 
the agricultural productivity activities as required by the Environmental Management 
Act; 
  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB; 
  Contribute to reporting structures as laid out in the HEEP documentation; and 
  Undertake  any  other  duties  (related  to  HEEP  activities)  as  may  be  assigned  by  the 
Senior CSA Specialist or Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A Master’s degree in agronomy, climate change adaptation or environment and 
natural resources management.  
  Thorough  knowledge  of  the  institutional  setting  in  Zimbabwe  with  a  specific 
reference to CSA and climate change adaptation as well as familiarity with all 
the  governmental  and  non-governmental  actors  and  stakeholders  involved  in 
the policy dialogue on CSA and climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  Thorough knowledge of the legislative and regulatory framework on agriculture 
and climate change as well as ongoing projects and initiatives focusing on CSA 
in Zimbabwe. 
  Good knowledge of GIS systems with relevant spatial skills for mapping project 
areas. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good  knowledge  of  communication  tools  and  technologies  (internet,  Microsoft 
office packages etc.). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
Required Work Experience 
At  least  four  years  of  experience  in the  field of  Climate Smart  Agriculture or  Agronomy 
with strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Seconded, renewable performance-based contract with an initial duration of one year. 
102 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
174. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Regional PMU: Infrastructure Officer 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture  Enterprise  Enhancement  Project  (HEEP)  is  an  eight-year  development 
project  financed  jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD), 
OPEC  Fund  and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of 
smallholder horticulture in Zimbabwe through Village horticulture model and the 4P hub 
and  spoke  horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all  provinces  for  the  4P 
interventions  and  is  focused  in  four  provinces  for  the  VHGs:  Matebeleland  South, 
Masvingo,  Manicaland  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components: 
Component  1:  Village  Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development, 
Component  2:  Access  to  Finance,  and  Component  3:  Institutional  Support  and  Project 
Coordination.  HEEP  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its 
National  Project  Management  Unit  (NPMU)  in  Harare  and  in  the  three  Regional  Project 
Management Units (RPMU) in the field, to manage and coordinate HEEP project activities. 
While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and 
Rural  Development  (MLAFWRD),  the  Village  Horticulture  Gardens  will  be  implemented 
through  ARDA  and  HEEP  4P  activities  include  pro-active  co-operations  with  the  private 
sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger 
processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Provincial Infrastructure Officer 
Duty Station: Regional PMUs (2) 
Key tasks 
  Supporting  Implementing  Agencies  in  gender  sensitive  infrastructure  project 
identification and development ranking at Province level. 
  Conducting  feasibility  studies  together  with  Implementing  Agencies  for  selected 
projects, taking into account the needs of men and women. 
  Reviewing  feasibility  studies  and/detailed  designs  at  every  stage  of  the  project 
cycle, before submission to the NPMU. 
  Building the capacities of the Implementing Agencies through Training of Trainers 
on  planning,  preparation  of  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs,  contract 
management, supervision of services and works, and operation and maintenance. 
  Preparing  training  materials  for  use  by  beneficiaries  and  Implementing  Agencies 
staff. 
  Ensuring, in collaboration with the respective technical experts, that national, IFAD 
and OFID environmental and social safeguards are adhered to during development 
of irrigation schemes.  
  Supporting the provincial PMU in all technical matters. 
Deliverables 
  Guidelines for project identification & development ranking. 
  TORs for feasibility studies and detailed designs. 
  Feasibility study reports for all infrastructure. 
103 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Timely and effective construction supervision implemented. 
  Timely and convenient contract management implemented. 
  Operation and maintenance manuals for all infrastructure developed under 
the project, in the province.  
Qualification and Experience 
The  Provincial  Project  Engineer  should  demonstrate  the  following  qualifications  and 
experience: 
  A Master’s Degree in Engineering or equivalent. 
  At least five years recent experience in rural infrastructure development and project 
implementation  focusing  on  sustainability  related  aspects  such  as  establishing/ 
strengthening user groups, social aspects and value-chain linkages.  
  Proficiency in spoken and written English. 
  Excellent interpersonal skills and team spirit. 
  Experience  of  projects  involving  multiple  and  diverse  stakeholders  including  the 
Government agencies, private sector, and end users.  
  Registration with a recognized engineering professional board or institution. and 
  Computer literacy with proficient knowledge of Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, Power 
Point)  and  conversant  with  modern  engineering  design  software  like  AUTOCAD, 
IRRICAD, GIS etc. 
Duration 
The duration of the contract will initially be for a period of 60 months. 
104 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
175. 
Officer 
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Regional  PMU:  M&E  and  Planning 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: M&E and Planning Officer 
Duty Station:  Provincial Management Units in Mutare, Bulawayo and Masvingo  
Overall Scope of Work: The M&E and Planning Officers will be based in HEEP Provincial 
Implementation  Units  and  work  under  the  supervision  of  the  provincial  PIU  Agricultural 
Value Chain and Agribusiness Specialist, who in the head of the provincial implementation 
unit. The  M&E  officer  will also work  closely  with the  M&E  and Planning Specialist in the 
National PMU. S/he will take responsibility for data collection, database management and 
assist with provincial data collection and entry into MIS. The M&E Officer will perform data 
and  reporting  support  functions  and  will  overall  be  in  charge  of  ensuring  the  project 
databases in the province are regularly updated.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The Monitoring & Evaluation Officer’s duties and responsibilities include the following: 
  Populate and maintain the project databases and MIS, ensuring disaggregation by 
sex and age 
  Support Business Skills Mentors and GALS Mentors in data entry into MIS on tablets  
  Carry out data collection activities in a sex and age desegregated manner 
  Produce summaries of the data entered to inform management 
  Produce project maps 
105 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Support other Provincial staff and implementing partners in ensuring completeness 
of their routine reports 
  Provide  technical  backstopping  to  in  preparation  of  activity-based  annual  work 
plans  and  budgets  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  project’s  implementation 
approach. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor's  degree  in  Economics,  Statistics,  Agricultural  Economics,  Development 
Economics, Business Administration, Social Sciences or a related field 
  Post graduate Diploma/Training in M&E is an added advantage 
  Post graduate training in Statistics is an added advantage  
  Training  and/  or  demonstrated  evidence  in  the  use  of  Geo-spatial  technologies 
(GIS) 
  Good reporting and report writing skills  
  Good knowledge of computer applications (particularly MS Excel, Word, Access and  
  PowerPoint, STATA)  
  Working knowledge of written and spoken English. 
Required Work Experience 
At least 2 years’ experience in data collection, data entry and data analysis, preferably at 
least partly in a development project. 
Mode and Duration of Contract: The duration of the position is for the duration of the 
project, based on performance. 
106 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
176. 
Nutrition Officer 
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Regional  PMU:  Social  Inclusion  and 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer 
Duty Station: Regional Project Management Units  
Overall Scope of Work: The Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer will report to the NPMU 
Senior Social Inclusion Specialist and the Programme Coordinator and be responsible for 
the  successful  poverty,  social,  gender,  youth  and  nutrition targeting  in  the  project  area 
covered by his/her province.  
Main  tasks  and  Responsibilities:  The  Social  Inclusion  and  Nutrition  Officer  will  be 
responsible for the following tasks:  
  Develop and supervise the implementation of the multi-pronged gender targeting 
strategy  to  ensure  effectiveness  and  foster  social  inclusion,  gender  equality  and 
effective poverty targeting. 
  Develop and supervise the implementation of a forward-looking and transformative 
gender strategy, detailing specific gender actions the project that will undertake to 
promote gender equality and women’s empowerment, and engaging with men and 
local leaders. 
  Contribute  to  the  development  of  a  nutrition  mainstreaming  strategy  including 
information, education and communication (IEC) materials and coordinate effective 
roll-out and monitoring. 
  Provide  technical  expertise  and  facilitate  development  of  a  plan  to  promote 
consumption of diverse foods. 
107 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Ensure  nutrition  is  adequately  integrated  in  project  activities  and  documents, 
including Annual Work Plan and Budget, progress reports and M&E system. 
  Assess the effectiveness of the nutrition education activities by visiting households 
and interacting with households and farmer groups. 
  Ensure  that  nutrition  indicators  (particularly  KAP)  are  tracked,  data  adequately 
collected and reported on regular bases, in close liaison with the M&E officer.  
  Establish  and  maintain  working  relationships  with  local  government  bodies 
(Provincial  Food  &  Nutrition  Committees)  to  support  implementation  of  the 
activities  and  technical  assistance  and  establish  local  partnerships  on  nutrition 
(SUN, UN agencies, etc.). 
  Carry  out  community-wide  gender  and  nutrition  sensitisation  using  the  Gender 
Action Learning Systems (GALS). 
  Adapt the SIRP GALS manual and provide training to GALS mentors. 
  Furnish  the  GALS  Mentors  with  tablets  to  monitor  gender  equality,  nutrition-
sensitive interventions and women’s empowerment.  
  Design  instruments  for  the  collection  of  gender-disaggregated  data;  that  would 
provide baseline and monitoring data on gender differences in the participation in, 
and  benefits  from,  project  activities,  performance  towards  the  project  strategic 
objectives  on  women’s  economic  empowerment,  community  empowerment  and 
participatory processes.  
  Coordinate the design of the pro-WEAI and nutrition baseline survey to be carried 
out by a hired consultant.  
  Develop  tailored  nutrition  education  training  materials  and  coordinate  capacity 
building and training sessions aimed at project staff, implementers and extension 
workers (AGRITEX) on nutrition education. 
  Develop a training roll-out strategy for use by AGRITEX extension staff for further 
provision of nutrition education to HEEP beneficiaries. 
  Develop  a  practical  field  manual  for  facilitating  (large)  group  discussions  and 
participatory problem analysis/Participatory Rural Appraisal. 
  Design gender, nutrition, youth and socio-economic specific studies to be conducted 
during the project cycle to gather in-depth qualitative and/or quantitative data, and 
disseminate  lessons  learnt/  stories/reports  at  project  level,  and  in  knowledge 
sharing  events,  on  what  works  for  targeting,  gender  mainstreaming,  youth 
inclusion and nutrition mainstreaming in HEEP.  
108 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Design  and  conduct  a  training  project  for  AGRITEX  in  the  procedures  mentioned 
above.  
  Systematically capture, document and disseminate lessons learnt, success stories 
and innovations for informing implementation, policy engagement and upscaling.  
  Organise  exposure/exchange  visits  and  workshops  for  lesson  learning  and 
collaboration. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Master’s or Bachelor’s degree in Sociology, Gender Studies, Development Studies, 
Social Sciences or a related field.  
  Proven  experience  in  developing  strategies  for  effective  gender  and  nutrition 
mainstreaming (with the production of training manuals). 
  Good knowledge of community health/nutrition education and knowledge of global 
nutrition frameworks, food and nutrition security stakeholder networks and multi-
sectoral platforms at country, regional and global levels.  
  Working knowledge of land and water management, nutrition-sensitive agriculture, 
FFS, Community development, agriculture and value chain development.  
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills, with very good command of English. 
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
Required Work Experience 
  Five or more years of relevant professional experience. 
  At least 2 years’ experience in working on nutrition, and GALS.  
Mode  and  Duration  of  Contract:  Three-year  seconded  contract,  renewable  based  on 
performance. 
109 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
177. 
Officer 
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Regional  PMU:  Junior  Procurement 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Junior Procurement Officer 
Duty Station: Regional PMU 
Overall Scope of Work 
Junior Procurement  Officer  supports  the Procurement  Officer  and Procurement  Assistant 
in the conduct of any procurement activities under the Provincial PIU, in which she/he is 
stationed.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Provide  administrative  support  to  the  National  Procurement  Officer  in  preparing 
various solicitation documents and in collecting and reviewing materials related to 
procurement operations in his/ her respective operational area in the PPIU. 
  Assist in the development, publication and management of solicitation documents, 
clarification of bidder’s enquiries, and receipt and evaluation of offers. 
  Carry out administrative tasks related to maintaining the procurement documents 
and files launched for his/ her respective area. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor’s  or  other  similar  degree  in  procurement,  supply  chain  management, 
business administration or related field. 
110 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  A professional qualification from a recognized institution such as CIPS Professional 
certification or equivalent in Procurement and or supply chain will be considered an 
asset. 
  Fluency in written and oral English. 
Required Work Experience: 2 to 4 years of work experience in procurement, or supply 
chain management. 
Mode and Duration of Contract: A seconded contract is for the duration of the Project, 
based on performance. 
111 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
178. 
Provider 
Draft Terms of Reference: Business Development Service  (BDS) 
Background 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Purpose and Objectives of the Assignment 
The  purpose  of  this  consultancy  is  to  develop  and  implement  an  action  plan  for  the 
Business Development  Services  of HEEP,  jointly with the project implementing teams at 
the  provinces  and  districts  covered  by  HEEP.  This  activity  will  support  the  smallholder 
agriculture  transformation  strategy  of  the  project  and  help  the  Agricultural  production 
Groups  (APGs)  and  Microenterprises  (ME)  to  successfully  prepare  business  plans  and 
implement  them  with  HEEP’s  Matching  Grant  support.  The  BDS  Provider  will  be  an 
institution  with  experience  and  professional  capacity  in  Agribusiness  Development  and 
Finance. 
The  HEEP  target  over  project  life  is  to  provide  TA  and  matching  grants  to  200 
microenterprises  and  800  Agriculture  Producer  Groups.  The  BDS  Provider  (or  providers 
covering  1-2  provinces  each)  will transfer  Business  Planning Skills first  to  HEEP  project 
implementation  teams  at  province  and  district  levels.  Thereafter,  jointly  with  the  HEEP 
teams, the BDS provider will train and coach the HEEP’s targeted value chain stakeholder 
APGs and MEs, following the HEEP Matching Grant (MG) criteria and templates. During this 
process  the  APGs  and  MEs  will complete  their  own  business  plans,  so  they  are  able  to 
apply for MGs and implement them efficiently. Also access to financial services is promoted 
by  the  HEEP,  and  the  consultancy  will  ensure  that  Business  Planning  templates  are  in 
accordance  with  those  of  the  Financial  Institutions’  requirements  in  the  Rural  Finance 
sector of Zimbabwe. 
Specific Tasks 
Key tasks of the assignment include: 
  Review the Project Design Report (PDR) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
to understand the HEEP’s overall approach and the role that the BDS plays in the 
project. Based on the information in the PDR and PIM, discuss and agree with the 
HEEP  senior  staff  the  appropriate  approach  and  contents  of  the  planned  BDS 
112 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
programme,  the  best  delivery  methods  and  the  timing  of  this  capacity  building 
input,  to  ensure  full  harmony  with  the  other  activities  of  the  project  and  the 
participation of men and women. 
  Preparation.  Design,  based  on  the  Service  Provider’s  already  developed  service 
packages, the structure and contents of the BDS support programme targeting the 
APGs and their members as well as the MEs supported by HEEP. This programme 
would include both basic (for most APGs) and more advanced (for better performing 
APGs  and  for  the  Microenterprises)  Business  Planning  modules,  covering  among 
other the subjects: 
  General introduction on the importance of production/business plan,  
  Project farmer grant opportunity through HEEP, and requirements 
  Business Plan suitability for access to bank finance 
  Business model selection and description 
  Production improvement and volume planning 
  Costs and benefits 
  Marketing and sales 
  Efficient purchase of input materials, investment items and their transport 
  Production Plan 
  Business Plan 
  Procurement Plan. 
  TOTs.  Based  on  the  modules,  conduct  a  Training  of  Trainers  workshop(s)  for  the 
province and district HEEP teams. 
  ME  BDS.  Based  on  the  modules,  implement  the  BDS  workshops  with  all 
Microenterprises. The BDS service provider leads technically the implementation of 
these  workshops,  with assistance,  facilitation  and  support  by  HEEP  province  and 
district teams. 
  APG BDS. Based on the modules, co-implement with the HEEP province and district 
teams in the APG BDS workshops. The BDS service provider will lead minimum 2 
days for each APG workshop, and provides backstopping for the overall process. 
  As result of both ME and APG BDS workshops, as criteria for successful workshop 
closing, at least 80 per cent of participants will have appropriate business plans for 
matching grant application. 
Consultant’s qualifications and experience 
  The Service Provider will provide consultants to carry out the assignment mainly 
from its own its own staff specialised in smallholder and microenterprise business 
planning.  
  The  Service  Provide  is  expected  to  have  at  least  15  years  of  experience  in 
agribusiness, smallholder and commercial value chain development and finance. 
  The service provider is expected to have already developed BDS training modules 
that will fit or can be modified to be used in HEEP BDS service. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The  consultancy  will  be  carried  out  by  the  selected  Service  Provider  with  experience  of 
operations with the smallholder community in the HEEP project area. The Service Provider 
will  provide  qualified  staff  for  the  operations,  potentially  using  different  implementation 
113 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
teams in different provinces. The final operational approach and the delivery timeline will 
be developed following the selection of the value chains for the HEEP support.   
Duration of the Assignment 
The duration of the Service Provider’s  contract is planned for the  first four  years  of the 
project implementation. 
114 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
179. 
Draft Terms of Reference: CSA Service Providers 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: CSA Service Provider 
Duty Station:  Mutare, Masvingo and Bulawayo 
Overall Scope of Work 
The  CSA  Service  Provider  will support  the  implementation of  the  activities  for  CSA  and 
Productivity Skills Enhancement under Sub-component 1.2. The Service Provider will work 
under  the  supervision  of  the  CSA  Specialist and  undertake  the  capacity  building in CSA 
and productivity skills for the APGs and MSMEs in each Province of HEEP.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The CSA Service Provider will be responsible for providing technical expertise and building 
APG  capacity  in  the  three  objectives  of  CSA:  (a)  sustainably  increasing  agricultural 
productivity,  (b)  building  climate  change  resilience  and  (c)  reducing  greenhouse  gas 
emissions within the context of HEEP in each Province. More specifically, the CSA Service 
Provider will perform the following tasks: 
  Provide  technical  inputs  and  guidance  in  the  implementation  of  the  sustainable 
agriculture production and climate change adaptation activities based on the APG 
and MSME business and investment plans; 
  Provide technical guidance to ensure the minimisation of greenhouse gas emissions 
resulting from the APG business and investment plans;  
  Collect  the  relevant  data  based  on  the  identified  gender  sensitive  indicators  for 
reporting on the CSA activities and contributing to the HEEP M&E system;  
  Develop CSA case studies and maps to capture the benefits of CSA and agricultural 
productivity in each HEEP Province; 
115 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Provide training to fill the knowledge and capacity gaps of the APGs and MSMEs in 
the understanding, planning and implementation of CSA measures; 
  Support the implementation of environmental and social management plans for the 
agricultural productivity activities as  required by the  Environmental Management 
Act; and 
  Provide monthly and quarterly reports to feed into the HEEP reporting structures. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A team leader with a Master’s degree in agronomy or climate change adaptation or 
natural  resources  management.  Team  members  with  relevant  experience  in 
agriculture,  CSA  technologies,  and  community  mobilisation  and  capacity 
development.  
  A  team  leader  with  thorough  knowledge  of  the  institutional  setting in  Zimbabwe 
with a specific reference to CSA and climate change adaptation as well as familiarity 
with all the governmental and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved 
in the policy dialogue on CSA and climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  A team leader with thorough knowledge of the legislative and regulatory framework 
on  agriculture  and  climate  change  as  well  as  ongoing  projects  and  initiatives 
focusing on CSA in Zimbabwe. 
  At  least  one  team  member  with  good  knowledge  of  GIS  systems  with  relevant 
spatial skills for mapping project areas. 
  A team leader with excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation 
skills. 
  A  team  leader  with  good  knowledge  of  communication  tools  and  technologies 
(internet, Microsoft office packages etc.). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
Required Work Experience 
A team leader with at least six years of experience in the field of Climate Smart Agriculture 
or Agronomy with strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Renewable performance-based contract with an initial duration of one year. 
116 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
180. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Financial Literacy Service Provider 
Background 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Purpose and Objectives of the Assignment 
The purpose of this consultancy is to develop a develop a strategy and action plan for the 
financial  service  literacy  support  of  HEEP  and  implement  the  action  plan  with  the  key 
beneficiaries of the project in the districts covered by HEEP. This activity will support the 
smallholder  agriculture  transformation  strategy  of  the  project  and  help  the  Agricultural 
production  Groups  (APGs)  and  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  to 
successfully  implement  their  HEEP-supported  projects.  The  Financial  Literacy  Service 
Provider will be a financial institution that will carry out its HEEP-financed financial literacy 
operations as a part  of  its overall strategy for the provision of banking services in rural 
areas. 
Specific Tasks 
Key tasks of the assignment include: 
  Review the Project Design Report (PDR) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
to understand the HEEP’s  overall approach and the role that the financial literacy 
support plays in the project strategy. 
  Based  on  the  information  in  the  PDR  and  PIM,  discuss  with the  SCP  senior  staff 
about  the  appropriate  approach  and  contents  of  the  planned  financial  literacy 
support, the best delivery methods and the timing of this capacity building input, 
to ensure full harmony with the other APG and MSME support actions of the project. 
  Design,  as  much  as  possible  based  on  the  Service  Provider’s  already  developed 
service  packages,  the  structure  and  contents  of  the  financial  literacy  support 
project targeting the APGs and their members as well as the MSMEs supported by 
HEEP.  This  programme  would  include  both  basic  and  more  advanced  financial 
literacy modules, covering among other subjects: 
the benefits of opening a bank account for a farmer, group and an MSME 
 
  benefits of business planning and record keeping in a household or an MSME 
117 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
the basics of the “Saving for a Purpose” approach 
 
  available  rural  lending  products  for  rural  producers  and  MSMEs,  including  both 
working  capital  loans  and  investment  loans  and  their  terms  and  collateral 
requirements  
  group saving and lending practices 
  money transfer transactions and payment services 
  modes and benefits of mobile and digital banking in rural areas. 
o 
 
Implement  the  agreed  financial literacy  support  programme  in  the  field  with  the 
APGs and MSMEs based on time schedules agreed with HEEP, following the overall 
timeline developed for the HEEP value chain support activities. 
  Review continuously the progress and  results achieved with the financial literacy 
support and develop the modules and their delivery methods accordingly. 
  Through  the  contacts  created  with  the  APGs,  their  members  and  the  MSMEs 
through the capacity building operations, aim at increasing their financial linkages 
and inclusion in a sustainable way as saving and borrowing clients either with the 
Service Provider itself or with other financial institutions operating in the HEEP area.    
Consultant’s qualifications and experience 
  The Service Provider, a financial institution, will provide consultants to carry 
out the assignment mainly from its own its own staff specialised in operations 
with smallholders and MSMEs.  
  The  Service  Provide  is  expected  to  have  years  of  relevant  professional 
experience in working with the HEEP target group. 
  The  service  provider  is  expected  to  have  already  developed  rural  finance 
training modules that will fit or can be modified to be used in HEEP financial 
literacy training. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The consultancy will be carried out by a Zimbabwean financial institution with operations 
with the smallholder community in the HEEP project area. The Service Provider will provide 
qualified  staff  for  the  operations,  potentially  using  different  implementation  teams  in 
different  provinces.  The  final  operational  approach  and  the  delivery  timeline  will  be 
developed following the selection of the value chains for the HEEP support. 
Duration of the Assignment: The duration of the Service Provider’s contract is planned 
for the first four years of the project implementation. 
118 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
181. 
Provider 
Draft  Terms  of  Reference:  Gender,  Youth,  Nutrition  Service 
Background 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Purpose and Objectives of the Assignment 
The purpose of this consultancy (firm or local NGO) is to come up with targeting, gender, 
nutrition  and  social  inclusion  strategy  and  action  plan  that  will  guide  gender,  nutrition 
targeting and youth mainstreaming in the HEEP.  In addition, the Service Provider will train 
Agritex  and  the  Social Inclusion and  Nutrition Officer  of  HEEP.  The  Service  Provider  will 
also  be  responsible  to  carry  out  independent  targeting  to  ensure  that  the  project 
interventions reach the HEEP target group.  
Specific Tasks 
Key tasks of the assignment include: 
  Review the Project Design Report (PDR) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
to understand the content of targeting and gender, youth and inclusion strategies 
in terms of the profile of target group, targeting strategy and operational measures, 
analysis of gender issues thematic areas, and  human and financial resources for 
supporting the implementation of analysis. 
  Based  on  the  information  in  the  PDR  and  PIM,  identify  gaps  for  additional 
information  required  to  develop  full  targeting,  gender  and  youth  inclusion 
strategies.  Gather more information to gain a better understanding of the poverty, 
youth, nutrition and gender dimensions of the project, through reviewing additional 
documentation (PRAs, Feasibility, reports etc) and/or by conducting socioeconomic 
assessments in the field. 
  Develop a draft targeting, gender, nutrition and strategy and action plan for HEEP. 
The strategy should define the target group, the objectives for reaching the target 
group, any lessons learned so far, principles for identifying and reaching the target 
group  (such  as  poverty  and  food  insecure  and  marginalised  groups,  women  and 
women  headed  households,  youth  participation  and  partnerships  etc)  as  well  as 
119 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
mechanisms for reaching the target group for the different activities. The strategy 
should  be  clear  on  how  the  project  plans  to  support  the  different  target  groups 
within the framework of HEEP.  
  Discuss the draft strategy with gender specialists, key implementing partners and 
service  providers  to  strengthen  the  relevance  of  the  strategies  to  overall 
implementation of the project and to ensure buy-in. This will help establish realistic 
action  plans,  identify  any  training  needs  and  secure  the  allocation  of  necessary 
resources. 
 
Incorporate the comments from the discussions/workshop and finalise the strategy 
and action plan.  
  Carry  out  community  mobilisation  workshops  with  Agritex  and  train  community 
mentors who will be provided with tablets for  monitoring gender,  youth nutrition 
and targeting in the project.   
  Document lessons learnt and success stories. 
Methodology  
The consultant shall propose his/her methodology to achieve objectives of the assignment. 
This methodology should include the following 
  Desk review of key project documents and other relevant documents 
 
Interviews with key government implementing agencies 
  Questionnaire on socioeconomic analysis 
  One day stakeholder workshop. 
Deliverables and timeframes 
i. Inception report: to be submitted to PIU within 7 working days after the signing 
detail 
of 
understanding/interpretation  of  the  TORs,  the  methodology  of  carrying  out 
the assignment and detailed work plan  
Inception 
contract. 
should 
report 
The 
the 
ii. Gap analysis report based on review of PDR and PIM  
iii. Socioeconomic analysis report  
iv. Draft Targeting, Nutrition, Gender and Youth Strategy and Action Plan within the 
framework of HEEP 
v. Stakeholder workshop report  
vi. Final Targeting, Gender, Nutrition and Youth Strategy for HEEP with the following 
content:  
  Context  
  Rationale  
  Targeting strategy  
  Rationale for gender, youth and nutrition mainstreaming  
120 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Targeting,  gender,  nutrition,  youth  inclusion  mainstreaming  within 
project components  
  Gender mainstreaming at the organizational level  
 
Implementation arrangements and time frame 
  Costs and financing  
  Action Plan 
  Documentation of lessons learned  
  Adapting the SIRP GALS manual for use in HEEP training of Agritex and 
GALs mentors 
  Training of Agritex and HEEP field staff and GALS Mentors on GALS. 
  Validating the lists of all targeted people at ward level to ensure that the 
project intervention is reaching the target group (twice a year) 
  Together with Agritex, conducting community wide gender sensitisation 
ant community level using GALS.  
Consultant’s qualifications and experience 
  The  Service  Provider  will  provide  consultants  with  Master’s  degree  in 
Sociology, Gender Studies, Nutrition social sciences or similar fields  
  Ten or more years of relevant professional experience; 
  Proven  experience  in  developing  strategies  for  effective  gender-
mainstreaming (with the production of training manuals and at least one 
Gender Strategy); 
  Working  knowledge  of  community  development,  agriculture  and  value 
chain development, and land and water management;  
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills, with very good command of 
English; 
  Creative, innovative system thinkers, with ability to catalyse change. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The  consultancy  will be  carried  out  by  a  firm  or  a  local  NGO.  The  Service  Provider  will 
provide qualified staff in targeting and social mobilisation, and nutrition training, gender 
and youth development interventions. The Service Provider will implement the assignment 
with  Agritex  and  will  withdraw  after  two  years  after  capacitating  Agritex  and  the  GALS 
mentors to carry out their training.  
121 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Duration of the Assignment 
The duration of the consultancy will initially be for a period of two years, renewable subject 
to performance. 
122 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
182. 
Terms of Reference for a Senior Horticulture Advisor 
Background 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Horticulture Advisor 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
The Senior Horticulture Advisor will work in close collaboration with the Senior Horticultural 
Agribusiness Advisor, the Farming as a Business Specialist, the Nutrition Garden Advisor 
and the Monitoring, Evaluation and Planning Specialist to provide  advice and support to 
HEEP  implementation,  to  ensure  that  market-led  interventions  to  enhance  smallholder 
horticulture production, productivity and market linkages are implemented and monitored.  
The Senior Horticulture Advisor will provide leadership and technical guidance to support 
the three regional Horticulture Advisors in the implementation of the Village Horticulture 
Garden (VHG) schemes under subcomponent 1.1.  
S/he will coordinate and build strong working relationships between the Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture,  Water  Climate  and  Rural  Resettlement  (MLAWCRR),  the  Department  of 
Agriculture,  Technical  and  Extension  Services  (AGRITEX),  the  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development Agency (ARDA), value chain actors, 4P partners and financial institutions. 
She/he will contribute to building the capacity of service providers to deliver better quality 
services to farmers more efficiently and effectively.  
The Senior Horticulture Advisor will be based in Harare, with frequent travel to the field.  
They  report  directly  to  the  Project  Manager.  Specific  duties  of  the  Senior  Horticulture 
Advisor include, but are not limited to the following:  
Project Implementation 
123 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Provide  overall  strategic  guidance  on  all  aspects  of  horticulture  production  and 
small-scale irrigation in the VHGs 
  Support  ARDA,  AGRITEX  and  other  partners  in  the  daily  implementation  of  the 
project 
  Develop  the  ToR,  recruit  and  supervise  the  three  regionally  based  Horticulture 
Advisors 
  Participate in the coordination workshops and meetings at PMU and Regional levels 
  Assist in the preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
  Work  closely  with  relevant  staff  and  promote  nutrition,  gender,  youth  and 
environment mainstreaming in VHGs 
Capacity Strengthening 
  Support the development of the farming as a Business and market linkage activities 
to  ensure  it  is  relevant  and  appropriately  written  for  commercial  horticulture 
production for smallholder farmers.  
  Supervise training of the Horticulture Advisors, ARDA and AGRITEX staff in required 
horticulture production, extension methodologies and technical innovations. 
  Support  university  students  with  their  fieldwork  for  their  MSc  and  PhD  thesis 
studies; 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning: 
 
In  coordination  with  the  PMU  Monitoring,  Evaluation  and  Planning  specialist, 
provide  guidance  to  HEEP  and  partners  in  the  design  and/or  enhancement  of 
participatory M&E tools and protocols to strengthen data  collection, analysis and 
reporting. 
  Assist in the design and implementation of baseline, mid-term and final evaluations 
and ensure follow-up of findings/recommendations to improve program quality 
  Prepare contributions to quarterly an annual progress reports; 
Qualifications and experience:  
She/he  should  hold  at  least  a  Master’s  degree  in  agricultural  sciences  with  particular 
emphasis on horticulture or agronomy. Other attributes / experience should include: 
 
Innovative,  energetic  individual  with  demonstrated  contributions  to  the  field  of 
agriculture and committed to seeing measurable impacts at farm level.  
  5 to 10 years of working experience in horticulture 
124 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Demonstrated  capacity  to  take  on  a  leadership  position  with  strong  managerial 
skills and capacity to manage people and interact with a wide range of stakeholders 
  Competency in field data collection, monitoring, analysis and reporting. 
  Working experience in private sector engagement.  
  Excellent communication skills - including fluency in English. 
The position is based in Harare  with frequent technical support and supervision visits to 
field sites. 
Contract: Two-year  contract,  with  six  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on 
agreed performance targets and deliverables 
125 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
183. 
Terms of Reference for a Regional Horticulture Specialist 
Background 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is an eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture in Zimbabwe through the Village horticulture model and the 4P hub and spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Horticulture Specialist 
Duty Station: Regional offices in Mutare, Bulawayo and Masvingo 
Overall Scope of Work 
The  Horticulture  Specialist(s)will be  stationed  at  the  Regional  Project  Management  Unit 
(RPMU) and will report to the Senior Horticulture Specialist. The Horticultural Specialists 
will have the responsibility to support the implementation of horticulture intervention at 
field level, in collaboration with other value chain actors in the project area 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  To  promote  efficient  coordination  between  the  Regional  Horticultural 
Specialists, Agritex and horticulture value chain players  
 
 
to visit farmers in order to identify the problems, if any, suggest remedial 
measures to the same 
to Train farmers to assist them to develop their professional skills and 
experience, through FFS, demonstrations, and field days 
  Review the situation of horticulture development and identify the gaps 
 
identify  constraints  in  horticulture  development  and  suggest  remedial 
measures 
  bring in the latest technology relevant  to crop and agro-ecology of the 
same in all aspects of horticulture 
  Develop extension material based on recent advancement in horticulture 
126 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Orient farmers and extension staff on recent advancement of horticulture 
  Suggest the appropriate marketing model for farmer produce.   
  To  ensure  an  optimum  use  of  HEEP  resources  in  achievement  of  the 
agreed objectives of the project; 
Qualifications and Competences 
A  Diploma  in  Horticulture  and  higher-level  qualification in  horticulture  will be  an  added 
advantage.  
Required Work Experience 
  2-years’ experience in managing horticulture Zimbabwe 
  Experience  in  extension  and  reporting,  preferably  using  systems  of  international 
institutions; 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
The Senior Horticulture Advisor will be recruited for  the total duration of the project. 
127 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
184. 
Draft Terms of Reference: Nutrition Garden Advisor 
Background: The Project 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) is a eight-year development project 
financed jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund 
and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  HEEP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder 
horticulture  in  Zimbabwe  through  Village horticulture  model  and  the  4P  hub  and  spoke 
horticulture  development.  The  Project  operates  in  all provinces  for  the  4P  interventions 
and is focused in four provinces for the VHGs: Matebeleland South, Masvingo, Manicaland 
and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Component  1:  Village 
Horticultural  Garden  and  4P  Mobilization  and  Development,  Component  2:  Access  to 
Finance, and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination. HEEP is in the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the three Regional Project Management Units (RPMU) in the 
field,  to  manage  and  coordinate  HEEP  project  activities.  While  the  lead  agency  of  the 
project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Fisheries,  Water  and  Rural  Development 
(MLAFWRD), the Village Horticulture Gardens will be implemented through ARDA and HEEP 
4P activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the farming 
community,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  larger  processing  and  marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Nutrition Garden Advisor 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Reporting to the Project Coordinator, the Nutrition Garden Advisor will lead the work on Village 
Horticulture  Gardens  related  activities  in  the  project  and  overall  coordination  of  the 
activities  under  Sub-Component  1.1.  The  specialist  will  also  support  policy  dialogue, 
institutional coordination and local level capacity building in GAP  and productivity skills. 
S/he will work in close collaboration with the other members of the NPMU and supervise 
the RPMU  Nutrition Garden Specialists that will support  the  implementation of the relevant 
activities in VHG for HEEP in collaboration with the ARDA managers.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The  Nutrition  Advisor  will  be  responsible  for  providing  technical  expertise  in  the  three 
objectives  of  VHGs:  (a)  sustainably  increasing  horticulture  productivity,  (b)  training 
farmers in horticulture production and (c) reducing greenhouse gas emissions within the 
context of HEEP. More specifically, the CSA Specialist will perform the following tasks: 
  Provide  technical  inputs  and  guidance  in  the  implementation  of  increased 
production and productivity of nutrition sensitive crops in the VHGs; 
  Provide  technical  guidance  to  ensure  the  minimisation  post-harvest  losses 
activities;  
  Provide inputs for ensuring market access for the horticultural farmers  
  Ensure  improved  horticultural  productivity  among  the  target  men  and  women 
beneficiaries of HEEP within the project’s disaggregated data on gender and social 
inclusion in  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  system,  in  close  consultation  with  the 
HEEP M&E staff;  
128 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  Ensure  the  inclusion  of  VHGs  data  collection  in  the  baseline  studies  to  be 
undertaken as part of HEEP; 
  Liaise with the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement and Ministry 
of Environment, Water and Climate counterparts and with the Project Coordinator, 
and engage in ongoing national and regional level policy dialogue; 
  Undertake the technical review of VHGs case studies, and reporting being produced 
 
under HEEP; 
Identify the appropriate dissemination channels for the case studies, vulnerability 
maps and other publications to be produced as part of the HEEP; 
  Participate in the screening of VHGs business plans produced by the APGs to ensure 
integration nutrition sensitive and high value crops.  
  Provide  training  to  fill  the  knowledge  and  capacity  gaps  of  the  various  project 
stakeholders including service providers and the project team in the understanding, 
planning and implementation of VHGs; 
  Provide  strategic  orientation  in  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  stages 
through periodic field visits to project intervention areas; 
  Liaise  with  ARDA  managers  on  the  management  of  VHGs  to  coordinate  the 
development and implementation of horticultural productivity activities  
  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB; 
  Contribute to reporting structures as laid out in the HEEP documentation; 
  Undertake any other duties (related to HEEP activities) as may be assigned by the 
Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A Master’s degree in agronomy, or crop science.  
  Thorough knowledge of the horticulture sector in Zimbabwe. 
  Thorough knowledge of the legislative and regulatory framework on horticulture in 
Zimbabwe. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, Microsoft office 
packages etc.). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
Required Work Experience 
At  least  three  years  of  experience  in  the  field  of  Agronomy  with  strong  knowledge  of 
horticulture. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Renewable performance-based contract after one year for the duration of the project 
129 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Appendix 8: Detailed Implementation Guidance 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION GUIDANCE 
COMPONENT  1:  Village  Horticultural  Gardens  (VHGs)  and  4P  Mobilization  and 
Development. 
185. 
This  component  consists  of  three  sub-components  involving:  Sub-component 
1.1  VHGs  Mobilization  and  Development;  Sub-component  1.2:  4P  Identification, 
Mobilization, and Capacity Building; and Sub component 1.3: 4P Matching Grants (MGs) 
and  Public  Infrastructure.  Component  1.1  will  be  implemented  through  ARDA. 
Subcomponents 1.2 and 1.3 will involve anchor firms, which are mainly private sector-led 
working with the various stakeholders. Implementation of the three components will be 
sequenced  to  start  with  Subcomponent  1.1  and  1.2  concurrently  followed  by  sub-
component 1.3 activities. Implementation will also be informed by the detailed  in-depth 
analysis  of  the  4Ps  in  other  countries  including  LAC  and  APR  regions.  The  knowledge 
management  learning  event  will  be  organized  during  early  start  of  the  project 
implementation.  
Sub component 1.1 
VHGs Mobilization and Development 
Introduction and Background 
186. 
HEEP will support the creation and capacitation of Village Horticultural Gardens 
(VHGs), a concept introduced by in the Presidential Pillar of the GoZ Horticultural Recovery 
and Growth Plan. The expected results of this sub-component are 620 VHGs functioning 
and providing increased income and nutritional outcomes to 31,000 poor rural households. 
187. 
HEEP  support for VHGs. IFAD loan funds will support each VHG for surveying, 
land clearing, borehole siting and sinking, all necessary irrigation equipment (pumps, 10ML 
plastic  tanks,  drip  irrigation  system,  solar  panels),  basic  administration  and  storage 
facilities, as per the standard design for a VHG. In addition, infrastructure for household 
water harvesting will be provided as required to support supplementary water supply for 
fruit  trees  and  household  gardens  located  at  beneficiary  homesteads.  These  water 
harvesting items will include installation of a roof rain collection system with pipes and a 
plastic storage tank. Finally, IFAD loan funds will cover the costs of training current and 
prospective VHG managers. 
188. 
The GoZ will be responsible for ensuring that all operating costs for the first two 
years will be covered by a combination of GoZ counterpart contributions, revenues from 
sales of produce from the commercial plot, and VHG borrowing. Operating costs will include 
but are not limited to the inputs (seed, planting materials, fertilizer, chemicals, etc), VHG 
management, and VHG labour. 
189. 
By  the  end  of  the  second  year  of  VHG  operations,  all  GoZ  counterpart 
contributions  to  the  VHGs  are  expected  to  cease.  At  this  point,  it  is  expected  that  the 
revenues  from  the  sale  of  horticultural  crops  from  the  commercial  plot  and  commercial 
borrowing will cover all operating and maintenance costs. Profits, if any, will be distributed 
as dividends to beneficiaries after funding the reserve for equipment replacement, etc.  
190. 
Management of VHG sub-component. Management of the VHG sub-component 
activities will be undertaken by ARDA (who has been selected by the GoZ to act as project 
130 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
manager for all Presidential Pillar village gardens). ARDA will subject to oversight by the 
HEEP  PMU  and  PSC.    The  VHGs  will  be  sited,  designed  and  initially  managed  by  ARDA.   
ARDA, as overall project manager, may bring in other MFLAFWRD and GoZ departments 
as appropriate in the design and operation of the VHGs (e.g. the Department of Irrigation 
and  ZINWA  for  irrigation  infrastructure,  AMA  for  marketing,  Agritex  for  crop/variety 
selection, agronomic methods, etc). 
191. 
VHG  size.  A  standard  VHG  will  cover  1.25  hectare,  with  one  hectare  a 
commercially  plot  dedicated  to  market-oriented  production  and  sale  of  commercial 
horticultural crops and 0.25 Ha nutrition plot dedicated to nutritious crops for consumption 
by beneficiary households. The standard VHG will have 50 beneficiary households.    
192. 
Should the size of VHG be increased to greater than 1.25 hectares, the same 
ratio of beneficiary household to commercial and plot hectarage should be preserved.  That 
is, for each beneficiary, there should be 200 square meters of the commercial plot, and 50 
square  meters  of  the  nutrition  plot.  These  minimums  will  help  ensure  that  there  is 
minimum level of nutritional and economic benefits per beneficiary. 
193. 
VHG structure, governance, and management. The VHG will be structured in a 
way (e.g. as a trust) to enable it to transact business, e.g., to enter into contracts, borrow 
funds, etc. The VHGs will be run a single farm, with a professional VHG manager (initially 
an ARDA employee or contractor) engaging the VHG beneficiaries in making decisions on 
crop choice, and advising on agronomic methods, and marketing guided by Agritex and 
the input from a VHG committee selected by and from the VHG beneficiaries. Depending 
on  circumstances,  the  professional  VHG  manager  may  initially  be  responsible  for 
management of up to 3 VHGs, and may also serve as an ARDA irrigation scheme manager. 
Each VHG committee will be responsible for selecting a VHG manager after HEEP and GoZ 
financial support is withdrawn. 
194. 
Location of VHGs. Where possible, up to three VHGs will be clustered close to a 
fully operational ARDA-managed irrigation schemes (e.g. rehabilitated by the GoZ through 
SIRP or other projects). Clustering the VHGs as ‘spokes’ around the ‘hub’ of an operational 
ARDA irrigation scheme will allow synergies in VHG management, with the existing ARDA 
irrigation scheme manager potentially able to  support up to three VHGs. The clustering 
will  also  allow  synergies/efficiencies  in  the  provision  of  capacity  building,  and  provide 
access to storage/processing infrastructure, and potentially market linkages through the 
irrigation  schemes  to  markets,  and  where  relevant,  to  4P  anchor  firms.  The  clustering 
approach will also allow the irrigation schemes to be used as training/learning centres for 
the  VHGs.  If  it is  not  possible  to  cluster  a  VHG  near  a  fully  operational  ARDA irrigation 
scheme,  then  other  considerations  (access  to  roads  and  other  infrastructure,  proximity 
near market centres, etc) may be considered. However, the final location of VHGs will be 
done through a participatory approach with communities and their leaders, must take into 
consideration as well HEEP targeting requirements, geophysical potential, and community 
interest. 
195. 
VHG Commercial plot operations. The VHG manager will manage VHG production 
and  marketing  operations  on  the  commercial  plot  based  on  realistic  business  plans 
developed by the VHG manager and approved by the VHG committee. The VHG manager 
may be guided by Agritex, ARDA, and HEEP specialists from the NPMU and the relevant 
RPMU  (e.g.  CSA,  horticultural,  and  agribusiness  advisors).  The  goal  of  the  commercial 
operations is to generate sufficient income through commercial sales to i) cover all VHG 
expenses including operations and maintenance and ii) fund a reserve to will cover any 
131 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
required  equipment  and  parts  replacement/upgrading.  Should  there  be  a  surplus  after 
these  two  requirements,  profits  may  be  distributed  as  dividend  paid  in  equal  shares  to 
each beneficiary household.   
196. 
VHG  Nutrition  plot  operations  The  VHG  manager  will  be  responsible  for  crop 
selection and agronomic decisions for the crops grown on the nutrition plot of the VHG. In 
these  decisions,  VHG  manager  will  be  guided  by  the  desires  of  the  VHG  beneficiaries, 
Agritex, and the HEEP Nutrition Garden and other specialists and advisors. The produce 
from  the  0.25-hectare  nutrition  garden  will  be  distributed  without  charge  to  beneficiary 
households. The beneficiary households may consume the produce, or may gift, trade, or 
sell some or part of the produce at their own discretion.  
197. 
VHG labour The VHG beneficiaries will form the labour pool for the VHG that will 
be  drawn  upon  by  the  VHG  manager.  If  special  skills  are  required  or  there  are  labour 
shortages,  the  VHG  manager  may  also  hire  from  outside  the  beneficiary  pool.  All  VHG 
labour will be paid at least the prevailing minimum farm labour wage. 
198. 
Anticipated  adjustments  the  VHG  concept  during  project  life  Given  the  highly 
innovative nature of this sub-component, it is expected that the experiences of the first 
year  or  two  of  implementation  will  provide  important  lessons  which  can  and  should  be 
incorporated in implementation in the later years. For this reason, implementation of the 
VHGs  will  be  closely  analysed  by  supervision  missions.  Based  on  the  findings  of  these 
missions, concrete and  specific recommendations on all aspects of VHG implementation 
should be provided to the PMU and GoZ to allow them to adjust the scope and nature of 
this activity to better achieve objectives. 
Key Implementation Steps  
199. 
Meet with ARDA to agree on VHG implementation processes and procedures and 
development of an MOU. The PMU PC, Sr Horticultural/Agribusiness Advisor, and Nutrition 
Garden specialists with the relevant IFAD start-up team members will have an initial high-
level  meeting  with  ARDA  senior  management  to  discuss  and  agree  in  broad  terms  on 
implementation procedures for ARDA as sub-component manager. This will include  inter 
alia  site  selection,  beneficiary  selection,  procurement  procedures,  training  of  ARDA 
managers, timing of VHG rollout, production and submission of M&E data, relationship with 
the 4P and Access to Finance components. After that meeting, the PMU technical and ARDA 
project  management  will  draft  an  MOU  that  works  out  the  detailed  processes  and 
procedures that when complete will be signed by ARDA senior management and the PMU, 
and then submitted to IFAD for NO. 
VHG Site selection 
200. 
The VHGs will be sited in 40 selected districts in Matabeleland South, Manicaland, 
Midlands, and Masvingo provinces. Where possible, clusters of up to 3 VHGs will be sited 
in  close  proximity  to  functioning  ARDA  irrigation  schemes.  In  all  cases,  the  VHG  site 
selection will based on a combination of bio-physical (availability, quantity, and quality of 
groundwater), technical, and socio-economic factor so that the VHGs achieve the desired 
economies  of  scale  and  scope,  have  the  intended  positive  impacts  on  economic  and 
nutrition  status  of  beneficiaries,  can  be  efficiently  and  effectively  operated  (taking  into 
consideration market potential) so that they can meet the required financial goals.  
201. 
After initial selection of VHG sites by ward and village has been completed, based 
on  the  above  technical  issues,  the  final  selection  will  involve  the  participation  of  the 
132 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
community  driven,  ensure  especially  the  participation  of  women  and  youth.  ARDA  will 
conduct the community meetings to introduce the project, outline its objectives, indicate 
the household criteria for selection. ARDA may include as appropriate ZINWA, Agritex, and 
other relevant GoZ staff.  
202. 
To ensure that the community participation process is transparent and fair, the 
community members will be provided with a realistic picture of: (i) expected benefits and 
obligations of the VHG, including VHG management; (ii) expected community contributions 
to  construction,  operations,  and  governance  (iii)  availability  and  nature  of  VHG 
employment/labour opportunities, (iv) expected size and timing of dividend flows from the 
commercial plot, (v) expected amount of nutritious vegetables from the nutrition plot, and 
(vi) the requirement for VHG transition to self-sustaining status within two years from the 
start of operations. Proper and complete community participation and acceptance of the 
VHGs are a requirement for VHG site selection. A summary of the community consultation 
process and feedback for each VHG site will be prepared by ARDA. 
VHG Technical Feasibility and Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment 
203. 
After  initial  VHG  site  selection  has  been  determined  with  community 
participation,  ARDA  with  ZINWA  will  undertake  the  VHG  technical  feasibility  and 
environmental safeguards assessment, and will produce the following report: 
  Site  Design  Report  including  cost  estimates.  The  basic  bill  of  materials  for  the 
construction of the VHG in Table A8.1 at the end of this sub-component section. 
  Environment  and  social  safeguards  report.  This  will  include  a  summary  of  the 
community participation process. 
The  Site  Design  and  Environmental  Safeguards  report  will  be  reviewed  and 
204. 
approved by the relevant Rural District Council (at district level) and the relevant regional 
PMU Infrastructure Specialist and DoI official (at provincial level). Once approved at the 
district and regional level, the reports will be approved by the PMU and ARDA at national 
level.  
VHG establishment 
205. 
Once the VHG location, site design, and safeguards report have  been reviewed 
and approved as outlined above, ARDA will undertake the necessary procurement activities 
for establishing the VHG, in all cases following  standard GoZ procedures. It is expected 
that VHG procurement will be done on a batch basis by district. 
ARDA staff capacity building  
206. 
Sub-component  1.1  will  be  implemented  through  ARDA  which  is  already 
receiving  capacity  building  from  SIRP.  ARDA  will  be  responsible  for  managing  the  VHGs 
and will receive technical back up from the PMU. The fact that Zimbabwe has been included 
by the World Bank amongst the countries with high levels of institutional and social fragility 
in 2022, calls for the need to conduct capacity assessment for organizations working with 
HEEP in order to address the capacity gaps. This is in line with the Fragility Assessment 
Annex in Zimbabwe COSOP 2021-2026. 
207. 
ARDA  has  a  fully-fledged  Rural  Development  and  Industrialization  Directorate 
with  Regional  Managers  resident  in  their  regions,  who  report  to  the  Director.  Other 
positions  within  ARDA  include  Regional  Agronomists  who  report  into  the  Regional 
133 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Managers,  resident  village  horticulture  garden  managers  as  well  as  Scheme  Business 
Managers reporting to Regional Agronomist. ARDA also has a Procurement Management 
Unit, a Finance Department which falls under a Legal and Corporate Services Directorate, 
Monitoring and Evaluation,  Internal Audit  and Risk Departments. ARDA will employ 450 
business  managers  for  smallholder  irrigation  schemes  and  300  of  the  managers  are 
already  in  place  nationwide.  The  managers  will  require  capacity  building  in  terms  in 
technical business aspects as well as social inclusion. 
208. 
ARDA staff will be capacitated in technical and social aspects of the project, as 
a  government  parastatal  responsible  for  rural  development.  In  this  regard,  ARDA 
managers  are  placed  in  smallholder  irrigation  schemes  where  they  are  responsible  for 
assisting  smallholder  farmers  in  improving  viability,  governance,  sustainability  and 
profitability. ARDA is also responsible for managing the VHG as viable enterprise. Detailed 
in house capacity assessment of ARDA managers will be carried out during project start-
up  in  order  to  ascertain  capacity  needs,  building  on  SIRP  experiences.  The  project  will 
develop a capacity building plan and training manual. The plan could include training and 
mentorship in technical business and social aspects, provision of motorcycles, creation of 
platforms for sharing and information and best practices, M&E, field days exchange visits 
and competitions. 
209. 
ARDA  will  be  responsible  for  the  identification and  recruitment/secondment  of 
VHG managers. All ARDA employees involved with VHG management or operations will be 
trained in a three- day residential workshop on group formation and management, farming 
as a business, development of business plans, horticulture production methods, pest and 
disease control and social and environmental safeguards etc. This training will be repeated 
with a two-day refresher course the following year. ARDA will be responsible for organizing 
and implementing these workshops, which will be delivered by ARDA, Agritex, ZINWA, etc 
and supplemented by HEEP recruited technical and business specialists.   
VHG committee selection 
Each  group  of  prospective  VHG  beneficiaries  will  select  a  committee  of  five 
210. 
people 
(Chair,  Secretary,  Accountant,  Market  Linkage  Facilitator  and  Youth 
Representative). Each committee will be gender and age balanced and will be guided by a 
Committee Constitution, which outlines the roles and responsibilities and election process 
for replacement  of Committee members every  two years. The VHG,  represented by the 
inclusive  management  committee,  will  be  capacitated  to  build  strong  producer 
organization to avoid elite capture.  
Development and implementation of VHG business plan 
211. 
The  VHG  manager  will  liaise  with  ARDA,  AMA,  private  sector  market  actors 
(including  4P  and  other  anchor  firms  and  HDC)  to  identify  the  demand,  seasonality, 
investment  costs  needed  etc  to  engage  in  different  horticulture  value  chains.  The  VHG 
manager will be assisted by the regional and national PMU technical staff. Based on this 
input, VHG manager will develop an annual VHG business plan. VHG managers will manage 
operations based on the developed and agreed VHG business plan, with the flexibility to 
make course corrections required based on weather, market conditions, etc. 
212. 
The  operational  costs  of  the  VHG  business  plan,  including  initial  inputs  (e.g. 
seeds, household fruit trees, fertilizer, chemicals, etc), scheme management, and labour) 
will be provided through a combination of GoZ counterpart funding, retained earnings, and 
134 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
if appropriate commercial borrowing. ARDA will ensure that there are no funding gaps in 
the  business  plan  for  the  first  two  years  of  operations.  After  the  second  year  of  VHG 
operations, all project and GoZ counterpart contributions to the VHGs will cease.   
Nutrition Garden and Nutrition Training  
The  nutrition  plot  crop  selection  by  the  VHG  manager  will  be  driven  by 
213. 
community  interests  and  expected  benefits  to  household  nutritional  status.  The  VHG 
manager will benefit from guidance from the GoZ Food and Nutritional Council and PMU 
Social  Inclusion  and  Nutrition  Officer.  The  PMU  will  coordinate  and  deliver  nutrition 
education and SBCC to help ensure that households consume diversified diets and that the 
nutritional  needs  of  adolescent  girls  and  boys,  pregnant  and  lactating  women,  children 
under age of five, are well reflected and considered. Nutrition education will be channelled 
through  agriculture  extension  and  through  GALS,  capacity  of  project  implementing 
partners will be enhanced on nutrition-sensitive agriculture, which will help in monitoring 
and supervising interventions at community and household levels. 
Support for Rainwater harvesting  
The VHG committee will select up to 10 beneficiary households per VHG based 
214. 
on (i) poverty status and (ii) distance from an accessible water source. For each selected 
household,  basic  rainwater  harvesting  infrastructure  will  be  supplied  and  installed.  This 
will include: roof rainwater collection system, pipes, plastic storage tank. This will provide 
these  households  with  supplementary  water  supply  for  the  fruit  trees  and  household 
gardens located at their homesteads. 
135 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Table A8.1  Standard VHG Bill of Materials 
136 
ItemDescriptionUnitQtyUnit RateTotal Cost (USD)A1Borehole siting and drilling upto 55m completeNo1150015002Supply and install Solar powered Submersible multistage centrifugal Pump 2.1l/sec @ 60m head closely coupled to 5.5kW AC motor Complete with Solar panels-270WX20 on standlump128002800subtotal4300C150mm  uPVC pipe complete with fittings (inlet&outlet)300m 142154215subtotal4215D1 10 tonne 4m high tank standsNo37502250210000 litre  water tank complete with connections in and outNo390027004950E1Drip system complete with head filter, manifoldsper hectare125002500subtotal2500F2Diamond mesh wire 75mmX2.50mmX1.8m high complete with single leaf gate, high strain wire, droppers and corner postsm40012.55000subtotal5000G1Farm brick on cement mortar covered by IBR roofing on 25m2 concrete floor arealump130003000subtotal3000Total23965Supply and Construct basic Admin/Stores buildingSupply and installation of the following items for the construction of perimeter fencingVHG -- Bill of MaterialsSupply and installation of the following items for the Pumping stationSupply and installation of the following items for the Conveyance pipeline (Borehole to tanks) Supply and installation of the following items for the construction of Tank stands Supply and installation of the following items for the construction of 0.5ha drip system 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Sub component 1.2: 4P Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building; 
Background   
215. 
The expected result from this sub-component is to identify and build capacity of 
20 4Ps serving 20,000 SHF households, thereby providing increased incomes as a result 
of  improvements  in  market  linkages,  productivity,  and  quality.  Under  HEEP,  4Ps  will  be 
cooperative agreements between a (i) private sector anchor farm or firm that provides a 
market  to  SHFs,  (ii)  the  public  sector  entities  helping  co-finance  and  facilitate  the  4Ps, 
e.g.,  the  main  funders  of  HEEP  (IFAD  and  the  GoZ)  and  (iii)  the  producers,  the  SHFs 
organized as APGs that will be supplying the anchor firm. In addition, the HEEP 4Ps may 
have  one  or  more  service  provider  partners,  who  are  direct  or  supporting  value  chain 
actors that provide critical services to other 4P partners (inputs, mechanization, extension, 
capacity building, CSA, crop protection, logistics transport,  etc.). Service providers may 
be private sector MSMEs, public sector government agencies, and non-profits. 
216. 
The Zimbabwe horticultural sector has had a strong tradition of hub and spoke 
arrangements  uniting  anchor  firms/farms  (the  “hubs”)  and  SHFs  (the  “spokes”);  these 
generally  have  most  of  the  elements  of  a  4P.  The  4P  model  advances  the  Zimbabwe 
tradition of hub and spoke arrangement by acknowledging the role of the public sector as: 
(i)  a  provider  of  catalytic  start-up  funds  and  technical  assistance,    (ii)  taking  steps  to 
empower  SHFs  to  be  more  equal  and  profitable  members  of  the  4P,  and  (iii)  making 
improvements in the enabling environment. 
217. 
Overview Under HEEP, 4P business plans for potential support will be identified 
through calls for Expressions of Interest (EOI)s issued by the PMU. Based on the guidelines 
the 4P anchor firm will submit the outline of an inclusive business plan for the production 
and  marketing  of  horticultural  produce  and  products  to  be  sold  in  local,  regional,  and 
overseas markets. Anchor firms will generally be commercial businesses or farms, but a 
relatively  strong  farmer  trust  or  cooperative  may  also  act  as  an  anchor  firm,  or  take  a 
leading role in 4P development.  
218. 
While the selection of value chains would be guided by the expression of interest 
by  the  anchor  firm  at  project  implementation  phase,  this  will  be  combined  with  a 
participatory process involving the smallholders and national agencies in the selection of 
VC.  This will be achieved through a sensitisation meeting with APGs at which the anchor 
firms will make their presentations. The sensitisation is conducted prior to the submission 
of expression of interest. Smallholder farmers will interact with the anchor firms and ask 
questions,  express  the  type  of  crops  they  wish  to  grow,  including  nutritious  foods  and 
those interested in a particular VC will register. Once the call for expression of interest is 
done,  the  PMU  will  ensure  that  the  interests  of  the  farmers  are  taken  into  account  in 
relation to the demand by the anchor firm. 
The  anchor  firms/farms  may  utilize  the  services  of  the  HDC  Market  Linkage 
219. 
Advisor (see C3.1) to prepare 4P EOIs. They may use local Agritex agents and horticultural 
officers, and ARDA irrigation scheme/VHG managers to assist in identifying and mobilizing 
APGs/SHFs.  Mobilization  of  APGs  provides  an  opportunity  for  them  to  influence  the 
selection  of  VC  they  have  interest  in  based  on  economic,  social  and  environmental 
sustainability and resilience to ensure positive impact. Commercial viability is the starting 
point included in all value chain selection. However, for the selection of VC development 
with nutrition focus representation of nutrition organization and relevant ministries should 
be included in the selection process.  
137 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
220. 
The incentives that will prompt the anchor firm to select nutritious crops include: 
the high probability that the proposal would be selected , the knowledge existing within 
farmers  that  would  assure  consistent  volumes,  the  size  of  profit  to  be  realised,  ready 
market access, availability of organised groups for aggregation, and access to matching 
grants. Matching grants are provided to anchor firm as an incentive to partner with SHFs 
partly to offset costs and reduce risks. 
221. 
To ensure that the selection of VCs that also meet nutritional needs, it calls for 
a participatory selection of process involving all stakeholders from both the private and 
public sector. The decision-making process for VC selection is supported by a combination 
of  qualitative  and  qualitative  data  from  secondary  and  primary  sources.  The  selection 
criteria  include  a  template  scoring  matrix  adapted  to  the  goal  and  value  i.e.  meeting 
nutritional needs and gender related criteria in selection of VC. The selection should include 
sustainability  criteria  of  economic  (reduction  in  poverty,  job  creation),  social  (women 
empowerment, improved nutrition) and environmental (reduced deforestation) dimension. 
The VC  selection process will be based on a holistic understanding of sustainability and 
resilience to ensure positive impact. Commercial viability is the starting point for inclusion 
in all value chain selection. The participatory stakeholder engagement including the target 
group  for  potential  VC  development  with  a  specific  focus  on  nutrition  should  include 
representation from the relevant ministries and organisations working on nutrition. 
222. 
If the 4P EOI is cleared by the PMU (this process is described in more detail in 
Key Implementation Steps), the 4P partners led by the anchor firm will be invited to submit 
a full 4P proposal for evaluation by the 4P Review Committee, and then if the review is 
positive, submission by the PMU to IFAD for No objection (NO). 
223. 
If approved, the 4P APGs/SHF members may receive as required technical and 
business  capacity  building  by  HEEP-recruited  advisors.  This  capacity  building  will 
complement  capacity  building  that  may  be  provided  by:  (i)  anchor  firms  (ii)  service 
provider partners in the 4P business plan, (iii) Agritex, ARDA, AMA, ZIMTRADE, and other 
government  agencies  and  parastatals.  HEEP-provided  technical  assistance  and  training 
may include farming as a business, group organization and dynamics, contract farming, 
crop  selection,  climate-resilient  agronomic  practices,  value  chain  logistics,  conflict 
resolution,  certification  (BRC,  Global  GAP,  ISO,  organic,  etc),  agriculture  processing, 
quality control, etc. 
224. 
There are three windows of MG support available to 4Ps: 
  Core.  The core window is limited to APG and SHF partners. Core  window items 
include  start-up  inputs,  services,  equipment,  machinery,  and  climate  proofing 
infrastructure. Note that 4P anchor firms and service providers do not qualify for 
core support, but they are eligible to access credit through the EHRF facility.  
  Climate  Resilience.  This  window  is  open  to  all  4P  partners,  including  anchor 
firms/farms,  and  is  intended  to  cover  the  higher  upfront  costs  of  using  climate 
resilient technologies. The Climate resilience MG window will include investments 
that  fall  into  clearly  defined  categories  of  climate-smart  agriculture  or  agro-
processing and storage (e.g. drip irrigation, protected agriculture, solar powered 
boreholes or cold rooms, etc.).  
  Innovation. This window is open to all 4P partners, including anchor firms/farms, 
and  is  intended  to  cover  the  higher  risks  or  costs  of  adopting  innovative 
technologies and processes. The innovation window items include investments that 
demonstrate  institutional,  product  or  process  innovations  with  the  potential  to 
138 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
enhance  the  4Ps  partners’  competitive  position  in  horticulture,  and  that  if 
successful, have the potential adopted more broadly. Examples of innovations to 
be  demonstrated  include  the  introduction  of  new  crops/varieties  that  that  are 
tolerant to heat, drought or flooding, and offer higher yield and better nutritional 
value, agronomic methods/equipment, efficient utilisation of water, climate resilient 
protected  agriculture  technologies  and  sustainable  fertilizer  options,  the  use  of 
smart-phone based farmer registration and extension systems, and new innovative 
processing techniques and labour saving technologies. 
139 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Table 1: 4P Matching Grant eligibility and conditions  
IFAD Contribution 
Target group  
Objectives  
Scoring Criteria 
Category 
Investments 
1: 
USD 5.0 million 
APG 
Core 
Category  2: 
Investments 
  Climate  Smart 
USD 2.0 million 
APGs and APG members in 4Ps  All 4P partners 
Category 
Investments 
3: 
USD 1.0 million 
All 4P partners 
Innovation 
Enhanced  ability  of  APGs  and 
APG  members  to  produce  and 
market  horticultural  produce 
and,  products  
Enhanced  climate  resilience  for 
all 
primarily 
partners 
benefits flowing to APGs 
4P 
potentially 
of 
Introduction 
scalable  innovations  by  all  4P 
partners  with  primary  benefits 
flowing to APGs. 
(i)  increased  climate  resilience 
(ii) 
carbon 
footprint 
reduction 
of 
viability 
technical 
feasibility, 
(ii) 
(i) 
financial 
and 
sustainability,  (iii)  benefits  to 
smallholders, 
  poverty 
reduction  impact,  (v)  nutrition 
outcomes,  (vi)  youth  30%  and 
women  50%  participation 
in 
APGs 
(iv) 
degree 
innovation 
of 
(i) 
introduced  to  Zimbabwe  (ii) 
likelihood 
if 
successful 
upscaling 
of 
USD amounts 
Counterpart contribution 
Average  USD  250,000  per 
approved  4P  (including  one  or 
more APGs) 
Minimum 20 per cent in cash or 
kind  by  APG,  may 
include 
commercial borrowing 
Average  USD  100,000  per 
approved 4P 
Average  USD 
approved 4P 
50,000 
per 
10 
investments: 
APG/SHF 
percent 
Anchor  Firm/Farm  or  Service 
Provider 
30 
percent 
Investments 
10 
investments: 
APG/SHF 
percent 
Anchor  Firm/Farm  or  Service 
Provider  Investments:  30  per 
cent 
Management  
225. 
Sub-Component 1.2 will be managed by the HEEP national PMU. The day to day 
operations will be the responsibility of the Senior 4P/Partnership Specialist. The potential 
risk of this arrangement and the mitigation measures are as follows: 
226. 
There is risk that there will be procurement delays with the management of the 
matching grants by the PMU. This will result in late delivery of  inputs for the farmers. As 
a mitigation measure, there will be monthly reviews of the AWPB and procurement plan 
to detect any delays. In addition, technical PMU staff will be involved in the procurement 
process.  Programmatic  matching  grant  approach  in  the  Zimbabwe  value  chain  projects 
HEEP and SACP enables coordinated capacity building support by IFAD to ensure effective 
matching grant implementation. The existing matching grant guideline developed under 
SACP  will  be  utilized  for  HEEP  including  for  the  process  of  pipeline  generation, 
prioritization,  investment  decisions,  disbursements,  accounting  and  reporting.  In  HEEP, 
additional procurement  support  by  PMU  staff  will  be  provided  to  beneficiaries  to  ensure 
access to highest quality available input materials and equipment, and affordable pricing. 
At HEEP start-up phase, dedicated technical assistance will be provided by IFAD to SACP 
and HEEP in the implementation and accounting of the matching grant manual.  
Key Steps for Implementation 
227. 
Finalize the 4P Matching Grant Manual. The 4P Matching Grant Manual will be 
developed  based  on  the  steps  outlined  below.  To  the  extent  that  it  is  applicable  and 
practical, the steps match those which are in the approved SACP MG Manual. An important 
140 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
difference is that, unlike SACP, HEEP MG do not utilize cash transfers to grantees. The PMU 
will be responsible for procurement of all MG items for provision or transfer to the grantees.  
228. 
The HEEP matching grant manual will make sure that program implementation 
(i) allows efficient and effective operations, (ii) meets the development objectives of HEEP, 
(iii) is structured to be compatible with the relevant national policies, laws, and regulations 
of Zimbabwe, (iv) is compatible with IFAD policies and (v) is compatible with commercial 
practices in Zimbabwe. 4P Matching Grant Manual development process should commence 
during the HEEP start up workshops. 
Form the 4P Technical Committee. The 4P Technical Committee will be formed 
229. 
by the PMU and will consist of (i) representatives of key horticultural stakeholders including 
HDC,  Agritex,  and  Farming  Unions  and  (ii)  key  individuals  within  the  PMU  (i.e.,  the 
4P/Partnership  Specialist,  the  Senior  Horticultural  Agribusiness  Advisor,  EHRF  Portfolio 
Administrator, CSA Advisor, and the Sr Social Inclusion Specialist). The Sr 4P/Partnership 
Specialist  will  act  as  the  secretariat  for  the  4P  Technical  Committee,  and  will  chair  the 
meetings.  
230. 
Develop package of EOI materials to be submitted by offerors.  At project start-
up, the PMU will draft the EOI offeror’s materials including a copy of the EOI template. The 
EOI materials package should be submitted to IFAD for No Objection.  
231. 
The EOI materials package will include the following information: 
a)  Objective of the EoI; 
b)  The categories of eligible candidates; 
c)  Conditions of application and participation, including: (i) sub-project duration, (ii) 
total  acceptable  sub-project  cost,  (iii)  maximum  grant  size,  (v)  requirement  for 
time-bound milestones in implementation plan and (vi) likelihood of performance- 
based disbursement in tranches; 
d)  Terms and conditions for the required beneficiary in-cash or in-kind contribution; 
e)  Categories of goods and services that are eligible for support; 
f)  Deadline and conditions for submission of the EoI; 
g)  The criteria and procedures by which EOIs will be selected Including consultation 
with beneficiary APG on selection of VC; 
h)  Selection nutrition sensitive VC 
i)  Where interested applicants may obtain technical support for developing EOIs.  This 
will  include  the  HDC  Market  Linkage  Advisor,  Agritex,  and  ARDA  amongst  other 
possibilities. 
j)  Where  and  how  interested  applicants  may  obtain  further  documentation  and 
support. 
232. 
Publish Call for Expressions of Interest.   The PMU will undertake a Call for EOIs.  
This will be publicized through discussion events, mass media (including local and national 
newspaper  advertisements),  direct  contacts,  business  associations  and  project 
implementing partners. The NPMU will be the point of contact for requests and queries, 
and for submission of proposals. The NPMU will also maintain a public posting at the office, 
which provides information on all 4P related events and results. 
233. 
4P Partnership consortia formed and submit 4P EOIs. In response to the Call for 
4P  EOIs,  prospective    4P  players  will  form  consortia  for  the  purpose  of  developing  and 
submitting  an  EOI.  As  mentioned  earlier,  prospective  4P  partners  may  seek  assistance 
141 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
from HDC, government agencies such as Agritex and ARDA, and NGOs with experiencing 
in organizing SHFs and operating contract farming/hub & spoke schemes.  
234. 
Review and Selection of 4P EOIs by PMU. This will be rapid screening of the EOIs 
submitted. The screening process is intended to reject EOIs that do not meet the minimum 
requirements. The reasons for rejection may include: 
a.  Submission past the deadline date in the Call for EOIs  
b.  If applicants do not meet the eligibility criteria as stated in the call for Applications; 
c.  If the total grant request and beneficiary contribution are not within the minimum 
and maximum limits allowed; 
d.  If the requested documentary evidence is not provided; 
e.  If the proposal is not within the specified project area and priorities; 
f.  If requested budget items are different from the stated objective; 
g.  If  the  EOI  Application  is  not  completed  and  signed  by  anchor  firms  and 
representatives of APGs 
235. 
If the EOI is rejected in the rapid screening, the PMU will inform the applicants 
accordingly, together with the reasons for rejection. In all cases, EOIs that are rejected 
may be amended and submitted for consideration in further rounds of Calls for EOIs. 
236. 
If the EOI passes the rapid screening, the PMU may conduct an initial visit to the 
Anchor  Firm  and  other  partners  to  validate  the  facilities,  capacities,  and  intentions  as 
mentioned in the proposal. If validated, the EOI is accepted and the 4P partners are invited 
to prepare and submit a full proposal. 
237. 
will request the following information: 
Development of 4P Proposal Application Form:  The 4P Proposal Application Form 
a.  4P inclusive Business Plan with three year forecast of financial statements  
b.  Financing Plan (e.g. own funds, commercial credit, EHRF credit, etc). 
c.  Application form including: 
  title of the 4P names of Anchor Firm, APGs, and any other partners 
  applicant con4PTCt details; 
  proposed duration; 
  proposed  total  cost,  requested  grant  amount  and  partner  in-cash  and  in-kind 
contributions 
  4P description including discussion of opportunities and how 4P consortium will 
take benefit from opportunities. 
d.  Documentation  of  an  account  in  a  financial institution  with  available  funds        for 
beneficiary’s in-cash contribution to matching grant; 
e.  Business license/ Business or Cooperative registration; 
f.  For Anchor Firms, latest annual tax returns, financial statements for the previous 
three years. 
4P consortia prepare and submit full proposals.  Successful EOI applicants will 
238. 
be invited to prepare full proposals to be submitted not more than 12 weeks from the date 
of  receiving  approval  of  their  EOIs.  As  with  EOIs,  applicants  may  be  supported  in 
development  of proposals by PMU-recruited technical staff, as well as by the  HDC MLA, 
142 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
government agencies such as Agritex, and other stakeholders such as NGOs with relevant 
experience.    
239. 
4P Technical Committee reviews 4P proposals and selects successful proposals 
for  IFAD NO and PSC information. Upon receiving the full 4P Proposal, the 4P Technical 
Committee will immediately acknowledge the receipt of submission to the applicants, and 
assign a proposal registration number to the proposal that will be used throughout the life 
of the grant, should the proposal be successful. The 4P Partnership Advisor will undertake 
an initial review of the proposal, and then prepare a summary sheet for the 4P Technical 
Committee. The 4P Technical Committee  will review the summary and proposal in detail, 
and  prepare  comments  dealing  with  the  financial  viability,  market  viability,  technical 
quality,  sustainability,    social  impact  (women  empowerment,  nutrition  impact,  youth 
employment)  poverty  reduction  (employment  creation)t,  environmentally  viability  and 
applicability  of  the  proposals.  Proposals  should  include  capacity  building  for  4P  APGs  to 
build  strong  and  cohesive  producer  organizations  with  constitutions    in  order  to  reduce 
elite capture.  
240. 
Within  two  weeks  after  the  submission,  4P  Technical  Committee  will  score  all 
received proposals, and make a recommendation to (i) award the grant as, (ii) award grant 
with certain specified modifications, or (ii) reject proposal. 
241. 
A  weighted  criteria  template  will  be  used  to  score  the  proposals  (see  Table  2 
below). The strategy will be to ensure that 70% or more of the poor smallholders constitute 
APG. This can be ensured by an analysis of composition of the APG group. 
242. 
The  following  template  should  be  used  as  the  basis  for  further  review  and 
modification during project start-up, and may also be reviewed from time to time by the 
PMU and by IFAD supervision missions.  For line items that fall under the Innovation and 
Climate Resilience 4P windows, special scoring criteria will need to be developed by the 
PMU. There should be an updated checklist to ensure all proposals meet IFAD Safeguard 
requirements.  Proposals  should  include  scoring  criteria  on  holistic  capacity  building  for 
youth, providing them with start-up kits, technical business, entrepreneurial (farming as 
a business), financial and life skills (social skills, communication, confidence building) 
243. 
A  formal  4P  Technical  Committee  meeting  will  be  convened  to  discuss  the 
proposal. The 4P Partnership Advisor will present a summary of the committee member’s 
recommendations,  and  the  other  4P  Technical  Committee  members  will  discuss  the 
proposal and give individual scores to each Application, and a consensus average of scoring 
will be developed. All proposals with a minimum score of 70 may be approved. Those with 
scores  less  than  70  points  are  returned  to  Applicants  together  with  the  declaration  of 
negative  result  and  the  main  reasons  for  failure.  Proposals  that  are  rejected  can  be 
improved and re-submitted. 
Table 2: Draft 4P Proposal Weighting Criteria Template – Core Window MGs 
   Criteria 
Out of maximum Points 
Development impact (maximum 40 points) 
  1 
Positive 
participants 
financial 
impact 
on 
APG/SHF 
__ / 10 
143 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  2 
Employment creation within and without the 4P 
consortium 
__ / 10 
  3 
Inclusion  of  50%  women  and  30%youth  and 
business  and  soft  skills  capacity  building  for 
youth 
Inclusion of nutrition 
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
Sub-project  innovation  and  replication  potential 
(maximum 30 points) 
  4 
  5 
Climate  Smart  Agriculture  and 
environmental sustainability o 
long-term 
     / 10 
term  economic/financial  sustainability 
Long 
(profitability) of the investment 
__ / 10 
  6 
Potential for further expansion of the operation 
by the business entity 
__ / 10 
Beneficiary  contribution  and  technical  capacity 
(maximum 20 points) 
  7 
Technical  capacity  of  Anchor  Firm/Farms  and 
service providers 
__ / 10 
  8  Level of in-cash contribution above the minimum  __ / 5 
  9  Level of in-kind contribution 
__ / 5 
Lead  Enterprise  on-site  environmental  impact 
(maximum 10 points) 
1
0 
Consideration 
including respective treatment plans 
for  mitigation  of  pollution 
__ / 10 
Total 
__ / 100 
Submit for IFAD No Objection 
The  approved  4P  proposals  will  be 
244. 
submitted  for  IFAD  no  objection,  and  to  the  PSC  for  information,  with  the  transmittal 
memorandum prepared by the 4P Partnership Advisor.  
4P Grant Agreement Award:  Within 3 weeks after receiving IFAD no-objection, 
245. 
a grant award meeting will be organized with the successful applicants.  A list of winning 
Applicants and titles of the proposals will be made publicly available and displayed at the 
PMU office. 
246. 
The  4P  MG  award  meeting  will  clarify  the  contract-signing  procedures,  grant 
management and implementation, disbursement and procurement regulations, monitoring 
and  reporting  requirements,  and  contractual  obligations.  In  addition,  the  meeting  will 
clarify the budget, the schedule of activities and any other outstanding issues necessary 
144 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
before the finalization of the Agreement. The meeting would agree on: (i) responsibilities 
for  monitoring;  (iv)  schedule  of  implementation;  (v)  reporting  requirements;  and  (vi) 
other issues as required. After agreement on the above issues has been reached, the grant 
award agreement will be prepared.  
247. 
The legal Grant Agreement documents will be issued by the PMU. The final Grant 
Agreement  will  be  reviewed  by  the  HEEP  technical  and  financial  officers,  signed  by  the 
NPMU Director, and sent to HEEP PSC for information. 
248. 
the Grant Agreement include: 
The Grant Agreement will be binding on signature by all parties. Key  items of 
  Copy of 4P Proposal 
  Products, services and results to be delivered under the contract; 
  Agreed measurable milestones, with technical description of implemented items by 
agreed ending dates of grant periods; 
  Costs  financed  within  the  grant  framework,  including  grant  funds  to  be  made 
 
available , applicants' in-cash contribution, and other contributions; 
Implementation  plan  by  milestones  and  a  schedule  for  the  releasing  trenches  of 
grant funds;  
  Procurement method and responsibilities; 
  Equipment ownership rights (during and after the completion of the grant); 
  Rules for reporting, monitoring, and supervision; 
  Rules for publication/disclosure of results/information; 
  Cancellation or other measures to be taken in the event of an unacceptable level 
of implementation or other causes of delay; and 
The Grant Agreement will include as relevant a milestone-based schedule for the 
249. 
disbursement  of  grant  items  by  the  PCU,  adherence  to  the  agreed  work  plan  and 
expenditure  requirements  by  the  grantee,  and  commitment  to  the  monitoring  and 
supervision process by all parties. 
145 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Sub component 1.3: 4P Matching Grants and Public Infrastructure 
Matching Grants  
Background 
250. 
procured by the PMU. 
All goods and services in the approved 4P Matching Grant Agreement are to be 
251. 
Procurement Procedures  Grant  implementation  procurements  will  be  carried 
out directly by the PMU in accordance with procedures satisfactory to the Government of 
Zimbabwe  and  consistent  with  IFAD  Project  Procurement  Guidelines.  All  goods  and 
services procured shall be used exclusively for the purposes of the project as stipulated in 
the Grant Agreements. 
IFAD good practices of procurement include the following: 
252. 
The Grant Applicants identify the goods and services to be procured. A specific 
procurement plan (a sample of which should be prepared in 4P Grant Manual) details (1) 
the  procurement  items,  (2)  quality  specification  for  each  item,  (3)  the  timing  of 
procurement for each item, (4) estimated costs per item and total costs; 
The  PMU  prepares  for  procurement  of  each  item  by  (i)  collection  of  three 
253. 
competitive  quotations  when  possible,  (ii)  agreeing  with  the  suppliers  and  service 
providers about purchase details including time and cost. When procuring the PMU shall 
pay attention to the need for economy, efficiency, transparency, timing and quality of the 
procured goods and services. 
254. 
Ownership of Items provided by the Grant Agreement. The applicants will follow 
the stipulated use of goods as agreed in the Grant Agreement. All purchased goods and 
assets are the property of the Project during the implementation of the sub-project. The 
recipients will enjoy the property rights for the purchased goods only after a  successful 
completion of the sub-project. The recipient is responsible for taking care of all property 
and  providing  for  the  proper  maintenance  of  equipment.  If  stipulated  in  the  Grant 
Agreement the Grant Recipient shall insure the assets procured with grant funding. In the 
case of NPMU’s termination of the grant as a result of violation of the Grant Agreement, 
or the termination of the sub-project by the grant recipient, the NPMU may be instructed 
to repossess the equipment. Repossessed equipment would be sold and proceeds, less any 
sales costs, would be deducted from the grant beneficiary financial obligations under the 
agreement, and returned to the grant fund for reallocation. 
255. 
Reporting, Monitoring and Evaluation: The  NPMU is responsible for the  overall 
monitoring and evaluation of the 4P grants,  through a combination of reviews of progress 
reports and on-site visits.  The Grant recipients are responsible for submission of milestone 
reports and the final report. 
256. 
The monitoring and evaluation of the grant implementation includes five steps: 
(i) initial monitoring visit; (ii) baseline evaluation; (iii) milestone reports and subsequent 
monitoring visits; (iv) final monitoring review and (v) final evaluation.  Each proposal will 
have  clearly  defined  milestones,  final  targets  and  associated  performance  indicators, 
against which progress can be assessed. These indicators are agreed between the NPMU 
and the applicant, as part of the Grant Agreement. 
146 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
257. 
Baseline evaluation is performed after start of the grant implementation, to 
document the baseline situation of the grant winning businesses including their economic 
impact among farmer households. The final impact evaluation will be conducted against 
results of the baseline evaluation. 
258. 
Milestone  monitoring  is  (i)  initiated  by  Grant  recipients’  submission  of 
milestone  progress  report,  describing  progress  of  implementation  against  Grant 
Agreement's  listed  milestone  indicators.  Subsequently,  (ii)  the  NPMU  will  review  the 
milestone  progress  report  prepared  and  submitted  by  the  Grant  recipients,  and  (iii) 
perform  a  field  visit  to  confirm  the  reported  implementation.  Within  30  days  after  the 
submission of milestone progress report, (iv) the NPMU will submit a milestone monitoring 
report for information of PSC and Grant Recipient, describing results of the desk review 
and  field  visit.  The  milestone  monitoring  report  of  the  NPMU  is  a  requirement  for 
disbursement  of  the  next  tranche  of  the  Grant.  The  NPMU  may  contract  independent 
evaluators to support the NPMU with milestone reviews. 
259. 
Final monitoring review is initiated by (i) Grant recipient’s submission of final 
report,  describing  the  final  outcomes  of  the  implementation  against  Grant  Agreement's 
listed indicators. (ii) The NPMU will review the final report and (iii) perform a field-check 
of implementation, and (iv) submit a final monitoring report to NPMU and Grant Recipient. 
increased 
260. 
Final  Evaluation  will  be  conducted  by  NPMU  contracted  independent 
evaluators, to assess whether the sub-project and Grant Scheme in general have achieved 
intended  results  in  terms  of  poverty  reduction,  creation  of  farmer  household  market 
opportunities, 
technology  development  and 
dissemination,  productivity  improvements,  skills  development  and  improved  market 
access.  The  independent  evaluators  will  compare  the  situation  with  baseline  evaluation 
results,  and  will  have  full  access  to  baseline  data,  milestone  documents  and  all  Grant 
Beneficiary  production  sites.  The  results  of  the  4P  scheme  will  be  documented  by  the 
evaluators,  with  the  aim  of  showcasing  good  activities.  The  NPMU  will  disseminate  the 
lessons learnt for replication/adoption by others. 
incomes,  employment, 
Public Infrastructure 
Background   
261. 
Justification  One  of  the  main  hurdles  faced  by  small  scale  farmers  is  the 
difficulties  transporting  their  produce  to  markets,  or  attracting  off-takers  to  collect  the 
produce at farm gate. Acknowledging this situation, and with a view to improve logistics 
and  decrease  marketing  costs,  HEEP  will  engage  in  the  rehabilitation  of  public 
infrastructure such feeder roads connecting scheme clusters to the main road. These public 
infrastructure investments will increase the positive impact of 4P on  direct  beneficiaries 
and provide benefits to other rural households and MSMEs in the 4P catchment area.  Other 
examples  of  public  infrastructure  investments  include  community  storage,  power  and 
water provision, renewable energy etc. Potential public infrastructure investments will be 
identified by 4P partners in consultation with the appropriate local/district officials (e.g. 
Rural  District  Council).  For  each  4P  investment,  an  average  of  USD  330,000  has  been 
budgeted. 
262. 
Expected  Outcomes  of  Public  Infrastructure:  The  exact  composition  of  public 
infrastructure grants cannot be determined, as this will be demand driven. However, for 
the sake of developing a budget, the following is assumed: 110 km  feeder roads will be 
147 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
constructed  or  rehabilitated,  600  km  of  farm  roads  will  be  constructed  or  rehabilitated, 
fifteen  communal  community  storage  facilities  will  be  constructed,  and  there  will  be  a 
contingency for renewable energy. 
263. 
HEEP  definition  of  Public  Infrastructure.  For  the  purposes  of  HEEP,  public 
infrastructure is not owned or controlled by 4P partners, and benefits all members of the 
surrounding communities as well as 4P beneficiaries. The public infrastructure would be 
owned  and  controlled  by  the  local  authorities.  Public infrastructure  provided  by  HEEP  is 
not intended to be leased or rented to 4P partners or any other private entity during the 
project  life.  If  such  a  transfer  of  ownership  or  control  is  deemed  desirable  by  the  local 
authority during the life of HEEP, then application must be made to the PMU, and written 
authorization provided, before this such a transfer occurs.  
Management 
264. 
oversight of the Public Infrastructure sub-component, under the direction of the PMU PC.     
The  Senior  Infrastructure  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  the  day  to  day 
Outline of Implementation Steps 
265. 
Drafting of Public Infrastructure Proposal Template -- Annex to 4P Grant 
Proposal  Package.  The  Senior  Infrastructure  specialist  will  draft  a  short  Public 
Infrastructure Proposal Template to be included in the 4P Proposal Package. This Proposal 
may  also  be  submitted  at  any  point  during  the  life  of  the  4P,  if  not  included  in  the  4P 
proposal package.  
266. 
This Template will outline the following requirements: 
 
Infrastructure Required 
  Estimated Costs of Construction and Operation 
  How operational costs will be met 
  Expected Benefits to Community (4P and non 4P members) 
267. 
Identification/Selection  of  Potential  Public  Infrastructure.  The 
identification  of  potential  Public  Infrastructure  will  be  initiated  by  4P  partners  in 
consultation  with  community  and  the  relevant  local  authority  (the  Rural  District  Council 
and  the  District  Development  Fund  in  the  case  of  roads  or  buildings).   Through  a 
consultative  process  with  the  local  authorities  targeted  communities  and  PMU  -  this 
process  should  result  in  a  transparent  process  of  public  infrastructure  selected  with 
community wide pro-poor benefits, in addition to also benefiting the 4P partners. The GRM 
will be used to track any unethical procedures in the selection process. The 4P partners in 
consultation  with  local  authority  will  complete  the  4P  --  Public  Infrastructure  Grant 
Proposal Annex as part of the 4P MG Proposal package, using the template provided. 
268. 
Review and field verification of Public Infrastructure Proposal. The PMU 
will form a Public Infrastructure technical committee to review each 4P proposal. This will 
be constituted of the  relevant local RPMU infrastructure  specialist, engineer(s) from the 
148 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
local  authorities  (RDC/DDF/REA29),  representatives  from  the  relevant  4P  partners,  and 
community representatives. The Public Infrastructure technical committee will be chaired 
by the NPMU infrastructure specialist. It will review the proposal, and participate in field 
verification,  and  provide  technical  feedback  and  recommendations  to  the  PMU  for 
rejection/modification/approval of the proposal.   
Design, Implementation and Supervision of Public Infrastructure works. 
269. 
The rural authorities (RDC/DDF/REA) as the custodians of the standards for rural public 
infrastructure in collaboration with the Senior Infrastructure Specialist will have oversight 
of designing and supervision of Public Infrastructure. The design of Public Infrastructure 
may also be tendered out to private engineering companies under the supervision of the 
rural authority engineers/Senior Infrastructure Specialist. In all cases the final approval of 
designs remains a function of the relevant rural body. For example, this would be the Rural 
Development Council for roads and buildings, and the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) 
for renewable energy installations.  
Environmental Safeguards. 
270. 
 The  Senior  Infrastructural  Specialist  will 
develop a prospectus for the investment to be verified by the Environmental Management 
Agency (EMA). In most if not all cases, a full EISA will not be required. The Environmental 
and  Social  Management  Plan  will  be  done  by  a  HEEP-recruited  service  provider  and 
approved by the relevant provincial EMA office.  
271. 
Link  between  4Ps  and  VHGs.  The  VHGs  will  firstly  benefit  from  market 
linkages  brokered  through  ARDA,  as  the  VHGs  will  be  managed  initially  by  ARDA 
employees and will be clustered near ARDA irrigation schemes or estates.  As the VHGs 
mature,  some  will  be  in  a  position  to  join  a  4P  initiative  as  partner  APGs. 
Alternatively,  VHGs may continue to work independently or through the ARDA system to 
link with local markets, or they may participate in 4Ps indirectly as suppliers to ARDA. 
COMPONENT 2: ACCESS TO FINANCE 
Subcomponent 2.1 Export Horticulture Revolving Fund 
Management 
272. 
The EHRF sub-component will be managed on behalf of the PMU by the HEEP-
recruited  finance/insurance  portfolio  administrator,  with  technical  input  from  the 
international export finance advisor. 
273. 
The EHRF itself will be managed by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe. 
Purpose and Objectives 
274. 
EHRF will provide working capital finance (up to 12 months) and medium- term 
finance (terms from 2 to 5 years) at commercially-benchmarked interest rates and terms 
29 RDC -Rural District Council (feeder road and buildings authority); DDF  -(District Development Fund- roads 
and infrastructure authority); REA- (Rural Electrification Agency - for renewable energy installations) 
149 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
to  4P  anchor  firms  and  other  4P  partners  with  access  to  export  or  other  hard  currency 
markets.  
275. 
EHRF finance may be used by the 4P anchor firms and other partners for any 
operation  of  the  approved  4P  business  plan.  This  may  include  value  chain  finance  to 
provide  inputs  to  SHFs  (e.g.  seeds  and  fertilisers),  in  the  form  of  in-kind  credit,  to  be 
repaid by the SHFs through deductions made from payments for their delivered produce. 
The  EHRF  may  also  be  used  for  imported  service,  inputs,  machinery,  and  equipment 
essential to the 4P partner for their and SHF produce to reach the 4P's export markets.  
EHRF  Working  capital  finance  is  aimed  at  the  funding  of  inputs  such  as  seeds 
276. 
and fertiliser that are directly related to the production of the next crop or harvest. It is 
therefore short term in nature with a lending term of up to 12 months. A 4P partner may 
use the working capital finance to buy inputs in bulk, and distribute part or all of such to 
SHFs. Following the harvest, the sales proceeds can be utilised to repay the working capital 
finance to the  relevant  PFI.  In the case of the  SHFs they will receive their share of net 
sales proceeds less the cost of inputs provided to them.  
277. 
EHRF Medium Term finance. The USD liquidity position of Zimbabwean banks is 
very short term in nature at this time, with the result that the ultimate length of a loan 
denominated in USD is 2 years at the most. A fundamental principle in the purchase of 
assets of a capital or semi-capital nature, is that the term of finance required be linked to 
the economic lifespan of the product involved. This means that assets such as machinery 
and  equipment  can  be  financed  over  a  period  of  2-5  years.  The  IFAD  EHRF  will  be 
instrumental to fill this market gap in the provision of medium-term finance. 
278. 
Allocation  between  Short-  and  Medium-Term  Finance.  At  appraisal,  it  was 
projected that 30% of the total of $16 million of IFAD loan ($4.8 million) for EHRF finance 
will be disbursed to PFIs for short term working capital finance, and the balance ($11.2 
million)  for  medium  term  finance.    However,  since  working  capital  finance  is  repayable 
within  12  months,  it  will  become  available  for  re-lending  every  year.  Therefore,  total 
working capital reflows for re-lending over five years is projected to be approximately $9.1 
million.    Under  these  assumptions,  the  total  amount  of  credit  extended  through  EHRF 
during the life of project will be approximately $ 25 million. 
EHRF Implementation Steps 
279. 
Drafting of MOFED instructions to RBZ.   MOFED will draft a circular to the RBZ 
outlining the steps and procedures for operation of the EHRF, including what constitutes a 
qualified  PFI,  flow  of  funds,  interest  rates  and  terms,  reporting  requirements,  etc.  The 
minimum conditions for PFI selection will be i) deemed by the RBZ to be able to manage 
foreign exchange payments and receipts, and ii) institution is supervised by RBZ and iii) 
acceptance  of  the  stipulated  terms  and  conditions  of  utilising  EHRF  funds  for  intended 
purposes.   During appraisal, the following terms and conditions were proposed. MOFED 
will  advance  funds  to  the  RBZ  without  charge.  The  RBZ  will  charge  participating  PFIs  a 
concessionary  rate  of  ~3%  on  all  EHRF  advances,  which  is  approximately  30%  of  the 
benchmark PFI interest rate to the 4P borrower, at present set to a maximum of 10% per 
annum. The difference between the PFI cost of funds (3%) and the rate which the borrower 
pays  (10%  maximum)  will  cover  (i)  PFI  margin  and  (ii)  the  cost  of  insurance  or  a 
performance guarantee on the borrower to the benefit of the PFI. MOFED may be assisted 
in this by the IFAD recruited international finance specialist. The draft MOFED circular to 
the RBZ will be submitted to IFAD for comment, including IFAD FMD clearance, and the 
final  version  for  IFAD  No  Objection.  IFAD  supervision  missions  will  review  these  initial 
150 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
terms and conditions agreed and may make recommendations through the PMU for MOFED 
to modify these based on prevailing market conditions 
280. 
RBZ Circular to Banks  The  RBZ,  as  per  instructions  and  guidance  from 
MOFED, will draft a circular to the financial institutions that are potential PFIs that outlines 
the procedures for becoming a qualified PFI under HEEP. The RBZ may be assisted in this 
by the IFAD recruited international finance specialist. The draft RBZ circular to the Banks 
will be submitted to IFAD for comment, including IFAD FMD clearance, and the final version 
for IFAD No Objection. Upon completion, the RBZ circular will be distributed to all financial 
institutions supervised by RBZ. 
281. 
Financial  Institution  Registration  as  an  EHRF  PFI.  The  RBZ  may  accept, 
review,  and  approve  applications  from  financial  institutions  at  any  time  as  per  the 
instructions in the circular.  
4P Anchor Firm Qualification. Upon approval of the 4P business plan by HEEP 
282. 
(as  per  C1.2),  the  anchor  firm/farm  partners  will  be issued  a  4P  Credit  Approval  Letter 
from the PMU that approves credit for the 4P business plan. This will include the maximum 
amount of credit to be provided, and the amount of short term versus long term credit.   
283. 
EHRF Loan Initiation. Qualified 4P anchor firms will be able to approach any 
registered PFI to access the EHRF to finance items in the approved 4P business plan. If 
the financial institution is not yet registered, then it may take immediate steps to do so.  
284. 
EHRF Loan Approval. The 4P anchor firm will apply to the registered PFI for 
the relevant financing as for any commercial loan. The 4P anchor will provide the PFI with 
the PMU 4P Credit Approval Letter. The PFI will use normal commercial loan appraisal and 
approval procedures. 
285. 
RBZ Advance of Funds. If approved, the PFI will request EHRF financing from 
the RBZ on back-to-back basis. That is, PFIs will draw down from the RBZ the necessary 
finance  to  fully  fund  the  approved  EHRF  before  extending  finance  to  the  eligible  4P 
partners. A loan agreement will be entered up between the RBZ and the PFI.  
286. 
Loan disbursed to 4P partner. After funding received from RBZ, the PFI shall 
advance  EHRF  finance  to  4P  partner  under  the  terms  and  conditions  of  their  loan 
agreement with the 4P partner. 
287. 
Loan Monitoring. EHRF loans will be separately identified in the PFIs MIS with 
a special code that  facilitates easy and  systematic follow up and  reporting. The PFI will 
provide quarterly reports to the RBZ and the PMU on loan origination and status. The RBZ 
will  provide  reports  on  an  annual  basis  to  the  PMU  showing  financial  flows  to  and  from 
PFIs.  The  HEEP  finance/insurance  portfolio  administrator  will  monitor  implementation, 
including the use of finance for the required purposes, the use of inputs, equipment, etc 
for the required purposes, and any arrangements for final post-harvest payments to SHFs 
for value chain credit provided in time.  
288. 
4P  Partner  Repayment/Reflows.  Repayments  from  EHRF  working  capital 
loans may be lent again by the PFI to same 4P partner by the PFI under the same terms 
and conditions. Other than relending working capital to existing 4P customers, the PFI will 
use all repayments by customers to pay down the PFI’s loan to the RBZ. 
151 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
289. 
Post HEEP operations.   Although  the  EHRF  will  be  financed  initially  by  the 
IFAD  loan,  the  RBZ  is  expected  to  continue  its  operation  indefinitely  after  project 
completion.  To this end, during implementation of HEEP, the EHRF may be modified during 
or after HEEP to accept other like-minded investors over time who accept the terms and 
conditions  of  the  fund,  e.g.  other  development  finance  partners,  remittances  from  the 
diaspora, etc.  The GoZ may choose to provide guarantees or other incentives to  attract 
additional funding for the EHRF 
Risk Management   
290. 
The PFI carries the full credit risk for all EHRF financed advances to 4P partners, 
and  therefore  must  use  its  own  criteria  and  systems,  and  own  terms  and  practices  for 
credit terms, collateral /security requirements, grace periods, etc.   
finance 
Export Finance Risks 
 The  successful  repayment  of  EHRF 
is 
291. 
dependent on the successful receipt of payment from buyers in foreign countries. In most 
countries, this kind of export finance is usually provided or facilitated by a dedicated export 
finance institution and/or national export credit agency such as the United States Export-
Import Bank (EXIM) as it is unusual for banks to absorb the full repayment risk on export 
related finance. Expert Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) is the official export credit 
agency of Zimbabwe and is a subsidiary of the RBZ. The PMU may request the international 
export  finance/insurance  specialist  to  facilitate  agreements  between  PFIs/ECGC/4Ps  to 
agree  case  by  case  solutions  to  structure  securities  and  risk  mitigation,  within  the 
maximum cost of 10% to a 4P partner. The finance/insurance portfolio administrator shall 
monitor implementation and adherence to agreements, and make recommendations for 
programmatic change.   
of 
range 
Other Risks A 
post-production 
292. 
as 
transport/shipping/handling/clearance/political  intervention  and  payment  default  are 
outside the control of PFIs and 4Ps. To help ensure that PFIs will be incentivized to advance 
EHRF funds to 4P partners, HEEP will support risk mitigation measures such as insurance 
and credit guarantees for PFIs and for 4P partners. Qualified logistics company/companies 
with full liability cover,  all risks insurance cover in Zimbabwe and through South Africa, 
and maritime insurance across the ocean as well as at destination all risk insurance will be 
required.  
risks, 
such 
these 
instruments, 
the  development  of 
Political  risk  insurance  and  payment  default  cover  are  key  risk  mitigation 
293. 
instruments.  To  support 
the  export 
finance/insurance  expert  will  facilitate  discussions  and  agreements  between  the  role-
players to find workable, cost effective solutions. A potential example of this tentatively 
explored during appraisal is a model whereby EHRF products be invoiced to an experienced 
international intermediary upon shipment to an international buyer pre-approved for credit 
cover  by  one  of  the  leading  international  credit  insurers  within  maximum  liability  limits 
obtained by the intermediary beforehand. With the intermediary company having access 
to pre-approved credit insurance cover for buyers in different countries across the world, 
shipment  can  be  re-diverted  in  the  case  of  political  interference.  The  export 
finance/insurance  expert  may  be  requested  to  facilitate  development  of  such  risk 
mitigation  structures.  Potential  service  providers  include  ECGC,  Zimnat,  Credsure,  First 
Mutual, Euler-Hermes, Coface Alliance, Atradius, SASRIA, etc.  
Financial reporting 
152 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
294. 
Financial reporting about the use of EHRF will be included in quarterly IFRs and 
in Financial Statements. It should allow the monitoring of the amounts advanced by EHRF 
to PFIs, the amounts actually lent out for purposes recognized as eligible by IFAD, and the 
resulting  outstanding  balance.  An  eligible  expenditure  is  considered  by  IFAD  when  PFIs 
lend out to real sector borrowers, that are the actual beneficiaries of EHRF, and not only 
when EHRF advances funds to PFIs.  
Subcomponent 2.2: Capacity Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending 
Background 
295. 
Preliminary  discussions  with  some  of  the  financial  institutions  during  the 
Programme  Design  stage  revealed  a  limited  presence  of  agricultural  financing  skills 
amongst lenders.  
To further improve access to finance for SHFs and MSMEs, this sub-component 
296. 
will  strengthen  the  capacity  of  financial  institutions  to  develop  and  deliver  inclusive 
financial services to SHFs and MSMEs in commercial horticultural and/or those participating 
in HEEP 4Ps. Commercial banks and building societies will be supported to develop value 
chain,  group,  or  individual  financing  instruments.  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs)  and 
community banks/SACCOs will also be supported to develop and deliver direct financing 
instruments  for  SHFs  and  MSMEs.  Insurance  companies  will  be  assisted  with  the 
development of suitable products for the horticultural sector. 
Management 
297. 
This sub-component will be managed on behalf of the PMU by the HEEP-recruited 
Access to Finance Advisor.  The incumbent will be based in Harare and will cover  all the 
targeted provinces. Apart from conducting training and coaching activities, the referred to 
Access to Finance Advisor will build relationships with PFIs, SHFs’ representative bodies, 
Insurance companies, and ZAMFI, among others. 
298. 
At appraisal, it was estimated that for the duration of HEEP (8 years), a total of 
48  training  workshops  and  48  coaching  workshops  will  be  held/  conducted  on  an 
alternating basis. In other words, there will be 6 training and 6 coaching workshops per 
year.  In  the  case  of  interactive  group  coaching  sessions,  one  session  will  be  held  per 
month, adding to 96 sessions in the 8 year-period. 
Key Implementation Steps 
Potential EHRF PFI Needs Assessment. The Access to Finance Advisor will 
299. 
undertake a needs assessment of financial institutions that are potential PFIs offering EHRF 
short- and medium-term finance, guided and supported as required by the Export Finance 
Advisor. The needs assessment will focus on the agricultural or horticultural loan portfolio, 
with  respect  to  size,  loan  products,  tenors,  interest  rates,  collateral  requirements,  and 
default rates. Feedback received will be analysed to determine the depth and breadth of 
agricultural  /  horticultural  financing  skills  in  PFIs.  Such  skills  would  include  product 
development,  loan  appraisal,  loan  monitoring  and  loan  recovery,  in  the  context  of  the 
horticultural  value  chain.  In  addition,  special  focus  will  be  placed  on  PFIs’  capacity  to 
leverage anchor firms for horticultural product development and risk mitigation purposes. 
The findings would be  evaluated against best  practices,  resulting in the identification of 
specific capacity related gaps/ shortcomings 
153 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
300. 
The needs assessment will also involve discussions with potential or current 4P 
anchor companies, structured as Key Informant Interviews. Key issues to be unpacked will 
include; (i) financing arrangements in place (if any) for SHFs, (ii) responsibilities and roles 
with financiers in risk sharing and mitigation, (iii) interest rates and default rates on input 
loans  to  SHFs,  (iv)  loan  monitoring  and  recovery  processes  currently  in  place,  and  (v) 
possible principal-agent relationships between Commercial Banks and Anchor companies, 
where the former avail funds to the latter for onward lending to SHFs in the form of inputs 
finance. 
EHRF PFI Capacity Building Program Development 
301. 
To  address  the  gaps/ 
shortcomings, training and coaching curricula will be developed. This will then lead to the 
development  of  specific  training  and  coaching  programmes.  Curricula  will  map  out  the 
issues  and  aspects  to  be  addressed  through  capacity  building,  while  training/  coaching 
programmes will provide a structured methodology and tools to address the gaps. Some 
of these will require an elaborate training programme to be rectified, while others will not.  
Therefore,  capacity  gaps  which  can  be  fixed  quickly  and  with  relative  ease,  will  be 
addressed  through  group  coaching  sessions.  However,  those  which  require  a  more 
structured format, perhaps due to the degree of sophistication or complexity involved, will 
be addressed via elaborate training/ coaching workshops. 
302. 
held with SHFs, Anchor companies, MFIs and SACCOs.   
MFI, SACCO, Community Bank Capacity Needs Assessment.  Interviews will be 
With SHFs, the interviews will be conducted via Focus Group Discussions, and 
303. 
will  focus  on  the  horticultural  operating  cycle,  its  financing  constraints,  and  key  risks. 
Specifically, it will zero-in on; (i) current sources of finance, (ii) ease of accessing finance, 
(iii)  profitability  in  the  operating  cycles  of  the  various  horticultural  crop(s)  under 
cultivation, (iv) common production and marketing risks impacting access to finance, (v) 
access to, and utilisation of insurance products, (vi) current interest rates, collateral, and 
tenors dictated by informal and formal providers. 
With regards to MFIs, interviews will be held with senior personnel at the MFIs’ 
304. 
apex  body,  ZAMFI  (Zimbabwe  Association  of  Micro  Finance  Institutions).  It  will  seek  to 
understand or appreciate MFIs’ sources and cost of funds, types of financial products, loan 
default rates, interest rates, tenors, and common conditions precedent. Responses to the 
interview will, as for PFIs, reveal capacity building gaps in MFIS. 
305. 
For  Community  Banks/SACCOs,  interviews  will  be  conducted  with  SACCOs 
located close to the selected production points or irrigation schemes. Key issues relating 
to membership fees, loan amounts, interest rates, tenor, collateral, and default rate, will 
be covered. As in MFIs, the responses thereof will be analysed, leading to the identification 
of capacity building gaps. 
Capacity  Building  Program  Development.  Following  this  Needs  Assessment 
306. 
exercise,  programmes  will  be  developed.  These  will  be  delivered  through  training/ 
coaching  workshops,  which  will  either  be  Generic  or  Entity-Specific.  The  latter  will  be  a 
customised  version  of  the  former,  with  case  studies  that  are  specific  to  the  targeted 
institution.  The  maximum  workshop  duration  period  will  be  three  (3)  days,  and  the 
maximum number of participants per workshop will be fifteen (15), to allow for effective 
interaction. Coaching sessions will be one-day events aimed at dealing with or clarifying 
some of the less complicated issues. Such sessions will be held in a group format, with the 
Access to Finance Advisor facilitating the interactions 
154 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
COMPONENT 3: INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORTAND PROJECT COORDINATION 
Sub-component 3.1 INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT 
307.  This  sub-component  aims  to  improve  the  production  and  marketing  information 
and  policy  relevant  knowledge  products  on  the  horticultural  sector  with  linkages  to 
mainstreaming themes: for example, case studies on women and youth in horticulture and 
access  to  land;  smallholder  horticulture  and  climate,  nutrition  nexus.  The  result  of  this 
subcomponent will benefit public sector policy makers and private sector investors, and to 
improve the governance of hub and spoke arrangements to ensure a fair distribution of 
risks and benefits to all parties. Institutional support will be provided  to complement the 
capacity building support for ARDA and Agritex in Component 1.  
Agricultural Information Management System  
Background. 
308. 
HEEP  will  support  MLAFWRD’s  Agricultural  Information 
Management System (AIMS) project, which was revamped in 2020 as part of the Smart 
Agriculture programme. AIMS collects production, productivity and marketing data on the 
different value chains in the agricultural sector. It is meant to provide updated information 
to policy makers and extension officers, but also to the private sector and to donors. Data 
collection  is  conducted  through  national  surveys,  case  studies  covering  the  different 
agricultural sub-sectors and mainstreaming themes. Data on horticulture is not yet being 
collected in a systematized way.  
309. 
Support HEEP will support MLAFWRD in setting up and carrying out a national 
scale  horticultural  assessment  that  will  collect  data  on  horticultural  production, 
productivity, and marketing. The survey will be implemented by the Division of Strategic 
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation at MLAFWRD. Data collection will be done in a sex and 
age  disaggregated  manner  by  extension  officers  and  will  follow  the  approach  and 
methodology set by  MLAFWRD.  The horticultural assessments will be  conducted in year 
one of the project. The findings and the raw data will be stored in MLAFWRD’s MIS and 
will be accessible to the public. HEEP will make use of the findings for its own planning and 
M&E  purposes  as  well  as  provide  evidence-based  information  for  policy  making 
development. As part of its support to AIMS, HEEP will also conduct an M&E training to 
strengthen  capacity  of  MLAFWRD  staff  responsible  for  M&E.  A  total  of  24  staff  will  be 
trained: 16 at provincial level (2 per province), and 8 officers at national level. The training 
will  include  three  modules:  i)  good  M&E  practices  and  approaches;  ii)  use  of  data  for 
evidence-based decision making; iii) hand-on training on MLAFWRD MIS, to facilitate the 
shift from paper-based to digital tools for data collection and analysis. 
Horticultural Development Council (HDC) 
Background. 
The  HDC  represents  export-oriented  horticultural  producers 
310. 
and has been designated by the GoZ to lead the “Conventional” pillar of the Horticultural 
Recovery  and  Growth  Plan.  The  HDC  is  firmly  committed  to  an  SHF-inclusive  model  of 
growing  the  horticultural  sector,  using  well-coordinated  hub  and  spoke  models  of 
production.    
311. 
Support  to  Horticultural  Development  Council  (HDC):    The  HDC  represents 
export-oriented horticultural producers, and has been designated by the GoZ to lead the 
“Conventional”  pillar  of  the  Horticultural  Recovery  and  Growth  Plan.  The  HDC  is  firmly 
155 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
committed  to  an  SHF-inclusive  model  of  growing  the  horticultural  sector,  using  well-
coordinated  hub  and  spoke  models  of  production.  To  this  end,  HEEP  will  support  HDC 
through  provision  of  a  market  linkage  advisor  (MLA)  at  HDC  that  will  (i)  assist  in  the 
identification and mobilization of 4P arrangements (e.g. hub & spoke and contract farming 
arrangements),  (ii)  develop  clear  and  fair  industry  guidelines  for  fair  4P  arrangements, 
adapting as appropriate Global GAAP and other guidelines for Zimbabwe (iii) provide any 
other support to 4P partners to implement 4P inclusive business plan. HEEP support will 
cover 100% of the costs of hiring and supporting the MLA for three years, and 50% for 
another two years with HDC financing the other 50%. Eventually, it is envisioned that HDC 
will  develop  a  business  model  so  that  the  costs  of  providing  the  MLA  services  will  be 
covered from a mix of fee for services, membership fees, etc. 
Key Implementation Steps 
312. 
At project start-up, the PMU shall request from HDC an updated, costed proposal 
based on informal submissions received during project appraisal.   After negotiations with 
the  HDC,  the  PMU  will draft  a  sub-project  grant  agreement  with  HDC  for  submission  to 
IFAD for No Objection.   
Subcomponent 3.2 PROJECT COORDINATION  
313. 
HEEP acknowledges the lack of in country capacity and will recruit the necessary 
expertise for the successful implementation of the project. The seconded PMU staff will be 
trained  in  order  to  increase  implementation  capacity.  The  detailed  project  management 
and TOR for project staff is presented in Appendix 5. The MLAWFRD Human Resources will 
conduct  competitive  recruitment  for  staff  through  a  head-hunting  firm.  All  government 
seconded staff  will be seconded through a competitive process and will be engaged full 
time  for  the  project  duration.  The  NMPU  offices  will  be  established  in  Harare  at  shared 
office  space  with  SIRP  and  SACP.  Regional  office  for  RPMU  will  be  established  within 
Government provincial offices in Mutare, Bulawayo and Masvingo. In addition, the low in-
country capacity, could be addressed through close supervision, monitoring, leveraging on 
implementation  partnerships,  recruitment  of  technical  assistance  and  utilization  of 
community- based champions/facilitators (e.g. GALS, nutrition, extension) to reach target 
beneficiaries where possible. 
156 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
14. Appendix 9: Knowledge Management Plan 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
Knowledge management: Definition  
For the purposes of this strategy, Knowledge Management (KM) is defined as “a 
314. 
set of processes, tools and behaviours that connect and motivate people to generate, use 
and  share  good  practice,  learning  and  expertise  to  improve  projects’  efficiency  and 
development effectiveness”.  
315. 
The present document is a draft plan developed to this end. After start-up, this 
draft should be completed and refined with support from IFAD. The KM strategy and plan 
will be validated by project stakeholders through a national workshop. The workshop will 
be an opportunity to refine the thematic focus and dissemination strategy of policy relevant 
studies, but also to better understand the key information needs for HEEP to be successful.  
Knowledge management: Goal, objective and activities  
The  overall  goal  of  this  KM  plan  is  to  support  learning  and  adaptation  for 
316. 
improved  project  performance.  It  will  also  enable  HEEP  to  develop  and  disseminate 
knowledge  products  that  can  promote  wider  changes  at  national  level,  as  well  as  the 
sustainability of project results.  
317. 
HEEP’s KM strategy is closely linked to the policy engagement agenda, which in 
turn  will  reinforce  the  project’s  exit  strategy.  In  this  sense,  KM  activities  will  focus  in 
particular on shedding more light on the following two key questions:  
  How  can  4P  in  the  horticultural  sector  be  structured  in  a  way  that  benefits 
smallholder farmers while also increasing revenues for anchor firms? 
  How  can  the  policy  and  regulatory  frameworks  be  modified  to  increase  the 
efficiency, inclusiveness and transparency of the horticultural sector? 
318. 
these two questions. Further envisaged KM products are the following:  
KM products will be developed to  capture and disseminate lessons learned on 
-  Briefs  highlighting  the  innovations  piloted  through  the  innovation  grants.  These 
briefs may be collected in an Innovation Catalogue towards project completion.  
-  A study on access to land for women and youth, which should be carried out in the 
first or second year of the project and should help refining the targeting strategy.  
-  A study to support the development of a water pricing policy, which will be key to 
support the policy engagement efforts laid out in the ongoing Zimbabwe COSOP 
319. 
The specific objectives of this plan are:  
  To  support  learning,  adaptation  and  improved  project  performance  during 
implementation;  
  To raise awareness among people in Zimbabwe on the importance of changing 
behaviour around nutritious diets, climate change, and gender equity  
157 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
  To capture, use and share lessons learned;  
  To improve the design of future projects in Zimbabwe and elsewhere based on 
the lessons learned from HEEP;  
  To influence policy processes and scale up successes;  
  To  raise  awareness  of  project  activities  and  results,  and  publicize  successful 
experiences;  
  To boost the project profile among decision makers;  
  To engage with and inform rural people about project activities;  
  To build a community of stakeholders.  
320. 
The  activities  will  be  implemented  in  three  broad  action  areas:  a)  producing 
policy-relevant material and sharing lessons learned on what works and what does in terms 
of  4Ps  in  the  horticultural  sector  (and  beyond);  b)  promoting  behavioural  change  and 
raising  awareness  on  the  importance  of  nutrition,  sustainable  practices  and  gender 
equality, and; c) promoting HEEP’s visibility.  
Knowledge management structure  
321. 
The implementation of the knowledge management strategy requires strong and 
visible leadership from the management team, and all JMU staff. It will also require strong 
partnerships with institutions, partners and the private sector.  Each member of the Unit 
has the responsibility to engage in developing knowledge products, facilitate connections 
between  the  field  and  headquarter,  offer  technical  support  to  knowledge-sharing  and 
learning.  
322. 
At the same time, KM will be the primary responsibility of the HEEP KM and M&E 
officers at JMU level. The KM and M&E functions will be carried out in synergy to ensure 
that:  
  M&E findings on project results are widely disseminated in a clear, synthetized, 
and interesting way;  
  Knowledge products are backed up by solid M&E evidence (and therefore, the 
M&E system collects all data necessary for the envisaged knowledge products 
to be developed);  
  Field  visits  to  collect  stories  by  the  KM  officer  are  also  used  for  triangulating 
M&E data, and the way around;  
  Case studies, stakeholder interviews and surveys, will be used to deepen the 
understanding of factors contributing to successes and failures, and to enable 
full documentation of impact. Collaboration will be sought with the University of 
Zimbabwe, from which an intern will be hired every year to work with the HEEP 
project and support KM activities.  
SWOT analysis in the KM context  
158 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
323. 
A SWOT analysis is a simple but useful framework for analysing the Strengths, 
Weaknesses,  Opportunities,  and  Threats  that  the  JMU  may  encounter,  especially  when 
about to start a new project or undergo a midterm evaluation, etc. It can also be used in 
project planning and eventually evaluation of its activities at various intervals.  
324. 
This SWOT analysis helps in focusing on the main strengths and leverage them 
to pursue key opportunities and to avoid threats. The team can also become aware of its 
weaknesses  which  might  need  to  be  overcome  in  order  to  take  the  greatest  possible 
advantage of potential opportunities available.  
be 
325. 
completed/adjusted/completely modified at start-up and updated during implementation.  
of  SWOT 
analysis, 
example 
below 
table 
The 
an 
to 
is 
Table 1: HEEP KM SWOT analysis  
STRENGTHS 
OPPORTUNITIES  
  Qualified JMU human capital;  
  A good culture of sharing knowledge inside the JMU;  
  Use  of  different  dissemination 
tools,  both 
(website/Facebook) and new (Instagram/YouTube)  
  Networking with other projects;  
traditional 
 
Exchange of good practices with partners;  
  Accessible information through different tools e.g., HEEP website, 
Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, Odnklassniki, partners website: 
agrobiznes.md, madrm.gov.md  
media;  
  Attract  more  young  beneficiaries  via  social 
  Good M&E system  
  Attract more smallholders to HEEP, broadening 
their knowledge of HEEP services  
  Adequate human and economic resources for KM;  
 
 
 
Presence of partners that support Project implementation.  
WEAKNESSES  
THREATS  
Limited HEEP execution;  
 
Relatively  low  level  of  commitment  from  the 
local public authority; 
Low  acceptance  rate  of  the  beneficiaries  to  share  their  story 
affect communication activities.  
 
Lack  of  successful  stakeholder  engagement 
(here stakeholders are beneficiaries)  
Stakeholders and audiences  
326. 
HEEP  KM  activities  will be  differentiated  depending  on  the  different  audiences 
they aim to reach. The tables 2 and 3 below are examples of KM stakeholders/audiences 
159 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
and  KM  products  that  could  be  used  to  reach  these.  Both  these  tables  are  to  be 
completed/adjusted/completely modified at start-up and updated during implementation.  
160 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Table 2: HEEP KM Stakeholders  
Stakeholders  
Local  
 
 
 
 
Beneficiaries  
Local communities  
Project staff  
Local offices of government agencies and project 
partners  
National  
Project partners  
 
  Other similar projects  
Government agencies  
 
General public  
 
International  
Donors/financiers 
Development agencies 
Communities of practice/interest groups 
 
 
 
  Other projects 
General public 
 
Policy makers  
 
What do they want/need to know? What do we want to 
communicate to them? 
Purpose and activities of the project  
 
  Opportunities to partner, participate, or benefit  
  Notifications about project events and meetings  
 
 
 
 
Project results and impacts  
Experiences of beneficiaries  
Relevant lessons learned  
Results  of  successful  pilots  and  trials  of  new 
technologies, crops etc.  
  Guidelines and methodologies  
 
Results  of  studies,  surveys  and  assessments 
undertaken  
Policy relevant lessons  
 
161 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Table 3. HEEP KM products 
Products 
• 
Videos 
languages  
in 
local 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Stories from the field  
Lessons learned  
Project briefs 
Policy briefs  
Reports and studies  
Technical guidelines  
• 
• 
•  Working papers  
How-to-do-note  
• 
Research publications 
• 
• 
to  partners 
Inputs 
publications  
Inputs  to  government 
policies and strategies  
• 
 
Articles 
(newspaper/magazine)  
Blog posts  
 
  Newsletters  
 
Press releases  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Videos  
Photos  
Interviews  
Infographics  
Podcasts  
TV spots  
Radio sessions  
What knowledge can they share and with who?  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Directed mainly to the project’s beneficiaries and to school children, these 
products  not  only  contribute  to  maintaining  the  feedback  loop  of  the 
project’s  activities  but  also  to  contribute  to  the  objective  of  raising 
awareness and promoting behavioural change.  
Their  participatory  component  allows  to  better  portray  the  beneficiaries 
point  of  view.  They  also  allow  participants  and  facilitators  to  produce 
powerful stories.  
Good  for  sharing  information  on  project  activities,  results  and  lessons 
learned with a wide variety of audiences from beneficiaries to high- level 
decision makers.  
Typically, short (a few pages) and not too technical, but with enough detail 
to be useful or to encourage audience to seek out more information.  
Addressing particular issues in significant detail, normally longer and more 
analytical  and  targeted  towards  audiences  with  specialist  knowledge  or 
interest in the topic.  
Require considerable investment of time and resources to produce  
Useful  opportunities  to  put  project  knowledge  into  action  and  to  use 
partners  and  government  resources  to  leverage  its  impact  and  raise 
awareness of the project.  
Useful for communicating information about project activities and results 
achieved and reaching a wide general audience. 
Newspapers,  websites  and  blogs  are  normally  eager  for  content  and  are 
normally keen to publish interesting stories from projects.  
These  make  great  content  for  the  project  to  disseminate  through  social 
media  –  publishing  videos  and  photos  of  project  activities,  beneficiaries, 
field visits etc. online is a good way to attract interest (but make sure you 
get  permission  where  necessary). 
Interviews  often  provide  good 
soundbites for sharing through social media, perhaps together with links to 
longer articles or publications.  
As  part  of  the  yearly  TV  and  radio  national  awareness  campaigns,  these 
public communication materials  directed to the national scale Zimbabwe 
population will not only raise awareness and promote behavioural change 
but also promote the use of fuel-efficient cooking stoves.  
Table 4: Template for Knowledge Management action plan  
Activities 
Expected 
outcomes 
Target 
audience 
Ex. 
Awareness 
campaign 
Behavioral 
change 
climate 
change  
on 
General 
public 
Output 
(knowledge 
product) 
TV show 
Dissemination 
channel  
Potential 
partnership 
Timeframe  Budget 
National 
channel 
TV 
SACP 
Year 3 
5.000 USD 
162 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
5.    
6.   
163 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
15. Appendix  10:  SECAP  Compliance  for  HEEP  Financed  Infrastructure 
Development  
327. 
Rehabilitation of irrigation schemes requires an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP)30 to be developed. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is required based on 
the  scope  of  works  particularly  where  expansion  is  envisaged.  Rural  roads  do  not  have 
specific EIA requirements though they can be included in the assessments for irrigation 
scheme development and agro-industries. The following steps will be followed.  
a)  screening of infrastructure sub-projects, as a result a prospectus will be produced; 
b)  submission of prospectus for Environment Management Agency (EMA) review;  
c)  desk review by EMA with feedback provided within 30 days;  
d)  ground truthing by EMA;   
e)  development of Environmental Management Plan if required. 
Sample Terms of Reference (ToR) for EIA Preparation  
328. 
contents.    
Based on the screening and scoping results the ToR   will   have   the   following   
 
  Objective of the ToR: This section should state the scope of the EIA in relation to 
the screening category and the proposed program activities. It needs to stipulate 
the process and the timing of the EMP preparation  and implementation stages in 
order to adequately address the safeguards requirements of the GoZ and IFAD. 
Introduction and Context: The ToR needs to provide information on project activity 
objective,  the  name  of  the  project  activity  proponent,  the  rational  for  the  EIA, 
specific components of the project activity, project activity area with location map, 
short  briefing  of  social  and  environment  of  settings  and  applicable  safeguard 
policies. 
  Location of the study area and likely major impacts: State the area  involved and 
the boundaries of the study area for the assessment. Identify adjacent or remote 
areas  which  should  be  considered  with  to  impacts  of  particular  aspects  of  the 
program activity. 
  Tasks:  The  EIA  study  team/consultant  should  effectively  execute  the  following 
tasks. 
a.  Task  A:  Description  of  the  proposed  program  activity:  Describe  the  location, 
size and nature of the project activity, environmental assessment category, brief 
description  of  project  activity  alternatives,  time  schedule  for  phasing  of 
development and resources required for the program activity, among others. 
b.  Task  B:  Baseline  information/Biophysical  and  social-economic  description: 
Describe  the  baseline/biophysical  and  socio-economic  characteristics  of  the 
30 To ensure compliance with the SECAP, the social risk analysis and mitigation measures will be included 
and thus an Environment and Social Management Plan developed as detailed in the ToR.  
164 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
environment  where  the  project  activity  will  be  implemented;  and  area  of 
influence.  Include  information  on  any  changes  anticipated  before  the  project 
activity commences. 
c.  Task C: Administrative and legal Policy framework: In addition to the required 
administrative  and  institutional  setup  for  the  implementation  of  the  program 
activity, this part needs to identify pertinent policies, regulations and guidelines 
pertinent to the study.  
d.  Task D: Identification of potential impacts of the program activity: Identify all 
potential significant impacts that the project activity is likely to generate. Assess 
the  impacts  from  changes  brought  about  by  the  project  activity  on  baseline 
environmental  conditions  as  described  under  Task  B.  The  analysis  should 
address  both  the  positive  and  negative  impacts  of  the  activity.  Wherever 
possible, describe impacts quantitatively, in terms of environmental and social 
costs and benefits. 
e.  Task E: Propose project activity alternatives: Alternatives extend to site, design, 
technology selection, construction techniques and phasing, and operating and 
in  terms  of  potential 
maintenance  procedures.  Compare  alternatives 
environmental and social impacts; capital and operating costs; suitability under 
local conditions; and institutional, training, and monitoring requirements. 
f.  Task F: Preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP): 
Describe the mitigation measures for adverse environmental and social impacts, 
capacity  building  requirements,  schedules,  and  other  necessary  support 
services  to  implement  the  mitigating  measures.  Provide  environmental  and 
social protection clauses for application by contractors and consultants, if any. 
The ToR should state that the concerned and affected parties should agree on 
the proposed mitigating measures before they are included in the ESMP. 
g.  Task G: Monitoring Plan: This organizes a comprehensive plan to monitor the 
implementation  of  mitigating  measures  and  the  impacts  of  the  program 
activities.  It should also address an estimate of capital and operating costs and 
a description of other inputs (such as training and institutional strengthening) 
needed to implement the plan. 
  Qualification  of  the  EIA  study  team/Consultant:  The  ToR  should  provide  clear 
guidance on the qualification of the EIA study team. 
  Duration  of  the  EIA  Study:  This  should  be  determined  according  to  the  type  of  the 
program activity. 
165 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
16. Appendix 11: Screening Checklists and Procedures 
329. 
Below is the list of the IFC exclusion list applicable to HEEP: 
  Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country 
laws or regulations or international conventions and agreements.  
  Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding beer and wine).  
  Production or trade in tobacco31.  
  Trade in wildlife or wildlife products regulated under CITES32. 
  Purchase of logging equipment for use in primary tropical moist forest.  
  Production or trade in pesticides/herbicides subject to international phase outs 
or bans. 
  Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labour 
/harmful child labour33 
330. 
This  section  outlines  the  selection  criteria  and  associated  Environmental  and 
Social risk assessment to be applied when screening infrastructure activities financed by 
HEEP. 
Information for screening potential environmental and social impacts 
Basic Data: 
Name of the Project: 
Name of the proposed project activity: 
Name of the Beneficiary: 
Address: 
31 This does not apply to project sponsors who are not substantially involved in these activities. 
"Not substantially involved" means that the activity concerned is ancillary to a project sponsor's 
primary operations. 
32 CITES: Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. A list 
of CITES listed species is available from the Environment Division. 
33 Forced labour means all work or service, not voluntarily performed, that is extracted from an individual 
under  threat  of  force  or  penalty.  Harmful  child  labour  means  the  employment  of  children  that  is 
economically exploitive, or is likely to be hazardous to, or to interfere with, the child's education, or to be 
harmful to the child's health, or physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or social development. 
166 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
__________________________________________________________ 
Civil Works to be constructed: 
Proposed Date for Commencement of Work: 
Site Selection:
167 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
II. Site Description 
Site Features 
Description 
Size of infrastructure to be developed  
Physical description of the site 
Proximity to existing water points, wells 
and other water resources 
Presence and type of vegetation 
What is the current land use? 
Who identified the site? 
Who is the owner or user of the land? 
Who occupies the land? 
Completeness of the Application: 
7. 
Does the application document contain, as appropriate, the following information? 
Issues to be considered 
Yes  No  N/A 
Description of the proposed  project activity and where it is located 
Reasons for proposing the project activity 
The estimated cost of implementation  
Information about how the site was chosen, and what alternatives were considered 
A map or drawing showing the location and boundary of the proposed project activity including 
any land required temporarily during construction 
Any new access arrangements or changes to existing road layouts 
Any land that needs to be acquired, as well as who owns it, lives on it or has rights to use it 
A work program for construction, operation and decommissioning the physical works, as well 
as any site restoration needed afterwards 
Construction methods 
Resources to be used in construction and operation (e.g. materials, water, energy) 
Information about measures included in the proposed project activity plan to avoid or minimize 
adverse environmental and social impacts 
Details of any permits required for the proposed project activity 
168 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
331. 
activities of environmental and social concerns.  
Checklist  for  environmental  and  social  impact  rating  for  Proposed  project 
332. 
probability of impacts so as to avoid subjective impact analysis.  
Impact rating will be considered both in terms of consequence of impacts and 
No.  Will the proposed project activity? 
A 
If Yes, Rate of Impacts 
None  Low  Medium  High  Unknown 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
Build or rehabilitate any rural roads (HEEP can only finance 
Category  B  roads  i.e.  max.  10  kilometres  continuous 
stretch)? 
Build or rehabilitate any irrigation schemes (HEEP can only 
finance Category B schemes i.e. max 100 ha)? 
Build or rehabilitate any structures or buildings? 
Be located in or near an area where there is an important 
historical, archaeological or cultural heritage site? 
Be located within or adjacent to any areas that are or may 
be  protected  by  government  (e.g.  national  park,  national 
reserve, world heritage site) or local tradition, or that might 
be a natural habitat? 
Depend on water supply from existing reservoirs, weir, or 
other water diversion structure? 
Have risk of causing the contamination of drinking water? 
Cause poor water drainage and increase the risk of water-
related diseases such as malaria or bilharzias? 
Be  located  within  or  near  environmentally  sensitive  areas 
(e.g.  intact  natural  forests,  mangroves,  wetlands)  or 
threatened species? 
Create a risk of increased soil degradation or erosion? 
Produce,  or  increase  the  production  of,  solid  or  liquid 
wastes (e.g. water, medical, and domestic or construction 
wastes)? 
Affect the quantity or quality of surface waters (e.g. rivers, 
streams, wetlands), or groundwater (e.g. wells)? 
Result in the production of solid or liquid waste, or result in 
an  increase  in  waste  production,  during  construction  or 
operation? 
Require  that 
(temporarily or permanently) for its development? 
Use  land  that  is  currently  occupied  or  regularly  used  for 
productive  purposes  (e.g.  gardening,  farming,  pasture, 
fishing locations, forests) 
Displace individuals, families or businesses? 
Result  in  the  temporary  or  permanent  loss  of  crops,  fruit 
trees or household infrastructure such as granaries, outside 
toilets and kitchens? 
Result in the involuntary restriction of access by people to 
legally designated parks and protected areas?  
land  (public  or  private)  be  acquired 
333. 
When considering the location of a proposed project activity, rate the sensitivity 
of the proposed site as shown in the table according to the given criteria. Higher ratings 
do not necessarily mean that a site is unsuitable. They do indicate a real risk of causing 
undesirable  adverse  environmental  and  social  effects,  and  that  more  substantial 
environmental  and/or  social  planning  may  be  required  to  adequately  avoid,  mitigate  or 
manage potential effects. The following table should be used as a reference.  
169 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Summary of assessment (based on screening criteria):  
Environmental Category (B or C) of the proposed project activities (with justification): 
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________ 
Recommendation  
The Proposed project activity can be considered for approval.  The application is complete, all 
significant environmental and social issues are resolved, and no further planning of proposed project 
activity is required:  
Approved without condition (Project activity is not of environmental and social concern and is ready 
for approved):       
 Safeguards instrument(s) required: ESMP or others (please specify)   
           ESMP required: 
           Rejected; reasons for rejection: 
           Others (specify):       
           A field appraisal is required. 
Free, Prior and Informed Consent 
334. 
Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is an operational principle empowering 
local  communities  to  give  or  withhold  their  consent  to  proposed  investment  and 
development  programmes  that  may  affect  their  rights,  access  to  lands,  territories  and 
resources,  and  livelihoods  (IFAD,  2015).  FPIC  is  solicited  through  consultations  in  good 
faith with the representative institutions endorsed by communities. In the context of the 
HEEP, it will ensure that community members, particularly the indigenous and marginalised 
groups  participate  in  decision-making  processes  for  the  agricultural  productivity  and 
infrastructure development activities. 
170 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
335. 
following:  
Consent being sought in a way that is “free, prior and informed” 34 requires the 
  no coercion, intimidation or manipulation 
 
 
consent sought sufficiently in advance of any decision point or commencement 
of activities  
information  provided  covers  all  relevant  issues  to  make  decision  maker  fully 
enlightened.  
  an  outcome  of  the  consultation,  participation  and  collective  decision-making 
process by the local communities 
336. 
General guiding principles 
a) 
Responsibility and institutional capacity for seeking FPIC  
The IFAD general policies and procedures, stipulate that the borrower or grant 
337. 
recipient is responsible for seeking FPIC. In this case the GoZ through the MLARR, as the 
lead Ministry, will be responsible for seeking FPIC. FPIC will be based on laws that regulate 
the rights to land and resources in Zimbabwe.  
b) 
Identifying representative institutions 
338. 
In  order  to  ensure  legitimacy,  it  is  crucial  that  FPIC  be  obtained  from  the 
representative institutions of local communities, which for the HEEP includes both the APGs 
and  the  WaDCos.  However,  the  important  criteria  is  that  representation  should  be 
determined  by  the  concerned  peoples  and  communities  themselves  to  avoid 
misrepresentation  or  manipulation.  Therefore,  additional  community  representation  can 
be included in the start-up phases of the project.  
c) 
Consultation, participation and consent 
339. 
HEEP  will  follow  a  participatory  approach  for  implementation  of  both 
Components 1 and 2 as articulated in the detailed descriptions above, to ensure that local 
communities are included in business plan development and infrastructure prioritisation. 
HEEP  processes  will  give  appropriate  attention  to  women  and  young  people  in  these 
consultations. 
As  a  result  of  the  participatory  approach  and  processes  outlined  under  each 
340. 
component,  each  specific  activity  will  be  an  outcome  of  the  collective  decision-making 
process by the local communities. The Project Management Unit will seek recorded consent 
agreements with the concerned communities through their freely chosen representative 
bodies to engage in the FPIC process. 
341. 
The consent agreement and record will document the outcome(s) of the process 
and terms and  conditions agreed upon.  It will also document any dissent to the  overall 
34 United Nations Development Group (UNDG), Guidelines on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues, 2009:30 
171 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
project  or  project  activities.  The  agreement  must  be  independently  verified  as  fair  and 
true by the communities and follow the process agreed by them. 
d) 
Documenting consultation, participation and FPIC 
342. 
participations and consent in the following manner: 
MLARR,  through  the  PMU,  will  undertake  to  document  all  consultations, 
  Keep  record  of  consultations  undertaken  how  participants  were  selected  and 
invited;  what  documentation/information  they  received  beforehand  and  in  which 
language; who participated; what was discussed; and what was agreed.  
  Keep  record  of  participation:  when  did  representatives  of  indigenous  and 
marginalised peoples and local communities participate; how they were selected; 
what institutional roles or accountability links to constituents do  they have; what 
commitments do they assume; and what agreements were made.  
343. 
Document specific instances that express FPIC such as agreements between the 
MLARR and the concerned local communities. These agreements should clearly articulate 
what has been agreed (issues, commitments, time frames, budgets, roles, responsibilities, 
etc.); who entered into the agreement (clearly identifying the individuals involved as well 
as their title and role (or the duly designated implementing agency or entity such as the 
PMU);  and  what  mechanisms  have  been  set  up  to  maintain  dialogue  and  address 
disagreements. 
344. 
Since investments in specific communities and areas were not identifiable during 
the HEEP design stage, FPIC will further be solicited during the implementation phase. The 
outline for the FPIC plan includes the following steps in the process and include timeline:  
  Sociocultural  and  land  tenure  assessment,  which  will  be  part  of  the  standard 
poverty analysis and beneficiary identification process. This will also be part of the 
targeting strategy for the HEEP and thus conducted within the first year of project 
implementation.  
 
Identification  of  decision-making  institutions  and  representatives  to  ensure  full, 
effective and equal participation of stakeholders. This will be done during the start-
up phase of the project as part of the stakeholder identification and engagement 
planning.  
  Consultation  process  leading  to  FPIC.  This  will  be  part  of  the  implementation 
process detailed for both component 1 and 2. The consent will be obtained for the 
APG participation and infrastructure prioritisation work flow.  
  Formalized  consent  agreement.  These  will  be  obtained  prior  to  any  investment 
activities through the business plans, matching grant proposals and infrastructure 
prioritisation list and feasibility assessments.   
172 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
17.  Appendix 12: Key Project Procedures 
PLANNING AND M&E PROCESS AND HEEP SURVEY 
Monitoring and evaluation system 
345. 
Key  elements  of  the  M&E  system:  HEEP  will  develop  a  robust  M&E  system  in 
compliance  with  IFAD  and  the  GoZ  requirements.  The  HEEP  M&E  system  will  generate 
timely and accurate information to support decision-making and adaptive management. 
In  particular,  it  will:  (i)  collect,  analyse  and  update  information  on  project  outputs, 
outcomes  and  impact;  (ii)  support  NPMU  and  the  Steering  Committee  in  planning  and 
making informed decisions on HEEP strategies and actions; (iii) maintain and strengthen 
strategic  partnerships  with  stakeholders;  and  (iv)  create  opportunities  for  learning  and 
sharing results. The system will be guided by three main documents:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
The Theory of change (ToC), which provides a comprehensive description and 
illustration of how and why the desired changes are expected to happen in the 
context of rural Zimbabwe 
The  log-frame,  which  offers  an  overview  of  the  project’s  goal,  outcomes  and 
outputs, and enables to track progress against expected results.  
The AWPB, which sets management priorities for the financial year. It is a tool 
to  control  costs,  review  performance  and  assess  the  achievement  of  targets 
each year.  
346. 
These  three  documents  are  closely  linked  to  each  other:  The  activities 
planned in the AWPBs should lead to the achievement of project outputs listed in the log-
frame. To ensure alignment between the log-frame and the yearly AWPBs, the NPMU will 
set annual targets for output indicators in the logframe, and these annual output targets 
will guide the development of the AWPB. The achievement of log-frame results will show 
whether  the  project’s  ToC  is  correct.  If  for  example  the  achievement  of  the  expected 
outputs does not lead to the desired outcomes, then the ToC underlying the project design 
may be mistaken. 
Annual and semi-annual reporting will be focused on assessing the achievement 
347. 
of physical and financial AWPB targets each year. IFAD supervision reports will focus both 
on the execution of AWPBs and on the achievement of log-frame outputs and outcomes. 
Based on logframe results, the Mid-Term Review and the Completion report will also assess 
the correctness of the Theory of Change.  
348. 
The  system  will  be  participatory  and  gender  sensitive:  It  will  include 
beneficiary feedback and grievance  redress mechanisms. Data will be  disaggregated by 
gender,  by  age,  and  –  where  possible  –  by  Persons  with  Disability  (PwD).  Targets  for 
outreach  to  PwDs  have  been  included  in  the  HEEP  log-frame.  About  2000  beneficiaries 
consists of PWD. PWD is a new target group for IFAD in Zimbabwe. The project will work 
with  traditional  leaders,  PWD  organisations  and  religious  organisations  to  identify  the 
target  group  and  opportunities  to  engage  them.  Lessons  learned  will  be  captured  to 
sharpen the strategy. HEEP will collect the views and opinions of the target group through 
regular  focus  groups  carried  out  during  field  visits,  as  well  as  through  quantitative  and 
qualitative  information  coming  from  the  COI  surveys  and  from  complementary  studies. 
The Core Indicator measuring Empowerment will be collected at baseline, at mid-line and 
173 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
at  completion,  and  will  give  an  indication  on  whether  the  project  is  succeeding  in 
addressing the barriers faced by the target group, in particular by women and by youth.  
349. 
Reporting  on  activities  and  outputs:  Activities  and  output  monitoring  will 
concentrate on the financial and physical outputs of project activities.  Data on activities 
and outputs will be collected on a regular basis either directly by the NPMU (for activities 
directly  implemented  by  the  NPMU)  or  by  implementing  partners  (ARDA,  partnering 
financial institutions, service provider) who will share data  with the NPMU. All contracts 
and MoUs signed by the NPMU will include details on implementing partners’ data collection 
responsibilities.  Data  on  all  people-centred  indicators  will  be  disaggregated  by  age  and 
gender. 
350. 
Outcome  and  impact  monitoring  assessment:  Outcome  monitoring  will 
assess  the  use  of  outputs  and  measure  their  benefits  at  beneficiary  level.  Impact 
assessment  will  strive  to  measure  the  long-term  effects  of  HEEP  interventions  on 
beneficiaries’ livelihoods and on the environment.  Data on outcomes and impact will be 
collected through a set of three surveys (baseline, mid- line, completion) conducted in the 
first, fourth, and last year of project implementation, respectively. The baseline, mid-line 
and completion surveys will be conducted in alignment with the IFAD guidelines for the 
measurement  of  Core  Indicators  at  Outcome  level  (the  so-called  COI  guidelines).  The 
guidelines  will  be  provided  by  IFAD,  which  will  also  offer  support  in  ensuring  that  the 
surveys are carried out respecting the quality standards set out in the guidelines. Draft 
ToRs for the baseline survey are provided in appendix X of this report. Qualitative studies 
will  deepen  the  understanding  of  quantitative  data  and  will  be  conducted  jointly  by  the 
M&E and KM functions.  
The baseline survey will provide a benchmark against which to measure future 
351. 
progress, as well as important information on target communities to refine the targeting 
strategy. The mid-line survey will precede the Mid-Term Review (MTR), and provide key 
information  on  what  is  working  and  what  is  not.  The  end-line  survey  will  precede  the 
Project Completion mission and provide key data on results that will feed into the Project 
Completion  Report  (PCR).  The  PCR  will  be  prepared  in  the  six  months  between  project 
completion and project closure. The M&E data collected over the project implementation 
period, and in particular the three outcome surveys, will be used to assess the changes in 
the livelihoods of the target groups, and for sharing of lessons learned and good practices. 
The project completion process will include reflection workshops where stakeholders have 
the opportunity to evaluate the performance of the project, identify success factors and 
areas of further interventions and discuss the way forward for sustainability.  
352. 
Management  Information  System:  The  Programme  will  set  up  a  user-
friendly,  web-based  Management  Information  System  (MIS)  to  facilitate  the  storage, 
analysis, and presentation of data. Geo-referenced data will be systematically collected on 
all the indicators related to relevant locations and/or areas. Data collection will be done 
digitally through portable electronic devices so as to speed up data entry, cleaning, and 
reporting as well as making management decisions and disseminating the results rapidly 
at different levels. Standard reporting formats will be developed in digital format, ready 
to be downloaded on tablets. These tablet-based data entry forms will be geo-referenced 
and will include tools for the detection of data entry errors. Data entry will be done either 
off-line or online, and automatically shared with the MIS database at NPMU level, where it 
will be reviewed and verified. In order to promote transparency and coordination, relevant 
staff  at  MLAFWRD  (in  particular  the  Division  of  Strategic  Planning,  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation) will be granted access rights to HEEP’s  MIS. However,  only NPMU  staff with 
174 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
M&E responsibilities will have entry and validation rights. The MIS will include a registry 
of all beneficiaries with a unique identification number, which will be their national ID. This 
will  facilitate  comparability  and  transfer  of  data  between  the  project’s  MIS  and  the 
ministry’s database.  
M&E responsibilities: Data collection, verification and use will be a joint task 
353. 
by all project stakeholders. The primary responsibility will lie with the M&E unit within the 
JMU, which will be staffed with a dedicated M&E officer and a KM officer. HEEP will inherit 
and build on data collected by the SIRP project on the HEEP-targeted areas adjacent to 
the  irrigation  schemes  rehabilitated  by  SIRP.  M&E  activities  will  be  agreed  on  with  the 
Director  Strategic  Planning,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  and  the  Chief  Director  SP&BD  at 
MLAFWRD, who have the responsibility for overseeing the M&E of the National Horticulture 
Recovery and Growth Plan (NHRGP) that HEEP will be supporting.  
Strengthening country systems: As detailed under subcomponent 3.1, HEEP 
354. 
will  promote  the  enrichment  of  MLAFWRD  database  and  M&E  system  by  supporting  the 
carrying out of horticultural surveys and by providing M&E and digital capacity building to 
the Ministry’s M&E staff. Thanks to the recent digitalization efforts carried out at MLAFWRD 
and supported by SIRP, the large majority of extension officers in Zimbabwe have been 
provided with tablets for digital data collection. HEEP will promote digitalization also in the 
private sector and for smallholder farmers through the 4P MG innovation window. It will 
promote the adoption by anchor firms of software solutions (e.g. Farmforce, Sourcetrace, 
etc)  built  to  facilitate  contract  farming  with  smallholders.  These  solutions  provide  an 
overview  of  the  production  needs  and  outputs  by  different  farmers/farmer  groups,  and 
help providing the full traceability demanded by export markets and supermarket chains. 
Key deliverables: Key deliverables of the M&E systems and draft timelines are 
355. 
presented in the table below, but will need to be adjusted and validated at project start 
up during the preparation of the detailed HEEP M&E plan (see section below on the key 
steps to set up the M&E system).  
175 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
356. 
following:  
Deliverables  which  will  be  the  primary  responsibility  of  the  M&E  Unit  are  the 
i)  AWPB preparation and monitoring  
ii)  COI survey reports (baseline, mid-line, end-line) 
iii)  Logframe with updated results 
iv)  Semiannual and annual reports 
357. 
Deliverables to which the M&E unit will provide its contribution include:  
i)  Management reports 
ii)  Supervision reports 
iii)  MTR report 
iv)  Project Completion Review 
358. 
Throughout the project lifetime, the M&E Officer will be able to access technical 
advice  and  backstopping  services  form  IFAD.  Support  may  be  needed  at  certain  times 
during  the  project  period,  for  example  when  a  draft  mid-term  survey  report  must  be 
reviewed. Provisions are made in the cost tables for on-demand support on M&E.  
359. 
indicators:  
Project  indicators.  The  project  will  collect  data  on  three  main  types  of 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Logframe Core Indicators: these are standardized indicators that appear in all 
IFAD-supported  projects  and  can  be  aggregated  across  projects.  Core 
Indicators are integrated in the HEEP logframe and can be recognized by the 
fact that they are preceded by numbers (e.g. CI 2.2.1 Beneficiaries with new 
jobs/employment  opportunities).  These  indicators  can  be  at  output  and  at 
outcome level. 
Logframe Project specific indicators: these are key indicators that appear in the 
logframe and are specific to HEEP and thus not aggregated at IFAD level across 
different projects (e.g. MSME and Lead Enterprise matching grants disbursed). 
These indicators can be at output and at outcome level. 
Operational indicators: These are indicators that do not appear in the logframe 
but  which  the  project  will  still  collect  and  store  in  the  MIS  because  they  are 
useful  for  monitoring  and  managing  the  project  (e.g.  Number  of  Village 
Horticultural  Gardens  set  up  in  Manicaland).  Operational  indicators  are 
generally only at activity and output level.  
360. 
HEEP  will  also  support  the  M&E  of  the  Rural  Horticulture  Component  of  the 
National Horticulture Recovery and Growth Plan (NHRGP), which is guided by the list of 
indicators  in  the  table  here  below.  The  indicators  to  be  collected  by  HEEP  are  those 
highlighted in bold.  
176 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
s
a
B
n
i
l
e
e
Improved incomes 
Farmer  Income  Levels  (ZWL)  (Assumption  is  each 
tree will give an output of ZWL 4 050 
-  
t
c
a
p
m
I
s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O
T
U
P
T
U
O
Ag GDP growth rates 
% growth 
Improved nutrition status 
Number HHS score 
-0.2 
tba 
Increased  Macadamia/pecan/ 
cashew production 
Quantity 
produced (MT) 
of  macadamia/pecan/cashew 
nuts 
      43,064  
Increased Citrus production 
Quantity of citrus produced (MT) 
    195,000  
Increased Mango production 
Quantity of Mangoes produced (MT) 
 1,200,000  
Increased Apple production 
Quantity of apples produced (MT) 
       6,000  
Increased 
production 
Peaches/Nectarines 
Quantity of Peaches/Nectarines produced (MT) 
       1,000  
Increased Banana production 
Quantity of Bananas produced (MT) 
    105,000  
Nurseries established 
Plant seedlings supplied 
18 million trees planted 
Number of trees planted 
nutrition 
25,000 
established  
9600 nutrition gardens in schools  Number of nutrition gardens in school 
gardens 
Number of nutrition gardens established per village 
Youth ward projects established 
Number of youth ward projects established 
             -    
             -    
- 
- 
- 
in 
9600  fruit  tree  plantations 
school 
4,000 boreholes around dip tanks 
constructed 
Development 
of 
horticulture varieties 
Establishment 
aggregation centres 
Indigenous vegetable improved 
improved 
rural 
of 
Number of plantations established in school 
Number of boreholes constructed 
             -    
Number of improved varieties developed 
             -    
Number of rural aggregation centres established 
             -    
Number of indigenous vegetable varieties improved 
             -    
indigenous vegetables conserved  Number of indigenous vegetable varieties conserved 
exotic fruit trees improved 
Number of fruit trees improved 
             -    
             -    
exotic fruit trees conserved 
Orchards for youths established 
Gardens for youths established 
Number of fruit trees conserved 
Number of orchards for youth established 
Number of gardens for youths established 
             -    
             -    
             -    
177 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
s
a
B
n
i
l
e
e
 fruit trees planted on the national 
fruit tree planting day (1 tree per 
learner) 
Number  of  fruit  trees  planted  on  the  national  fruit 
tree planting day 
             -    
361. 
First steps for setting up the HEEP M&E system after  start-up.  The  HEEP M&E 
unit, with the support of international TA, will undergo 5 key steps to set up a solid M&E 
system. 
Step 1: Prepare the M&E manual  
On the basis of this section of the PIM, prepare an M&E manual which will define – indicator 
by  indicator  -  when,  where,  how  and  who  will  be  responsible  for  data  collection.  In 
particular, the M&E manual will provide further details on:  
i)  The objectives of M&E  
ii)  Roles and responsibilities of different actors 
iii)  Data collection methods 
iv)  Data flow and how the data will be stored 
v)  Frequency of reports 
The M&E manual will also include a list of all operational indicators to be collected by HEEP.  
Step 2: Prepare an M&E plan: 
Based  on  the  M&E  manual,  prepare  an  M&E  plan  that  covers  the  whole  lifetime  of  the 
project, listing all M&E activities with timelines and budgets 
Step 3: Prepare data collection tools  
 
Develop standard reporting formats for all project activities and outputs  
Include requirements on data collection in the contracts of service providers and 
 
use it as a measure of performance. Ex. Training: disaggregated data by sex, age  
Step 4: set up the MIS 
 
Set up the MIS with the full list of log-frame and operational indicators  
Use of the geo-referencing methodology for relevant activities (support from IFAD 
 
will be provided on this activity)  
Purchase tablets (if needed) and set up standard reporting formats in the tablets 
 
that will be used for data collection  
Step 5: Validation and Training  
Share and validate the M&E manual, plan, and reporting formats with all relevant 
 
project stakeholders  
 
Agree on key timelines for reporting  
178 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Train  all  implementing  partners  with  data  collection  responsibilities  on  standard 
 
reporting formats and the use of tablets  
 
Train all NPMU staff and other relevant actors on the use of the MIS  
362. 
Unit will also be responsible for:  
Throughout these steps, and starting immediately after project start-up the M&E 
 
 
 
Ensuring that monitoring of the first AWPB gets underway 
Preparing the ToRs for the baseline survey (a draft is provided in appendix X) 
Preparing the ToRs for the development of the MIS 
Knowledge management and strategic communication  
363. 
Capturing  and  documenting  lessons  and  innovations  through  field  data 
collection,  reports  and  thematic  studies  will  be  an  integral  part  of  the  learning  and 
knowledge  management  function  of  HEEP.  KM  activities  will  have  two  main  focuses: 
supporting policy engagement and supporting the project’s mainstreaming themes.  
364. 
Knowledge management and policy engagement: KM will aim at supporting 
the  policy  engagement  activities  carried  out  under  subcomponent  3.1.  to  develop  clear 
and fair industry guidelines for fair hub & spoke/contract farming arrangements. KM will 
support this effort by:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
Producing  a  study  on  the  different  contract  farming  models,  with 
for 
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  different  approaches 
smallholder farmers and anchor firms.  
Organise  exchange visits among farmer organisations engaged in 
4P models. 
Regularly documenting and spreading through a newsletter positive 
and  negative  lessons  from  HEEP  implementation  experience, 
supported by reliable evidence and analysis.  
Preparing  one-pagers  and  short  videos  on  success  stories  on 
transformation  of  smallholders’  activities 
towards  deeper 
integration into the market economy.  
v) 
Showcasing innovations implemented in the 4Ps.  
365. 
KM  support  to  mainstreaming  themes:  In  line  with  HEEP  mainstreaming 
themes,  KM  and  Communications  will  place  a  particular  focus  on  nutrition,  gender,  and 
climate. In particular, KM will: 
i)  Develop and disseminate flyers and posters aimed at improving knowledge around 
good nutritional practices  
ii)  In  collaboration  with  SACP,  carry  out  annual  TV  and  radio  campaigns  aimed  at 
raising awareness on the risk of climate change and on the importance to adopt 
climate smart agricultural practices and technologies 
iii)  Carry out TV and radio campaigns aimed at promoting gender equity. 
179 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
366. 
Staffing and responsibilities: KM will be a shared effort by all actors involved 
in the project but will be the primary responsibility of the M&E Unit, which will be staffed 
by  an  M&E  and  KM  senior  officer.  The  two  staff  will  be  involved  in  both  M&E  and  KM, 
thereby ensuring that the KM and the M&E functions are conducted in synergy with each 
other.  The  expected  results  of  such  synergy  are:  i)  M&E  findings  on  project  results  are 
widely disseminated through KM products in a clear, synthetized, and interesting way; ii) 
knowledge products are backed up by solid M&E evidence (and therefore, the M&E system 
collects  all  data  necessary  for  the  envisaged  knowledge  products  to  be  developed);  iii) 
field visits to collect stories for KM products are also used for triangulating M&E data, and 
the  way  around;  iv)  case  studies,  stakeholder  interviews  and  surveys,  will  be  used  to 
deepen the understanding of factors contributing to successes and failures, and to enable 
full documentation of impact. The JMU will facilitate strong collaboration between the HEEP 
KM officer and the SACP KM officer, who will jointly ensure the visibility of the IFAD portfolio 
in Zimbabwe, as well as cross-learning between the two projects.  
367. 
Communication: HEEP’s visibility will be enhanced through a project website, 
as  well  as  trough  social  media  accounts  such  as  Twitter,  Facebook,  and  Instagram.  To 
promote  transparency  and  coordination,  all  relevant  MLAFWRD  officers  will  be  granted 
access rights to HEEP MIS. Project results will also be accessible to the general public and 
be visible on the HEEP website. The JMU M&E and KM unit will ensure that information on 
project services and eligibility criteria reaches all farmers in a timely manner.  
Knowledge Management plan: The programme’s KM activities will be guided 
368. 
by a robust KM strategy and plan. Lessons learnt in implementation will be actively shared 
between provinces, clusters and districts. Semi-annual review meetings with national and 
provincial staff and implementing partners will be organised by NPMU to discuss progress 
towards results in relation to each semi-annual progress report, the format of which will 
explicitly include a focus on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc.  
369. 
A draft KM plan has been provided as appendix. After start-up, the KM plan will 
be  completed  and  refined  with  support  from  IFAD.  The  KM  strategy  and  plan  will  be 
validated by project stakeholders through a national workshop. The workshop will be an 
opportunity  to  refine  the  thematic  focus  and  dissemination  strategy  of  policy  relevant 
studies, but also to better understand the key information needs for HEEP to be successful. 
Useful  KM  tools  and  templates  can  be  accessed  on  the  IFAD  KM  Resource  Centre, 
accessible 
link:  https://ifadkmcentre.weebly.com/integrating-km-in- 
projects.html 
through 
this 
Sub-component 3.1: Institutional Support:  This sub-component will provide 
370. 
modest institutional support to complement the capacity building support for ARDA and 
Agritex  in  Component  1.    HEEP  will  support  MLAFWRD’s  Agricultural  Information 
Management System (AIMS) project, which was revamped in 2020 as part of the Smart 
Agriculture programme. AIMS collects production, productivity and marketing data on the 
different value chains in the agricultural sector. It is meant to provide updated information 
to policy makers and extension officers, but also to the private sector and to donors. Data 
collection is  conducted  through  national  surveys  covering  the  different  agricultural  sub-
sectors. Data on horticulture is not yet being collected in a systematized way.  
371. 
HEEP  will  support  MLAFWRD  in  setting  up  and  carrying  out  a  national  scale 
horticultural assessment that will collect data on horticultural production, productivity, and 
marketing.  The  survey  will  be  implemented  by  the  Division  of  Strategic  Planning, 
Monitoring and Evaluation at MLAFWRD. Data collection will be done by extension officers 
180 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
and  will  follow  the  approach  and  methodology  set  by  MLAFWRD.  The  horticultural 
assessments will be conducted in year one of the project. The findings and the raw data 
will be stored in MLAFWRD’s MIS and will be accessible to the public. HEEP will make use 
of the findings for its own planning and M&E purposes.  
As  part  of  its  support  to  AIMS,  HEEP  will  also  conduct  an  M&E  training  to 
372. 
strengthen  capacity  of  MLAFWRD  staff  responsible  for  M&E.  A  total  of  24  staff  will  be 
trained: 16 at provincial level (2 per province), and 8 officers at national level. The training 
will  include  three  modules:  i)  good  M&E  practices  and  approaches;  ii)  use  of  data  for 
evidence-based decision making; iii) hand-on training on MLAFWRD MIS, to facilitate the 
shift from paper-based to digital reporting.  
18.  Appendix 13: Procurement Guidance  
General Provisions 
373. 
This  section  of  the  PIM  defines  the  operational  basis  for  undertaking  HEEP 
procurement activities. The total project financing is USD 66.9 million, the main financiers 
IFAD  loan  and  the  OPEC  Fund  with  a  goal  of  achieving  higher  and  more  sustainable 
incomes for smallholder farmers in Zimbabwe. 
PRM Assessment 
At its design phase, the project scores an INHERENT procurement risk of 2.22 
374. 
which  is  considered  as  moderate  risk.  The  weaknesses  of  the  Zimbabwe  procurement 
system lie mainly at accountability and transparency stages and contract monitoring stage. 
The PRM assessment highlighted the weaknesses in the mentioned area as follows: 
1) 
The Accountability and Transparency: (a) non adherence of the procurement 
complaints management system in place; (b) the corruption perception index scores 23 
(ranked at the 157 position out of 180); (c) the existence of local authority responsible for 
investigating  corruption  allegations  which  is  the  Zimbabwe  Anti-Corruption  Commission 
(ZACC) and has the constitutional mandate to investigate corruption. However, ZACC is 
administered under the Office of the President and Cabinet. 
2) 
Contract  Administration  and  Management:  (a)  absence  of  a  contract 
monitoring  system  in  place;  (b)  some  shortcomings  in  the  process  of  monitoring  and 
approval  of  deliverables  and  related  services  and  works.  The  above  can  be  mitigated 
through strengthened efforts in lowering the corruption through more tightened regulatory 
framework  and  in  setting  contract  monitoring  system  also  more  targeted  corrective 
measures  stipulated  in  the  PRM.  Score  and  assessment  revisions  are  susceptible  to 
improve  the  risks  from  the  current  rating  and  make  it  lower.  Specific  and  targeted 
corrective  measures  stipulated  in  the  PRM  and  PIM.  The  revisions  are  susceptible  to 
improve the risk from a high-end medium to a low-end medium risk. 
Procurement Regulations 
375. 
Driven  by  the  urgency  to  improve  procurement  regulatory  framework,  and  to 
align with International Best practices, the Government of Zimbabwe in collaboration with 
the World Bank, bring into light in 2018 the new procurement regulations to enhance the 
Zimbabwe  regulatory  framework  to  answer  the  international  procurement  requirements 
and  mitigate  future  risks  which  might  occur  due  to  the  shortcoming  in  the  previous 
regulations. 
181 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
376. 
The  procurement  assessment  has  determined  that  the  Zimbabwe  Public 
Procurement Law is deemed to be consistent with the IFAD’s procurement guidelines, and 
with the International donor community requirements. Hence, HEEP will follow the National 
procurement regulations to the extent such are consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement 
Guidelines,  the  national  regulations  will  be  used  to  undertake  the  project-funded 
procurement activities subject to the implementation of the risk mitigation plan that will 
be detailed in the Project Design Report.    
377. 
HEEP  procurement  activities  for  commodities  (goods,  works  and  services)  will 
be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the country’s procurement regulations 
governed by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act no 5/2017 [Chapter 
22:23].  Published  in  the  Government  Gazette  on  4  AUG  2017,  complemented  by  the 
Statutory Instrument 5 of year 2018 (CAP. 22:23 Public Procurement and Disposal of Public 
Assets (General) Regulations), and by the Procurement Manual issued by the Procurement 
Regulatory  Authority  of  Zimbabwe  (PRAZ)  on  May  29th,  2019.  The  Act  applies  to  the 
procurement  of  goods,  construction  works  and  services  by  procuring  entities  and  to  all 
stages of procurement. The national regulations shall apply to the extent such provisions 
are consistent with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and other provisions stipulated in the 
Financing  Agreement.  Where  divergences  appear,  IFAD  procedures  prevail.  All 
procurement of goods (including non-intellectual services), works and consulting services 
financed by IFAD loan, OFID loan and grants will be carried out in accordance with IFAD 
Procurement  Handbook,  December  2010  edition,  as  updated  from  time  to  time,  and  in 
accordance with the provisions mentioned in the Financing Agreements or as subsequent 
officially approved version. 
378. 
Some  discrepancies  between  IFAD  Procedures  and  the  key  statutory 
procurement instruments no. 5 of 2018 are identified under several aspects (a) bidding 
stage (bidding period and bid validity); (b) Financial thresholds and relevant procurement 
methods.  Guidance  on  how  to  deal  with  such  discrepancies  are  presented  below  under 
SBD and proposed applicable thresholds sections below.  
379. 
It  is  to  note  that  procurement  manual  “Guidelines  issued  by  the  Procurement 
Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (the Authority or PRAZ) in accordance with Sections 6 
and 7 of the Act” clearly highlight that The Act contains certain exemptions, limitations 
and special provisions clarifying that when the Act conflicts with an obligation arising from 
an international convention, treaty or agreement to which the Government of Zimbabwe 
is party, that agreement prevails, but the Act and Regulations still apply to the extent that 
they do not conflict.  
Governance Aspects and Anti-corruption Measures.  
380. 
The Transparency Corruption Perception Index for Zimbabwe scores 23 for year 
2021  (ranked  at  the  157  position  out  of  180).  Therefore,  strengthened  efforts  by  the 
Government of Zimbabwe are required to ensure that IFAD’s procurement principles are 
observed throughout the project lifetime. Therefore, strict compliance with IFAD’s Policy 
on Preventing Fraud and Corruption will be required. Similarly, the project will ensure strict 
adherence  IFAD’s  policy  related  to  preventing  Harassment, Sexual  Harassment and 
Discrimination. 
Procurement Plan 
381. 
An  initial  Eighteen  (18)  Months  procurement  plan,  reflecting  agreements 
reached on the procurement activities, methods of procurement, prior review thresholds, 
182 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
quantities,  estimated  costs  and  definition  of  a  practical  implementation  schedule  is 
attached to the PDR in Annex 07. 
382. 
The initial Procurement Plan will be developed into a detailed procurement plan 
covering the first Eighteen (18) Months and any subsequent version of it shall be prepared, 
in line  with  the  Annual  Budget  and  Work  Plan  activities;  and  submitted  by  the  PMU  for 
IFAD’s No Objection at least 1 months prior to the commencement of each fiscal year (1st 
of January of each year). Similarly, all ad hoc amendments to the plan will be prepared 
and submitted for IFAD’s endorsement.  
For the purpose of this project, the financial thresholds will be those defined by 
383. 
IFAD and as agreed with the borrower in the Procurement Arrangement Letter (PAL) and 
as  proposed  below.  For  each  commodity,  the  procurement  plan  will  set  forth  IFAD’s 
thresholds for prior review as well the threshold for the use of the procurement method. 
All activities with an estimated budget falling above the specified threshold are subject to 
IFAD’s  explicit  No  Objection  which  must  be  requested  and  granted  through  NOTUS.  All 
other contracts shall be subject to post review by IFAD. 
When  preparing  the  PP,  the  reported  estimated  amounts  will  be  revised  and 
384. 
updated by the PMU in consultation with the relevant stakeholders to reflect the prevailing 
market prices.  The  estimated amounts contained in the plans approved by  IFAD will be 
used as a basis for assessing the reasonableness of the price.  
385. 
Procurement Oversight Committee by the NPMU for information and acknowledgement. 
A  copy  of  the  procurement  plan  shall  be  communicated  to  the  Special 
386. 
General Procurement Notice (GPN) on the following communication channels:  
Prior to undertaking any project procurement activity, the PMU will publish the 
- 
- 
- 
- 
At least one national newspaper with wide audience for at least one day; 
MLAWRR official website for 30 calendar days;  
IFAD website for 30 calendar days; and  
UNDB for 30 calendar days.  
Organizational Framework, Roles and Responsibilities 
The implementation period of HEEP is 8 years. All procurement activities will be 
387. 
conducted  by  MLAFWRD  through  a  HEEP  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  and  the  Joint 
Management Unit (JMU).  The JMU has already been initiated under SACP.  The JMU will 
be responsible for oversight of the IFAD portfolio utilizing a programme approach. The JMU 
will assure efficiency of certain key functions such as procurement, M&E and knowledge 
management,  and  will  make  use  of  systems  which  are  constantly  updated  in  line  with 
international best practices and tools offered by IFAD. The JMU is critical to ensure early 
start-up of HEEP as well as to ensure that capacity building investments in SIRP and SACP 
staff are not lost as projects near completion. The PMU of HEEP will consist of recruited 
and  seconded  specialists  who  will  be  responsible  for  management  and  implementation 
project activities. Also, some shared staff members are foreseen to strengthen the JMU. 
Efficient and transparent procurement of services and goods will be important 
388. 
for HEEP’s successful implementation. IFAD will provide senior procurement experts from 
183 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
the  earliest  stages  of  implementation  to  support  the  development  of  appropriate  and 
transparent  bidding,  contracting  and  contract  monitoring  procedures  for  the  HEEP 
operations, following the Borrower/Recipient’s procurement regulations, to the extent such 
are  consistent  with  IFAD’s  Project  Procurement  Guidelines.  Additionally,  procurement 
under HEEP will make use of lessons learnt from procurement operations of SIRP and SACP 
as it comes on-stream. 
389. 
Guidance to the PMU will be provided by the HEEP Project Steering Committee 
(PSC), whose members will be drawn from government departments, parastatals, and the 
horticultural sector, including HDC. 
390. 
will include the following: 
The responsibilities of the procurement officials within the PMU at the MLAFWRD 
  Prepare the annual project procurement plan including any subsequent revision of 
it, in line with the AWBP, and submit it in time for IFAD’s review;  
  Supervise the execution of the procurement activities at the NPMU and District level 
and report directly to the Project Coordinator; 
  Liaise with the various stakeholders and beneficiaries in Harare and at the district 
level for the execution of the procurement activities; 
  Manage the implementation of all the procurement activities up to the conclusion 
of the contract; 
  Prepare and request IFAD’s No Objection for cases requiring its prior review; 
  Ensure the contract management register is updated and maintained regularly; and 
  Maintain adequate records and filing for each project procurement case. 
Standard Bidding Document  
391. 
The  Government  of  Zimbabwe  developed  standard  bidding  documents  for 
different procurement process which are available on PRAZ website, nevertheless the said 
bidding documents do not cover all types of procurement methods, in addition the bidding 
documents  need  more  elaboration  and  enhancement  to  answer  the  International  Best 
Practices in different procurement aspects. Hence, and building on previous experience in 
project  implementation  with  IFAD  funded  projects,  HEEP  will  be  using  IFAD  standard 
bidding documents which are constantly updated on IFAD website, more specifically HEEP 
will  ensure  abiding  by  IFAD  rules  and  regulations  when 
the 
to 
advertising/submission deadline for International and National competitive biddings. 
it  comes 
392. 
As per IFAD handbook ”Bidding documents can either be sold or provided free 
of  charge.  Whether  to  sell  or  simply  provide  the  documents  is  a  matter  that  should  be 
determined by the procuring entity and IFAD. The reason for selling bidding documents is 
to recoup the costs of printing and sending large documents by courier to bidders – it is 
not a “profit-making” exercise or a means of raising revenue for the procuring entity”. 
393. 
Therefore,  HEEP  will  ensure  publication  of  all  competitive  bidding  documents 
which will be issued electronically. If the documents are to be issued electronically with no 
charging a fee. 
184 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
394. 
As  far  as  applicable  and  to  ensure  smooth  implementation  throughout  the 
project’s lifetime, similar activities will be packaged together following IFAD’s guidance on 
the subject. Similarly, the project will seek framework agreements for routine and iterative 
purchases (works and services). Thresholds for the selection of the procurement modality 
under each commodity shall be those set out by in the procurement plan which shall obtain 
a No Objection from IFAD and in line of the proposed table thresholds below.  
395. 
during competitive bidding:  
Below  are  the  proposed  bidding  period  and  bid  validity  period  which  to  apply 
185 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Bidding 
periods 
National regulations   
Statutory  Instrument  5/2018  Public  Procurement 
and Disposal of Public Assets (General) 
Regulations, 2018 
Article 19   20 days in the case of procurement by 
Bid 
validity  
20 (1) g 
the 
competitive  bidding  method  where 
bids are solicited 
from national bidders;  
40 days in the case of procurement by 
the competitive 
bidding  method  where  bids  are 
solicited from national 
and international bidders 
The period for which bids are required 
to remain valid at least 60 days, in the 
case  of  bids  from  domestic  bidding, 
and ninety days in the case 
of bids from international bidding 
the period for which bids are required 
to remain valid at least 90 days in the 
case  of  bids 
international 
bidding; 
from 
F1: 
IFAD Applicable rules  
Module 
Procurement 
Methods  for  Goods,  Works  and 
Non-consulting Services 
NCB opportunities are advertised 
for  a  period  of  no  less  than  30 
days.  
ICB opportunities are advertised 
for  a  period  of  no  less  than  45 
days 
Under NCB, all bids shall be valid 
for  a  period  of  no  less  than  90 
days 
Under  ICB  shall  be  valid  for  a 
period of no less than 120 days 
Procurement and Prior Review Thresholds vis-à-vis the PRM risk scoring 
396. 
The  determination  of  procurement  selection  method  thresholds  and  of  prior 
review thresholds is a key project procurement risk mitigation strategy in itself. It will be 
used as a ground for elaborating the initial 18-month procurement plan, and as a guidance 
for the Procurement Arrangement Letter.  
397. 
drawing on the PRM score:  
The  inherent  risk  is  2.22  and  the  Net  risk  is  2.42,  below  are  the  thresholds 
Risk Score  
≥2.00 to 2.49 
Procurement Thresholds  
Currency: US$  
Goods/NCS 
Shopping 
NCB 
>50,000 
𝑡𝑜<150,000 
Prior Review  
Thresholds  
ICB 
≥ 150,000  
≤ 50,000  
NCB 
>145,000 
<500,000  
ICB 
𝑡𝑜 
≥ 500,000  
≤ 100,000  
CONSULTING SERVICES/NCS  
CQS  
≤50,000  
QBS, LCS, FBS,   QCBS  
< 80,000  
≥ 80,000  
≤ 30,000  
398. 
such as Shortlisting, Single Source Selection and Direct Contracting.  
Other Thresholds will be identified in the Procurement Arrangement Letter (PAL) 
399. 
The thresholds contained in the Zimbabwe Procurement Act and regulations shall 
not prevail. Procurement oversight review will be established in accordance with the score 
186 
≤50,000 
WORKS/NCS  
Shopping 
≤145,000  
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
obtained in the Procurement Risk Matrix. Revisions related to the PP, including any new 
procurement arrangements, are subject to IFAD’s prior approval.  
400. 
The thresholds for prior review and use of the procurement method, respectively, 
shall be reviewed (either by increase or decrease) throughout the project lifetime at IFAD’s 
discretion and based on the results of the Procurement Risk Matrix.  
Contract Management  
401. 
The mission noticed some weaknesses in terms of contract management, more 
specifically in the approval of deliverables and in the follow up on delivered works, goods 
and services. In the absence of contract monitoring system/tools in place, there will be 
high  risk  of  mis  procurement,  this  can  be  mitigated  through  various  measures:  (a) 
recruitment  of  qualified  procurement  officer  with  adequate  expertise  in  international 
donors funded projects; (b) the procurement officer to coordinate with the beneficiaries 
and  closely  monitor  the  implementation  of  contract  and  of  the  acceptance  process  of 
deliverables; (c) coordination with contract management unit at the Ministry to set a clear 
process  for  acceptance  of  deliverables  related  to  Goods,  Works  and  Services  to  ensure 
proper implementation of the procurement activities and accurate payment process during 
contract management phase. All the aforementioned to be conducted in view of IFAD rules 
and  guidelines  due  to  the  unclear  rules  within  the  national  regulations  with  regards  to 
contract management process and procedures.   
Procurement Capacities 
402. 
Procurement  capacities  are  considered  as  a  major  element  in  the  project 
procurement  implementation.  The  procurement  activities  can  be  very  challenging  if 
executed by incompetent personnel who lack the appropriate knowledge and expertise to 
apply  procurement  rules  and  procedures.  Hence  and  in  order  to  guarantee  proper 
procurement management and successful implementation of procurement activities, the 
PMU needs to be properly equipped with the necessary procurement expertise in terms of 
knowledge  of  the  national  rules  and  regulations  and  in  terms  of  experience  with  donor 
funded projects.  
403. 
The PRM shows weak capacity in contract management which can be mitigated 
through  (a)  recruiting  the  adequate  Procurement  Expertise  with  international  donors 
funded projects;  (b) ensure constant training on procurement related aspects from the 
start-up  of  the  project  until  closure,  the  topics  shall  include  planning,  tendering 
management,  contract  management,   and other related topics from planning to project 
closure; (c) ensure participation of procurement personnel in the BUILDPROC which is a 
procurement  certification  programme  managed  by  the  OPR  at  IFAD,  the  BUILDPROC  
focuses  on  the  integration  of  safeguards  into  procurement  and  on  challenges  faced  by 
borrowers  in  your  local  markets;  (d)  setting  an  effective  performance  evaluation  and 
monitoring  methodology  to  ensure  proper  follow  up  on  the  performance  of  the 
procurement  personnel  and  to  properly    assess  training  needs  in  order  to  ensure 
enhancement of the procurement capacities during the full project cycle. 
Exceptional measures related to COVID 19 or proven emergency situation 
404. 
IFAD has developed a guidance document  “Fast-Track Project Procurement for 
COVID-19” containing exceptional measures to enable Projects/Programmes to adopt the 
most flexible and timely procurement approaches in the procurement of IFAD projects in 
order to minimize the impact of COVID-19 on project implementation. 
187 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
405. 
HEEP may, in the event of a reappearance of COVID 19 or a proven emergency 
situation,  use  Fast-Track  Project  Procurement  for  COVID-19  guideline  and  lightened 
modalities  in  the  management  of  processes  for  recovery  and  resilience  in  the  regions 
covered. 
Procurement with community participation 
406. 
When the Project calls for the Community participation and other associations 
or  financial  institutions,  it  may  simplify  and  adapt  the  procurement  procedures,  the 
specifications  and  the  contractual  clauses  provided  that  the  principles  of  economy, 
efficiency and social justice. The role of the Project Management Unit (PMU) is to supervise 
and  oversee  the  award  of  contracts,  disbursements  and  the  execution  of  transferred 
activities,  so  as  to  guarantee  transparency,  integrity  and  compliance  with  contractual 
obligations  taking  into  consideration  Module  Q  of  IFAD  handbook    "Procurement  with 
Community Participation". 
Procurement with International Institutions (UNICEF, FAO, etc.) 
407. 
As part of the implementation of HEEP activities, it is strongly recommended to 
use the expertise of United Nations agencies specializing in the areas of procurement of 
goods, services and/or works in order to optimize the achievement objectives. 
SECAP Assessment Risks relevant to Procurement  
408. 
The SECAP assessment flagged some risks that the mission considered relevant 
for  procurement,  those  risks  are  addressed  in  the  bidding  documents  (e.g.  choice  of 
bidding document, requirements for bidder qualifications, technical specifications, specific 
contract  conditions etc. The SECAP  risks  relevant to procurement are highlighted under 
the following categories: 
  SECAP Standard 1: Biodiversity conservation  
  SECAP Standard 2: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention  
  SECAP Standard 5: Labour and working conditions  
  SECAP Standard 6: Community health and safety  
  SECAP Standard 7: Physical and economic resettlement  
  SECAP Standard 8: Financial intermediaries and direct investments  
409. 
mitigation measures to be considered during project procurement implementation. 
The  detailed  risks  are  listed   in  Annex  11  below  along  with  the  proposed 
Lessons Learned and challenges from SIRP  
410. 
The  OSC  (operational  Strategy  and  Policy  Guidance  committee)  raised  some 
concerns  and  recommendations  related  to  procurement  to  ensure  that  Efficient  and 
Transparent procurement process and procedures are implemented in line of the National 
rules and IFAD’s procurement guidelines, one of the recommendations is to make use of 
lessons learnt from procurement operations of previous projects. The mission conducted 
several  interviews  with  the  PMU  in  charge  of  SIRP  implementation  and  noticed  the 
following concerns to be taken into consideration during the implementation of HEEP:  
188 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Economic situation:  
411. 
The Hyperinflation in the country due to the large national debt is causing the 
instability in the market leads to significant rise in the prices (sometimes on a daily basis). 
In addition around 30% of procurement activities are influenced by the fact that the budget 
estimation is not being accurate, the received offers from the market are often different 
and do not fit within the  estimated budget, noting that the project is not able to revise 
the  AWPB  due  to  constraints  in  budget  availability,  this  challenge  caused  a  lot  of  bids 
cancellation and sometimes the only solution was to negotiate with the contractor(s) for 
scope reduction. 
412. 
Mitigation Measures: Building on SIRP experience where the project is receiving 
requests  for  price  variation  frequently  (by  the  time  the  request  for  variation  is  under 
process another request is being submitted), it will be beneficial that the PMU during the 
stage  of  developing  the  detailed  procurement  Plan  can  reach  out  to  the  market  to 
understand the factors and elements leading to such situation in order to agree on some 
measures to mitigate the risk of keeping the procurement activities dependent on price 
changes during project implementation. 
Resistance to change:  
413. 
Resistance  to  change  is  one  of  the  biggest  challenges  that  the  project  can 
encounter.  People  engaged  in  procurement  activities  are  used  to  certain  practices  and 
working methods which are now considered very old and useless after the modernization 
of  the  procurement  rules  and  regulations  in  Zimbabwe,  therefore  their  resistance  to 
change from the legal application perspective will delay the process and the flow of work 
will be delayed. 
414. 
Mitigation  Measures:  Capacity  Building  and  knowledge  sharing  can  help  in 
transferring the opponents to proponents, also engaging them in the process and decisions 
related to procurement would help in reducing the reluctancy.   
Improper design of the bill of quantities in works contract:  
415. 
In very sensitive bidding  documents, the BoQ  on paper  was not applicable on 
the ground due to the lack of sufficient studies, this fact often resulted in amending the 
BoQ  and  extending  the  contract  implementation  period.  It  is  to  note  that  the  technical 
department of irrigation is the department responsible for BoQ preparation. 
Mitigation Measures: it will be beneficial to ensure that appropriate studies are 
416. 
performed  prior  to  launching  bids  or  procurement  activities  for  works  contracts, 
consulting/engaging  knowledgeable  consultant(s)  with  the  relevant  experience  in  the 
subject matter is advisable and would be very efficient in designing more accurate BoQ.  
Receiving non responsive bids  
417. 
A  lot  of  non-responsive  bids  are  received  under  SIRP,  the  PMU  conducted  an 
information  session  to  understand  from  the  market  representative  the  reason  behind 
receiving  non  responsive  bids,  the  market  representatives  complained  from  the  large 
volume of bidding which are difficult to fill and comprehend. 
Mitigation Measures: 
189 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
418. 
PMU can take the initiative to invite potential bidders for a general information 
session in which they can explain the modality of filling the bidding documents and how 
to answer the  requirements and criteria set in the said bidding documents.  Even more, 
the  PMU  can  organize  an  information  session  prior  to  launching  high  volume  and 
complicated contracts prior to the submission deadline and can dedicate in the session a 
specific time to explain the requirements and evaluation criteria and the needed templates 
to be filled by the suppliers/contractors/consultants. 
Procurement staff are competitively recruited: 
The shortage of procurement expertise is very obvious and to avoid any delays 
419. 
in the process  of procurement planning and implementing procurement activities, HEEP 
shall recruit dedicated procurement staff (within the PMU) to closely monitor, review and 
approve  the  procurement  processes  to  ensure  conformity  and  consistency  with 
IFAD’s/GoZ’s procurement procedures. 
Office space: 
420. 
To ensure that HEEP will be provided with the adequate office space to properly 
organize and maintain record of all contract management related files and to make sure 
that all dossiers are kept in good conditions, also to ensure that all contract management 
files are available IFAD supervision and audit purposes   
Procurement Activities under the Projects’ Components  
421. 
and will be implemented through the PMU with the support of the Provincial PIUs.  
The project has three (3) components, all of which include procurement activities 
  Component 1: Village Horticultural Garden and 4P Mobilization and Development 
  Component 2: Access to Finance  
  Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Management  
Procurement  activities  (Works,  Supplies,  Services)  under  each  component  will 
422. 
be included in the initial Procurement Plan for the first 18 Months of the project reflecting 
agreements reached on the procurement activities, methods of procurement, prior review 
thresholds,  quantities,  estimated  costs  and  definition  of  a  practical  implementation 
schedule. 
423. 
The  Borrower  will  ensure  the  PP  budgets  under  each  respective  activity  are 
updated accordingly and reflect the prevailing market situation. The estimated budgets, 
as  approved  by  IFAD,  will  constitute  a  basis  for  determining  the  commercial 
reasonableness of the actual cost. 
424. 
Initial  procurement  activities  (works,  goods  and  services)  are  included  in  the 
initial 18-Months Procurement Plan attached to the PDR in Annex 07 based on the below 
project components and their relevant Key procurement requirements:  
Component 1: Village Horticultural Garden and 4P Mobilization and Development 
  Procurement under this component will involve Goods, works, and recruitment of 
individual consultants.  
Component 2: Access to Finance  
190 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
  Procurement under this component will involve mainly capacity building activities 
and recruitment of individual consultants.  
Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Management  
  Procurement under this component will involve purchase of goods, services, non- 
consultancy services and recruitment of individual consultants. 
  The procurement of goods will include mainly purchase of vehicles, office furniture 
and IT furniture for the PMU and the districts offices.  To the  extent feasible, the 
PMU  will  group  each  activity  per  lot  according  to  their  respective  nature  and 
complexity. The PMU, through the Project Coordinator, will liaise with the Central 
Mechanical and Equipment Office on the technical aspects pertaining to preparing 
and evaluating tenders. The reception of the goods is expected during the first 12 
months of the project life cycle. 
  Services under Component 3 involves the recruitment of individual consultants who 
will perform the daily and routine project activities and include a mix of individuals 
recruited externally and internally through secondment. All the recruitment of these 
consultants,  whether  externally  or  on  secondment,  will  be  carried  in  accordance 
with  IFAD’s  rules  and  procedures  for  the  selection  of  individual  consultants.  The 
threshold for IFAD’s review will be considered by reference to estimated budget of 
the total contract duration and not annually. 
Annex 11: Integration of SECAP risks into Procurement 
425.  This section provides indication to the SPO on the SECAP risks to be incorporated 
into procurement. While the general integration of SECAP requirements into procurement 
documents is described into ANNEX 4, Volume 1 of the SECAP, the project specific risks 
are as identified by the SECAP  online tool. The ES specialist has identified, through the 
SECAP  environmental  and  social  screening  checklist,  the  issues  in  the  table  below  that 
need  to  be  mitigated  through  procurement.  In  case  the  SPO  has  ambiguity  as  to  the 
guidance provided by the ES specialist in the rightmost column of the below Results Table, 
then the SPO will need to collaborate with the ES specialist and relevant members of the 
PDT  in  order  to  reach  an  agreement  as  to  how  these  ES  issues  can  be  dealt  with  best 
through procurement mitigation measures that the Borrower must be required to put in 
place with respect to procurement parameters like: 
1.  Technical Specifications 
2.  Bidder Qualification 
3.  Bid Evaluation Criteria 
4.  Contract Clauses 
426.  For  Example, if use  of  harmful types of pesticide is an issue in the project area, 
then  it  can  be  dealt  with  through  the  specifications  of  the  pesticide  and  both  the  ES 
specialist and the SPO will agree that the project will use a “WHO-FAO approved pesticide 
and that WHO-FAO codes for safe labelling, packaging, handling, storage, application and 
disposals of pesticide are respected”.  If the project involves work in a sensitive  cultural 
heritage area or an area where biodiversity is to be protected, then the successful past 
experience of the contractor in working in such zones is critical and the ES specialist will 
select “Bidder qualification” and “Bid Evaluation Criteria”. If labour conditions or indigenous 
191 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
peoples’ rights are often compromised in the project’s area, then the ES specialist  may 
select  “Contract  Clauses”  and  give  whatever  further  guidance  is  possible  for  SPO.  If 
deforestation or extensive use of natural resources in the project area is an issue identified 
by the ES specialist, then the ES specialist will chose “specifications” and “Bid Evaluation 
Criteria” and agree with the SPO to specify legally-harvested timber (or timber certified 
with  the  relevant  label)  and  agree  as  to  the  evaluation  criteria  to  be  used  to  promote 
resource  efficiency  (e.g.  evaluation  criteria  to  favour  energy  efficient  pumps,  efficient 
transformer sub-stations, fuel saving equipment etc.). 
427.  The ES specialist, relevant members of the PDT and the SPO will need to consult 
together and pool their collective expertise in the various disciplines in order to arrive at 
the right mitigation measures to be reflected in the PRM. In this manner downstream work 
by the SPO in prescribing the project requirements for the Procurement Plan (PP) and PDR 
are facilitated and can be readily reflected in the PIM and the choice of bidding documents 
and contract provisions. The table below gives SECAP Guidance to the SPO: 
192 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
SECAP Guidance for SPO 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Biodiversity conservation 
1.8 Could the project involve 
or lead to procurement 
through primary suppliers of 
natural resource materials? 
Risk Rating 
Substantial 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Moderate 
Project requires procurement 
of natural resources through 
primary suppliers, and 
resource extraction is tightly 
regulated  
The project will procure locally 
made bricks however, 
procurement will be done by 
ARDA. The MoU will stipulate 
that no bricks will be procured 
made from unsustainable 
practices that lead to 
environmental degradation.  
Risk Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Resource Efficiency and 
Pollution Prevention 
2.1 Could the project involve 
or lead to the release of 
pollutants to the environment 
due to routine or non-routine 
circumstances with the 
potential for adverse local, 
regional, and/or 
transboundary impacts? 
Moderate 
Minor 
Pollutants may possibly be 
released, either routinely or by 
accident, but treatment 
systems are proven and 
verified. Receiving 
environment has absorptive 
capacity.  
The use of fertilisers and 
pesticides could lead to 
pollution of groundwater and 
surface water. The suppliers of 
fertilisers and pesticides 
contracted by the PMU will be 
required to operate in line with 
the specifications in SECAP 
VOL 1 Annex 4 which specifies 
a need for environmentally 
friendly safeguard standards, 
e.g. use of eco-labelled 
products that minimizes 
hazardous 
substances/emissions. 
The project will procure fruit 
trees from government 
institutions, research institutes 
and NGOs companies that 
grow the tree nurseries. 
Instructions will need to be 
included in the related bidding 
documents that tree nurseries 
will need to be grown in a 
sustainable manner including 
safe use of fertilisers, 
chemicals, safe disposal of 
plastics. 
Procurement of raw materials 
will be carried out in an ethical 
manner and the instructions to 
be included in the related 
bidding documents. 
Procurements of goods and 
equipment related to water and 
energy provision should focus 
on water and energy efficient 
equipment for Agriculture 
Producer Groups.  
The project will procure 
fertilisers for the Agriculture 
Village Gardens. Suppliers of 
fertilisers will be required to 
supply fertilisers that are eco-
friendly, which are not harmful 
Moderate 
2.3 Could the project involve 
or lead to engagement in 
areas of forestry, including 
the harvesting of natural 
forests, plantation 
development, and/or 
reforestation?  
Minor 
Only a small component of the 
project is focused on forestry, 
and this aspect is well 
regulated.  
2.4 Could the project involve 
or lead to significant 
consumption of raw 
materials, energy, and/or 
water?  
Substantial 
Moderate 
The project will require 
consumption of raw materials, 
energy, and/or water. This will 
be a significant component of 
the project, but impacts can be 
appropriately managed.  
2.6 Could the project involve 
inputs of fertilizers and other 
modifying agents? 
Substantial 
Moderate 
The project requires use of 
fertilizers, but options are 
available to replace polluting 
fertilizers with alternatives.  
193 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Substantial 
2.7 Could the project involve 
or lead to procurement, 
supply and/or result in the 
use of pesticides on crops, 
livestock, aquaculture or 
forestry? 
Moderate 
The project requires use of 
pesticides, but options are 
available to replace potentially 
polluting pesticides with 
alternatives.  
to the environment in line with 
SECAP standard 2.  
The project will not supply or 
procure pesticides that contain 
active ingredients that are 
banned or restricted under 
applicable international treaties 
and agreements, or meet the 
criteria of carcinogenicity, 
mutagenicity or reproductive 
toxicity as set forth by relevant 
international agencies. 
Labour and Working 
Conditions 
5.4 Could the project: (a) 
operate in a sector, area or 
value chain where producers 
and other agricultural workers 
are typically exposed to 
significant occupational and 
safety risks, and/or (b) 
promote or use technologies 
or practices that pose 
occupational safety and 
health (OSH) risks for 
farmers, other rural workers 
or rural populations in 
general? (Note: OSH risks in 
agriculture might include: 
dangerous machinery and 
tools; hazardous chemicals; 
toxic or allergenic agents; 
carcinogenic substances or 
agents; parasitic diseases; 
transmissible animal 
diseases; confined spaces; 
ergonomic hazards; extreme 
temperatures; and contact 
with dangerous and 
poisonous animals, reptiles 
and insects. Psychosocial 
hazards might include 
violence and harassment.) 
Community Health, Safety 
and Security 
6.5 Could the project involve 
or lead to transport, storage, 
and use and/or disposal of 
hazardous or dangerous 
materials (e.g. explosives, 
fuel and other chemicals 
during construction and 
operation)? 
Low 
6.7 Could the project lead to 
the potential for gender-
based violence, including 
sexual harassment, 
exploitation and abuse, as a 
result of labour influx, land 
redistribution, or other actions 
that alter community 
dynamics? 
Risk Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Moderate 
Minor 
The project operates in a 
sector, area, or value chain 
where workers are 
occasionally exposed to 
significant OSH risks, and 
where regulation is known to 
be effective.  
Measures relating to OSH, 
aimed at protecting project 
workers from injury, illness or 
impacts associated with 
exposure to hazards 
encountered in the workplace 
or while working will be 
included in the technical 
specifications of bidding 
documents and contractors will 
be required to abide by them. 
Risk Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Moderate 
Minor 
The project has only minor 
involvement with the transport, 
storage, and use and/or 
disposal of hazardous or 
dangerous materials, and 
regulation of hazardous 
materials is effective.  
Negligible 
The project will not result in 
labour influx, land 
redistribution, or other actions 
that alter community 
dynamics.  
There is a possibility of 
transport and storage of 
pesticides/herbicides which 
might have safety issues to the 
farm workers. There is need to 
improve procurement (taking 
note of expiry dates), 
transportation, storage, 
handling and disposal of 
chemicals.  
Suppliers, contractors and 
service providers will be 
required to respect the  
IFAD Policy to preventing and 
responding to sexual 
harassment, sexual exploitation 
and abuse and mandatory 
references to safe policies will 
194 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
6.8 Could the project lead to 
increases in traffic or 
alteration in traffic flow? 
Low 
6.9 Could the project lead to 
an influx of project workers? 
Low 
Negligible 
The project will not lead to an 
increase in traffic, or alteration 
of traffic flow.  
Negligible 
The project does not require 
an influx of project workers  
6.10 Could the project involve 
or lead to the engagement of 
security personnel to protect 
facilities and property or to 
support project activities? 
Moderate 
Moderate 
The project requires the 
introduction of a moderately-
sized security force. The force 
is well trained, and protocols 
are in place.  
be included in the bidding 
documents and contracts 
entered into. 
No risks are foreseen.  
The increase in traffic flow is 
minimal with no procurement.  
Moderate risks are associated 
which can be managed  
There is no influx of project 
workers envisaged most 
workers will be local with no 
procurement.  
The risk is moderate and 
recruitment will be according to 
local employment rules. 
Community members are 
responsible for the security of 
their enterprises so there will be 
no procurement . 
Physical and economic 
resettlement 
7.4 Could the project result in 
impacts on or changes to 
land tenure arrangements 
and/or community-based 
property rights/customary 
rights to land, territories 
and/or resources? 
Financial intermediaries and 
direct investments 
8.2 Could the investment be 
granted to an institution with 
insufficient capacities (i.e. 
unqualified personnel e.g. ES 
Officer) to implement the 
ESMS? 
Risk Rating 
Consequence 
Guidance for SPOs 
Moderate 
Risk Rating 
Moderate 
Minor 
The project will result in minor 
impacts on or changes to land 
tenure arrangements and/or 
community-based property 
rights/customary rights. Legal 
recourse and other forms of 
arbitration/conflict resolution 
are available.  
Consequence 
Moderate 
The institution does not 
employ an ES Officer, but has 
sufficiently trained field staff 
available to monitor the impact 
of the operations of the 
institution.  
No risk is foreseen and no 
procurement envisaged 
Guidance for SPOs 
There is a potential that 
investment could be granted to 
institutions with inadequate 
capacity to implement ESMS. 
The training on how to 
implement ESMS will be 
mandatory to all institutions 
after capacity assessment. The 
institutions will be capacitated 
to implement ESMS 
implementation. 
195 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
19.  Appendix 14: Financial Management 
DRAFT HEEP FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT MANUAL  
INTRODUCTION  
428. 
The  Financial  Management  Manual  outlines  the  financial  procedures  to  be 
followed by the Programme Coordination Unit (PMU) during implementation of the HEEP 
project. The manual is a living document to be reviewed and updated as need arises during 
project  implementation.  The  Manual  is  part  of  the  Programme  Implementation  Manual, 
and should be read together with the Procurement Manual. This manual makes references 
to  the  following  key  documents:  (i)  HEEP  Financing  Agreement,  (ii)  IFAD  General 
Conditions,  (iii)  Financial  Management  and  Financial  Control  Letter  (FMFCL),  (iv)  IFAD 
Guidelines  on  Project  Audits,  (v)  FMFC  Handbook,  (vi)  GoZ  Public  Finance  Management 
Act (vii) Treasury Instructions, (viii) Audit Act, (ix) HEEP design report, and (x) Accounting 
Officers  Instructions.  It  is  therefore  fundamental  that  the  project  staff,  especially  the 
National  Programme  Coordinator  (NPC)  and  the  Program  Accountant  understand  these 
documents  in  the  early  stages  of  programme  implementation.  Below  are  links  for  the 
generic documents listed above: 
 
 Financial Management and Financial Control Handbook 
  General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing 
  Conceptual  Framework  on  Financial  Reporting  and  External  Audit  of  IFAD- 
Financed Projects 
 
IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects 
429. 
Financing package: The Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
is a US$ 66.9 million with a goal of achieving higher and more sustainable incomes for 
smallholder farmers in Zimbabwe. The Programme Development Objective is to “Enhance 
participation  in  horticulture  value  chains  for  smallholder  farmers.”  HEEP  will  promote 
smallholder village aggregation centres whereby the smallholders will produce for a farmer 
owned and managed central point  that will be responsible for collection, quality control, 
aggregation, processing and marketing of produce. Smallholder farmers will be provided 
with extension services, tillage, and inputs on credit. HEEP will introduce innovations such 
as greenhouse production, water efficient technologies, value addition through creation of 
micro processing plants, aquaponics, and hydroponics to mitigate severe drought. These 
technologies will allow the landless women and youth to participate meaningfully in the 
horticulture value chain. 
430. 
Fiduciary responsibility: The key implementers in HEEP financial management 
have fiduciary responsibility to ensure that project funds are used exclusively for intended 
purposes. Poor financial management in the implementation of the project could result in 
failure to achieve its intended impacts. IFAD will undertake supervision missions that will 
include a review of all fiduciary aspects, will undertake review of audit reports, and may 
commission own audits/ reviews. The GOZ as well has systems and structures to ensure 
that public funds are used for intended purposes. 
431. 
Transparency,  governance,  anti-corruption:  The  HEEP  Governance  and 
Anti-Corruption Framework are in line with IFAD’s Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud 
196 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
and  Corruption  in  its  Activities  and  Operations35,,  with  the  aim  to  mitigate  the  risk  of 
corruption and promote effective utilisation of resources, including the following aspects: 
  The  provisions  of  this  financial  management  manual  articulating  the  type  of 
internal  controls  and  administrative  systems  to  be  established  towards 
transparency and accountability; 
 
 
 
the accounting system that will substantially reduce the scope for human error; 
the  risk-based  implementation  reviews  of  programme  financial  management 
and staff; 
the  back-up  procedures  kept  on  the  PMU’s  computers  to  avoid  the  loss  or 
damage of financial data; 
  HEEP will also include a systems audit in the TORs  of the auditors and in the 
supervision plan; and 
 
Internal audit department of MLAWRR will include the programme in its yearly 
internal audit oversight plans. The implementation status of the internal audit 
recommendations will be addressed and made available to the fund. 
IFAD  zero  tolerance  policy  for  corruption  and  fraud  urges  persons  observing 
432. 
concerns of irregular practices in IFAD funded projects to report to the IFAD Office of Audit 
and Oversight through any of the following means: 
By telephone: +39 0654592888 
By confidential email: anticorruption@ifad.org  
433. 
Roles and responsibilities of IFAD and the recipient are included in Section D of 
the  Revised  IFAD  Policy  on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  its  Activities  and 
Operations. 
434. 
Supervision. HEEP will be jointly supervised by GOZ and IFAD every six months. 
The IFAD Finance Officer will review the performance of the project and provide guidance 
in  areas  of  improvement  to  support  the  project  to  adhere to IFAD financial management 
guidelines. The aim will be to resolve all issues related to the financial management of the 
project  during  or  shortly  after  each  supervision  mission.  Terms  of  reference  for  the 
supervision missions will be prepared by the IFAD Country Director. 
435. 
Users of the Manual. Within the PMU, the finance team will include the following: 
Programme Coordinator; Program Accountant and Assistant Accountant. Non-finance staff 
will  be  involved,  in  their  capacities  as  users,  providing  technical  inputs  in  expenditure 
justifications. The Procurement Unit (PU) will play a special role in contractual certification 
of payments before these are passed to the Program Accountant for payment processing. 
https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/policy-on-preventing-fraud-and-corruption-in-its-
35 
activities-and-operations?p_l_back_url=%2Fen%2Fcorporate-
documents%3Fmode%3Dsearch%26keywords%3Dcorruption  
197 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
As  such,  even  non-finance  staff  should  familiarise  themselves  with  the  contents  of  the 
financial management section of the PIM because they also have a fiduciary responsibility 
to ensure HEEP funds are used only for intended purposes. 
436. 
Organisation and Staffing: HEEP PMU finance team will comprise of a Program 
Accountant and Assistant Accountant who will be competitively recruited and tasked to set 
up  the  financial  management  systems  of  the  project.  The  PMU  finance  team  will  be 
responsible for the accounting function of the  Programme, such as funds  flow  (including 
following up justifications), preparation of annual financial statements, periodic financial 
reporting and overseeing the arrangements for audits in accordance with GoZ procedures 
and IFAD’s audit guidelines. Roles and responsibilities of the program finance staff will be 
clearly documented in their respective job descriptions.  
Figure 1: Finance team reporting structure within PMU 
Programme Coordinator 
Procurement Officer 
Program Accountant 
Assistant Accountant 
FUNDS FLOW ARRANGEMENTS 
Designated  and  Operating  account:  MLAWRR  will  open  a  US$-denominated 
437. 
designated account at the Reserve Bank  of Zimbabwe to receive loan funds from  IFAD. 
Upon approval and signing of a separate Financing Agreement in respect of the OFID loan, 
MLAWRR will open a separate US$ designated account at Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe to 
receive loan funds from OFID. The designated accounts will be managed by the PMU which 
will be charged with the preparation of all disbursement requests and justifications. HEEP 
financial  obligations in  foreign  currency  will  be paid  from  the  US$  designated  accounts. 
MLAWRR will also open operating bank accounts at a commercial bank to receive and hold 
the financing transferred from the designated accounts for the IFAD funds and OFID funds 
respectively from which HEEP financial obligations in local currency shall be met. 
438. 
GOZ will fund taxes and duties on programme expenditures through tax waivers 
on imported goods and services. The government will maintain separate dollar account to 
provide  for  funds  to  cover  for  taxes.  Transfers  of  these  funds  to  the  project  operating 
account  to  meet  the  taxes  will  be  done  on  a  quarterly  basis  in  the  foreign  currency  to 
mitigate  potential  currency  mismatch  risks.  Other  GoZ  contributions  shall  be  in  form  of 
salaries to seconded staff and provision of office space. 
198 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Figure 2: HEEP Funds flow arrangements 
439. 
Report-based disbursement will be the mechanism used for withdrawing funds 
from IFAD financings. Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) package will be used as a basis of 
submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD. The IFRs package will be included in the 
Financial Management and Financial Control Arrangements Letter (FMFCL) and the PIM. 
Project will be using the Revolving Fund modality under the report-based disbursements 
during the implementation period. The first advance should be equal to or less than the 
forecast  amount  of  IFAD  financed  expenditures  approved  in  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and 
Budget (AWPB) for the period of six months. Further advances to the Designated Account 
will follow IFR report-based disbursement procedure. 
440. 
The  PMU  will  have  the  responsibility  of  coordinating  and  ensuring  the  smooth 
flow  of  funds  so  that  funds  are  available  as  and  when  necessary  to  meet  programme 
financial obligations towards suppliers, service providers and contractors. This will involve: 
(i)  establishing  the  liquidity  requirements  of  each  implementing  agency  based  on  the 
approved AWPB; (ii) preparing and dispatching bank transfer instructions to MLAWRR to 
ensure  that  there  is  sufficient  liquidity  in  the  operational  accounts  at  all  times;  (iii) 
following  up  on  any  funds  advanced  to  implementing  agencies  and  ensuring  the  timely 
justification  thereof;  (iv)  maintaining  the  supporting  documentation  underlying 
expenditures incurred by the programme in order to prepare Withdrawal Applications for 
submission to IFAD; and (v) ensuring that the Authorized Allocation is fully accounted for 
199 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
at  all  times  through  regular  preparation  of  periodic  reconciliation  statements  for  the 
designated account. 
441. 
The day-to-day expenditures incurred by each of the programme’s implementing 
agencies at the national, provincial and district levels will be settled from these accounts. 
The  operational  accounts  will  be  managed  by  PMU  and  MLAWRR  with  the  Director  of 
Finance as a Principal Signatory. For a payment to go through at the programme accounts 
it  must  have  two  signatures;  one  from  category  A  and  another  from  Category  B.  The 
signatories to the bank accounts will be as follows: 
Category A Signatories 
Category B Signatories 
  Director of Finance/MLAWRR. 
  Programme Accountant 
  Three  officers  from  MLAWRR  appointed  by 
the  Accounting  Officer  of  MLAWRR  and 
approved by MOFED. 
  Programme Coordinator 
442. 
HEEP financial management cycle 
Financial  management  in  HEEP  will  be  established  as  a  routine  and  highly 
443. 
standardised process and will follow an annual cycle of inter-dependent steps. These steps 
are:  
1)  Budgeting  and  budget  control.  Any  expenditure  incurred  outside  the 
approved budget will be declared ineligible for IFAD financing. 
2)  Commitment of funds – including procurement process. Finance department 
will be responsible for guiding procurement department on fund availability.  
3)  Treasury functions – including the accounting system. Payments to eligible 
contractors, service providers, and suppliers.  
4)  Preparation  of  quarterly  Interim  Financial  Reports  and  subsequent 
withdrawal applications. The finance team will have to exercise efficiency in 
the  forecasting  exercise  to  ensure  that  WAs  submitted  to  IFAD  are 
consistent and that no liquidity challenges hamper project implementation.  
5)  Financial reporting and auditing.  
444. 
annual financial management routine. 
This manual has been arranged as to cover each of these aspects of the above 
STEP 1: ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGETING 
Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  is  the  key  instrument  for  HEEP 
445. 
implementation  and  operational  control.  During  day-to-day  financial  management,  an 
approved AWPB is the most important document, and the principal guide on what to do 
and how to use resources. The AWPB represents: 
200 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
  Commitment  of  PMU  and  implementing  agencies  to  carry  out  a  set  of  activities, 
produce specific outputs and achieve certain targets; and 
446. 
Agreement by GoZ and IFAD that the planned activities are appropriate in light 
of  the  HEEP  objectives  and  approval  to  spend  the  necessary  money  as  specified  in  the 
annual budget. 
447. 
The AWPB is a means  by which Government of Zimbabwe  and  IFAD  will have 
provided “prior approval” to PMU to spend resources on the activities included in the AWPB. 
It should be taken very seriously, as any expenditure incurred outside the AWPB will be 
queried by auditors, supervision missions and will be declared ineligible for IFAD financing. 
448. 
The detailed steps to be followed in the preparation of the AWPB are included in 
the  IFAD  guidelines  for  preparation  of  AWPBs  and  progress  reporting.  The  Procurement 
planning aspects are covered under the Procurement Manual. 
449. 
Timing: The draft AWPB should reach IFAD 60 days before commencement of 
the year in question, that is, by 31 October of each year. It is equally important that AWPB 
preparation schedule be in tandem with Government budgetary process since HEEP budget 
should pass through Government budgetary approval process and HEEP must be included 
in the GoZ printed budget estimates. 
The following AWPB preparation schedule is provided for guidance. It should be 
450. 
reviewed and modified as may be necessary in consultation with the MLAFWRD and other 
key stakeholders. 
Table 1: Proposed annual work plan and budgeting planning schedule 
Activity/ steps 
(i)  Briefing  on  preparation  of  AWPB, 
provision of guidelines and format to 
key implementing agencies. 
Schedule 
End April 
(ii)  Call 
letter 
from  PMU 
the 
preparation of AWPB to participating 
institutions. 
for 
of 
by 
(iii)  Preparation 
participating 
institutions. 
Submission  of  AWPB  proposals  to 
PMU. 
AWPB 
Early May 
May/June. 
(iv)  Preparation  of  consolidated  Annual 
Mid-July 
Work Plan and Budget. 
(v)  Review/Agreement  on  draft  AWPB 
End July 
by participating institutions. 
(vi)  Review by PSC 
(vii) Finalization by PMU 
(viii) Submission 
to  MLAWRR 
Early August 
Mid-August 
Last week August 
for 
incorporation into MLAWRR budget 
and 
Director, 
Responsibility 
PMU,  PC,  M&E  Specialist 
supported  by  Program 
Accountant 
and 
Agricultural 
Economics 
Markets 
Letter  drafted  by  PM&E 
Specialist  and  sent  under 
the signature of 
Programme Coordinator. 
Focal  point  identified 
by 
respective 
institutions. 
Head 
of 
Institutions 
M/E Specialist and Program 
Accountant  with  support 
from PMU members 
Meeting 
by 
Programme Coordinator 
PSC 
PM&E Specialist or PC 
Programme Coordinator 
called 
the 
participating 
(ix)  Submission to Parliament 
Mid-September 
MLAWRR 
201 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Activity/ steps 
(x)  Submission of draft AWPB to IFAD 
(xi)  Comments from IFAD 
(xii) Approval by Parliament/information 
(xiii) Finalization of AWPB/Distribution to 
implementing institutions 
Schedule 
Responsibility 
October 
Programme Coordinator 
IFAD CPD 
Mid November 
November/December  Parliament 
Programme 
End December 
Office 
Coordinator 
451. 
stage, the HEEP finance officers perform the four functions below: 
Role of finance offices in AWPB preparation: In the planning and budgeting 
1 
Avail the technical 
coordinators status of 
available balances 
2 
Quantify other 
restricting factors 
3 
Consolidation and 
presentation of 
budget tables 
4 
Treasury  
planning 
452. 
Role  1:  Avail  HEEP  Budgeting  teams  the  status  of  available  balances. 
Technical  coordinators  will  play  an  important  role  in  facilitating  budget  preparation  for 
activities  in  their  respective  fields.  This  does  not  however  imply  that  they  can  solely 
dispose of the component budget as the respective sub-components are interrelated with 
others. HEEP will adopt an integrated team work programme management approach. 
453. 
Prior  to  the  start  of  the  planning  and  budgeting  exercise,  the  Program 
Accountant  will  provide  the  budget  holders  the  respective  sub-component  status  of 
available balances and overall category-wise implications. The Program Accountant does 
this by preparing extracts from the accounting system and obtaining from IFAD a status 
of  funds  balances  available  category-wise.  From  the  accounting  system,  the  Program 
Accountant will also obtain balances component-wise, including up to the major activities 
as described in this manual. The status of funds available should be adjusted by deducting 
commitments, WAs in the pipe line and projected expenditure for the remaining part of 
the  current  year.  The  adjusted  information  about  the  status  of  funds  is  provided  to  the 
budget holders so that they are aware of budget ceilings. 
454. 
The net available balance should also be broken down according to components, 
sub- components and major activity headings so that planners are able to determine the 
relative weights for each component/ sub-component in the AWPB. It is important to keep 
a relative balance between components so that some components do not lag behind. 
455. 
Role 2: Other disbursement restricting factors. Whereas available balances 
may set the ceiling of what to include in the AWPB, there are other restricting factors. The 
program  accountant  will  quantify  these  and  communicate  to  the  budget  holders/  sub-
component heads at the start of the planning season; examples will include: 
a.  The realistic amount that can be replenished from IFAD. 
b.  Time lag between commitment and disbursement. 
c.  Existing obligations to complete on-going works. 
456. 
Role  3: Consolidating the HEEP  AWPB:  In  the  AWPB there is  a number  of 
finance tables that have to be consolidated by the program accountant and his or her team, 
working  closely  with  the  M&E  Specialist. While  the  consolidation  of  the  AWPB  into  one 
document will be led by the M&E Specialist, the finance tables will be a responsibility of the 
program accountant. These tables will include: 
202 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
a)  Past year financial performance and cumulatively 
b)  Consolidated Annual Budget Summary 
c)  Component of expenditure/receipts summary 
d)  Category of expenditure/receipts summary 
e)  Category of expenditure/receipts summary by financier 
f)  Component of expenditure/receipts summary by financier 
g)  Detailed  activity  based  annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  for  each 
budget responsibility centre. 
457. 
for AWPB preparation and progress reports. 
The formats for each of the above summary are available in the IFAD guideline 
458. 
Role  4:  Treasury  planning.  This  will  be  part  of  the  AWPB  preparation.  The 
program accountant, as part of AWPB processing, will earmark the bigger items that can 
be paid for through direct payments and those that have to be paid for from the operational 
bank accounts. This will be translated into a quarterly cash flow forecast to ensure there 
is  sufficient  liquidity  even  in  peak  periods.  Sample  AWPB  templates  are  included  at 
Appendix 1. 
STEP 2: COMMITTING FUNDS 
Commitment  of  funds  is  largely  a  procurement  function  covered  under  a 
459. 
separate  procurement  manual.  The  finance  team  will  have  a  role  to  play  in  the 
procurement cycle including: 
a.  Providing the status of available balances ahead of each procurement 
launch  to  avoid  over-committing  the  project/GoZ.  This  will  require 
the  program  accountant  to  maintain  a  detailed  analysis  of 
commitments. 
b.  This  means  contracts  cannot  be  signed  off  without  the  program 
accountant entering them into the accounting system. 
c.  The  authentication,  custody  and  execution  of  any 
financial 
instruments such as performance bonds, advance guarantees will be 
a responsibility of the Programme Accountant. 
d.  The financial progress elements of the contract monitoring forms will 
be a responsibility of the Programme Accountant. 
STEP 3: TREASURY FUNCTION INCLUDING THE ACCOUNTING SYSTEM 
460. 
The  PMU  will  operate  a  fully  functional  accounting  software  in  form  and 
substance  satisfactory to  IFAD for maintaining its accounts.  In order to maximise value 
for money, priority should be given to use the existing accounting software currently being 
used by SIRP, and which has been customised for IFAD financial reporting purposes. IFAD 
will  continuously  review  the  Grants  Module  of  the  Public  Financial  Management  System 
(PFMS) during implementation to determine its readiness for IFAD projects in the country.  
461. 
The  project  will  adopt  the  IPSAS  accrual  basis  accounting  standards  in 
accordance with GoZ accounting requirements for externally financed projects. HEEP will 
maintain  a  multi-currency  general  ledger  to  facilitate  automatic  generation  of  financial 
reports in US$ and ZW$. 
203 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
462. 
accounting package to optimise its use. In setting the chart of accounts: 
Setting  the  chart  of  accounts.  HEEP  will  sufficiently  code  the  off-the-shelf 
a.  The  customisation  will be  in  such  a  way  as  to  disclose  use  of  HEEP  funds  by 
component,  sub-component,  activity,  cost  category  and  each  of  the  funding 
sources to be collated through the software. 
b.  Customization will also include reference to the GoZ’s Chart of Account (COA). 
Budgetary control at activity level to be incorporated.  
c.  The  system  shall  be  set  to  produce  sufficient  data  for  preparation  of  interim 
financial reports (IFRs). 
d.  It  should  be  set  to  print  at  a  click  of  a  button,  the  designated  account 
reconciliation at any one time; and 
e.  They key activities and codes allocated should be agreed with M&E Specialist 
as the key ones that the latter will be monitoring from physical progress side. 
This will ensure that there is a convergence between the Program Accountant’s 
monitoring (financial progress) and the M&E Specialist (physical progress). This 
coding  approach  will  be  applied  consistently  across  the  entire  PMU  from  the 
coding of the AWPB, procurement requisitions and other documents, payment 
vouchers, the accounting system and PM&E physical input level monitoring. 
463. 
Expenditure  attribution.  Use  of  the  accounting  software  will  ensure  the 
traceability  of  the  funding.  In  this,  activities  will  be  traced  –  right  from  planning  to  be 
followed through by the accounting system up to withdrawal application – to either OFID, 
or  to  the  IFAD  loan.  Activity  level  expenditure  codes  in  the  accounting  system  shall  be 
aligned to activities codes contained in the AWPB. 
464. 
Accounting  for  Beneficiary  Contribution.  all  project  financing  sources  (IFAD 
financing, counterpart contributions, beneficiary cash contributions and co-financier funds, 
whether  in  cash  or  in  the  form  of  tax  exemption)  and  all in-kind  contributions  must  be 
duly valued and accounted for in the project financial statements. Such contributions shall 
be subject to external audit. 
465. 
a.  Recognition.  The  contribution  by  an  individual,  unit  or  organisation  of  a 
service or product to HEEP free of charge shall be classified as in-kind contribution. All in-
kind costs must be eligible, actual, evidenced and essential to the delivery of the project. 
For  HEEP  beneficiary  contribution  may  in  the  form  of  cash  deposited  by  participating 
communities  to  match  grant  funds  of  the  share  of  the  sub-project  costs,  labour, 
construction materials, agricultural products, plots of land etc. The GoZ contribution will 
be in form of tax  exemptions, salaries for  GoZ staff seconded to  HEEP and provision of 
office space. 
466. 
Measurement. In-kind contributions should be recognised at fair market value. 
“Fair market value” is defined as the agreed-upon price in an open and unrestricted market 
between knowledgeable and willing parties who are dealing at arm’s length and who are 
fully informed. 
467. 
Disclosure.  It  is  the  ultimate  responsibility  of  HEEP  Program  Accountant  to 
ensure that the reported fair-market value for all items involving an in-kind contribution 
is reasonable and correctly and fully disclosed in its financial statements. 
204 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
468. 
It  is  incumbent  upon  the  HEEP  Program  Accountant  ensure  that  in-kind 
contributions recognised at the grant proposal evaluation stages are incorporated in the 
milestones  defined  in  the  grant  agreements  so  that  they  are  measured  in  the  normal 
course  of  the  grant  monitoring  process  for  subsequent  disclosure  in  the  financial 
statements.  (Example  of  information  required  for  beneficiary  contribution  is  included  at 
Appendix 5). 
469. 
Justification  of  expenditure  and  Payment  Documentation  –  Payments  must  be 
supported with the minimum set of supporting documentation that should be attached to 
a payment/journal voucher. To ensure that the PMU collects all the supporting documents, 
checklists  are  provided  hereunder.  These  should  be  ticked-off  carefully  and  attached  to 
each cheque payment voucher to ensure completeness of supporting documents. These 
documents  shall  be  filed  for  review  by  the  auditors  (internal  and  external)  and  IFAD 
Supervision/Implementation Support Missions; they must be archived over a period of 10 
years  following  the  financing  closing  date.  Refer  to  Appendix  2  for  guidance  on 
documentation.  
Table 3: HEEP Document Checklist 
Standard Goods 
1.  Complete  payment  voucher,  duly 
(Tick) 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
approved 
2.  Confirmation  by  Procurement  Officer 
that  the  Procurement  was  properly 
done in accordance with GOZ and IFAD 
procedures 
3.  Attach 
copies 
of 
Objections 
applicable 
from 
relevant  No 
IFAD,  where 
4.  Attach  Contract  Monitoring  Form 
where applicable 
5.  Availability 
of 
supporting 
documentation: 
Invoice 
a)  Contract 
b) 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d)  Bank guarantee, where applicable 
e)  Delivery  notes/reports  (Make  Cross 
Reference where bulky) 
6.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget  –  ensure  accounting 
software  is  been  updated  at 
all 
the 
to 
outstanding balances 
reflect 
times 
b)  Category(ies) 
7.  Accuracy of Computations/footings 
8.  Reviewed 
optimality 
of 
the 
disbursement method 
9.  Banking instructions 
10.  Correspondence bank 
11.  Percentage of financing 
Workshops – Abroad 
(Tick) 
1. 
Invitations  and  related  IFAD’s  No 
Objection 
205 
1.  Attendance sheets 
2.  Attendance sheets should be reconciled 
to DSA paid 
3.  Availability 
of 
supporting 
documentation 
a)  Training report 
b)  Hotel  Receipts/  bills  for  meals  and 
accommodation(  should  be  reconciled 
to attendance sheets) 
4.  Procurement record on how the venue 
5. 
was selected 
Justification  for  any  fuel  refunds  and 
related support 
6.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget-Ensure Vote Book has 
been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
7.  Accuracy of computations 
Consultancies 
1.  Time  sheets  in  comparison  with  the 
(Tick) 
work done 
2.  Attach  Copies 
Objections 
applicable 
of 
relevant  No 
where 
IFAD, 
from 
3.  An acceptable report 
4.  Availability 
of 
supporting 
documentation 
Invoice 
a) 
b)  Contract 
c)  Evidence of payment 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
2.  Availability 
of 
supporting 
a) 
documentation 
 Boarding passes reconciled DSA days 
taken 
b)  Back to Office Reports 
3.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget – ensure  accounting software 
is been updated at all times to reflect 
the outstanding balances 
b)  Category(ies) 
4.  Accuracy of computations 
INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM 
d)  Bank guarantee for advances 
5.  Fund  availability  in  budget:  ensure 
accounting software is been updated at 
all  times  to  reflect  the  outstanding 
balances 
6.  Ensure  banking 
appropriate.  
instructions  are 
470. 
Internal controls. Being a GoZ program, HEEP will comply with GoZ allowances 
applicable to externally financed projects for travel and accommodation unless otherwise 
specifically agreed formally between IFAD and GoZ. Payments should follow the following 
procedures:  
a) 
A payment request voucher should be prepared for each payment. 
Validation of invoice. The following validation checks should be performed by the 
b) 
Finance Team on invoice: 
 
Invoice arithmetically correct; and 
 
Quantity and price recorded on invoice should be checked back 
to  contract,  order,  and  certification  of  completion/delivery.  If  there  is  any  discrepancy 
identified, it should be raised with the vendor prior to proceeding with invoice processing, 
Supporting  documentation:  the  following  documents  should  be  attached  to  the 
c) 
payment voucher to support validation: 
 
 
 
 
invoice; 
Required approvals; 
Purchase order, goods received note and contract if applicable; and 
Copy of required guarantees 
Adequate  segregation  of  duties:  HEEP  financial  management  system  shall  be 
471. 
designed to assure adequate segregation of duties. No single officer shall be allowed to 
originate, process, approve  or sign off payments or to  certify the receipt of any related 
goods and services all by themselves. The payment cycle for works and goods will follow 
the following pattern: 
206 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Figure 5: HEEP segregation of duties in the Payment Cycle 
Technical  Departments  make 
payment 
justifications 
Procurement Specialist: 
Prepare payment request 
documents 
Attach contractor’s/ supplier invoice and 
Delivery Notes 
Accounts Assistant 
Verifies availability of budget 
monitoring forms 
Programme Accountant 
instructions 
accounting system 
Reviews the work of the Assistant 
accountant 
Prepares payment vouchers 
and fully ticked off 
Prepares payments or types out a 
withdrawal application in case of 
direct payment 
series for each funding source 
disbursed on a parallel basis 
Makes entries in manual registers 
Follow 
and 
up 
and accountabilities 
provision
supporting documents 
Verify the payment  request’s compliance 
with the contract 
Reviews the work done by the  
Accounts Assistant 
for further action of Director of 
Finance and Programme Coordinator 
Assistant and if satisfied updates the 
computerised system 
Programme Coordinator 
and Procurement Specialist 
Request Program Accountant/Director 
of Finance authorised signatories to 
sign off withdrawal applications in case 
of direct payments 
RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
472. 
Records  management.  Financial records must be created and preserved for 
every financial transaction performed under the programme. Financial records are defined 
as any financial information including written, computer data, internal forms, e-mails, or 
any  other  form of  storage  information  originated  from the  PMU  such  as  internal  forms, 
journal vouchers, financial reports (Monthly & quarterly) copies of cheques and withdrawal 
applications  etc.  or  received  by  the  PMU  such  as  supplier  invoices  and  receipts,  bank 
statements, IFAD documents etc. within the framework of the project's official activities. 
The objective  of  this  procedure  is  to  preserve  the  financial  records  and  files  for  further 
official use by the PMU, for financial audit and for review by IFAD during the supervision 
missions. The programme’s financial records are the property of the MLAWRR and cannot 
be removed or destroyed. 
207 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
473. 
Filing of the financial records. The Finance team will maintain chronological 
files in which the financial documents have to be filed for future reference. Filing should 
be performed daily to prevent the accumulation of papers and to ensure that the financial 
records are maintained in an up-to-date manner at all times. Each financial record should 
be filed under its code in a chronological order, with a sequential number assigned to every 
document. Any kind of additions or amendments to the financial document should be filed 
in a chronological order immediately following the principal document. A separate series 
of vouchers will be filed for each operational account opened. 
474. 
Storage of financial records.  The financial records  of the project should be 
stored  in  the  PMU/and/  or  MLAWRR  for  a  minimum  of  10  years  after  the  project 
completion. The data should be stored within the accounting software, as paper copies, as 
scanned copies and as computer disc copies. The Program Accountant should allocate an 
appropriate storage area for the financial records in paper format and maintain them in 
locked cabinets, safe from water and fire, to which access is controlled and limited. 
475. 
Archiving of financial records. In order to prevent an unnecessary pile-up of 
files in a limited office space, the Program Accountant should make sure that the financial 
records are archived on a regular basis. Once a year, the Program Accountant should make 
sure that the completed or inactive  files are archived in a manner that will allow for easy 
retrieval of the files in case they are required at some future date. 
Back-up  procedures.  To  avoid  the  loss  or  damage  of  financial  data,  the 
476. 
information should be kept in two copies: i) at the computer server and ii) in the locked 
cabinets of the PMU. Only authorised personnel should be allowed to access the financial 
records. The access of external persons is prohibited except for authorised persons such 
investigators, auditors and IFAD staff/ consultants with prior arrangement. 
FIXED ASSETS CONTROL 
477. 
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets 
for the purposes of financial accounting and to ensure preventive maintenance, and theft 
deterrence.  Adequate  Fixed  asset  maintenance  also  increases  the  sustainability  of  the 
project. 
Asset  Register.  The  Program  Accountant  must  maintain  a  register  of  all 
478. 
(material) HEEP equipment. The asset register should record the following information for 
each  individual  piece  of  equipment:  1)  Asset  description,  2)  Asset  number,  3)  Serial 
number of the item, 4) Officer responsible for asset, 5) Funding of asset (IFAD, Government 
etc.), 6) Location; Date of purchase; and 7) Estimated life. Sample forms for asset records 
are included at Appendix 4. 
479. 
Asset  Verification  Review.  The  Program  Accountant  must  ensure  that  a 
verification count of all equipment recorded in the fixed asset register is performed at least 
once a year. This should include the following checks: 
a.  Verify that all equipment is still held in the location recorded on the register; 
and 
b.  Check that equipment is still in a reasonable state of repair. 
c.  Discrepancies between the verification exercise and the fixed asset register 
should  be  investigated.  Where  assets  are  missing  or  seriously  damaged, 
208 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
they  should  be  removed  from  the  asset  register.  The  removal  should  be 
formally  documented  and  approved  by  the  Programme  Coordinator  and 
notified to PSC. 
d.  The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who 
use the equipment, to ensure adequate segregation of duty. 
480. 
Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel. The drivers are required to record all trips and 
fuel  refills  in  a  logbook  and  collect  all  the  supporting  documentation  (different  if  fuel 
cards/vouchers are used). The vehicle logbook provides control over the use of the vehicles 
as  well  as  fuel  consumption.  For  official  field  trips,  a  special  cash  provision  is  given  to 
drivers to allow them to purchase fuel during the trip and payment of tollgate fees. 
481. 
The safety of cars is the responsibility of the recipient staff members and drivers 
assigned to the vehicles. Consequently, they  must ensure that the cars are parked in a 
secure area when not in use or outside working hours. The drivers are required to monitor 
the  maintenance  of  their  assigned  vehicles  under  the  supervision  of  the  Administrative 
Assistant.  The  drivers  must  notify  the  Administrative  Assistant  of  maintenance  needs 
(including periodic servicing) so that the cars can be serviced on a timely basis. Sample 
documents for vehicle and fuel management are included in Appendix 6 and 7. 
482. 
The Program Accountant should on a monthly basis review the mileage and fuel 
usage  as  well  as  any  undertaken  service  as  reported  in  the  log  book  of  each  car  and 
compare  these  with  the  official  invoices and travel authorizations etc. to make sure the 
numbers are accurate. These should be signed off by the Programme Coordinator. 
An insurance policy must be taken by the PMU to cover all cars and passengers 
483. 
against all risks, including damage, theft, and fire, as well as injury and property damage 
to third parties. 
STEP 4: REPORT-BASED DISBURSEMENTS – INTERIM FINANCIAL REPORTING 
484. 
The  program  accountant  should  endeavour  to  know  the  project’s  treasury 
position at all times in order to better manage the liquidity position in a timely and efficient 
manner. The key goals are to ensure that: 
a.  There are  sufficient funds in treasury to meet  the project’s field activities 
for implementation. 
b.  the  disbursement  rate  of  the  project  closely  follows  the  physical  activity 
progress; 
c.  Increase in the performance level of HEEP and meeting its objectives as in 
the PDR. 
The program accountant should prepare regular cash and expenditures rolling 
485. 
quarterly  cash  flow  forecasts  in  line  with  the  revised  interim  financial  reporting  (IFR) 
guidelines (discussed further in Step 5 below). This will help to detect periods of liquidity 
gaps  so  that  appropriate  adjustments  in  work  scheduling  or  any  other  remedial  actions 
can  be  taken  proactively.  The  purpose  of  the  IFR  is  twofold:  (i)  to  report  on  past 
performance (immediate past quarter, cumulative for the financial year, and cumulative 
since  inception);  and  (ii)  mandatory  projection  of  cash  flow  requirements  for  the 
subsequent two quarters. 
209 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
486. 
per semester which will be determined during the final stage of the design. 
The  authorised  allocations  for  HEEP  will  be  based  on  projected  disbursements 
487. 
The programme will make use of the standard disbursement methods including: 
i)  Advance  withdrawal/replenishment;  ii)  direct  payment;  and  iii)  reimbursement  if  the 
GOZ  has  pre-financed  any  transactions.  Detailed  instructions  for  disbursements  will  be 
included in the Letter to The Borrower (LTB) issued by IFAD for HEEP the contents of which 
will be discussed and agreed with the GOZ. 
488. 
The Interim Financial Reports Package shall include: 
a.  Brief narrative summary; 
b.  Cash forecast for the next two quarters; 
c.  Sources and uses of funds statement; 
d.  Designated Account activity statement; 
e.  Variance analysis of use of funds by quarter; 
f.  Variance analysis of use of funds for the financial year; 
g.  Variance analysis of use of funds for the cumulative period; 
h.  The bank statements of the Designated Account for the reporting period, showing 
the  account’s  opening  and  closing  balance  and  a  summary  of  the  account’s 
movements; 
i.  Extracts from the contracts register, as generated by the project from the IFAD  
j.  Client Portal, Contract Monitoring Tool Module. 
The interim financial reporting guidelines are provided in Appendix 3. 
IN-KIND CONTRIBUTIONS 
489. 
Beneficiary  and  Government  contribution  is  seen  as  a  viable  mechanism  to 
ensure sustainability of programme interventions and promote mindset changes in order 
to  attract  additional  investments  for  similar  interventions.  On  the  other  hand,  in-kind 
domestic  contribution  could  minimize  the  amount  of  external  resources  needed  for 
Programme  implementation.  As  such,  the  following  paragraphs  provide  the  HEEP 
guidelines for valuation of in-kind domestic contribution. 
the  expenditures 
In-kind  contributions  are 
490. 
incurred  by  Government, 
beneficiaries  or  other  implementing  partners  (value  chain  actors,  service  providers  and 
others) for the implementation of HEEP operations. They include (i) goods, (ii) works, (iii) 
use of services and facilities (e.g. office space), (iv) professional services or expertise in 
the form of staff time, (v) provision of or access to equipment and special materials; and 
(vi) office running costs, which otherwise would need to be paid for by the project in order 
to carry out activities. They are only considered eligible if: 
  they are dully included in the approved AWPB; 
  the  amount  of  expenditure  is  duly  justified  by  supporting  documents  having 
equivalent  probative  value  to  invoices,  without  prejudice  to  provisions  set  out  in 
specific national regulations; 
210 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
  their value can be independently assessed and/or audited; and 
  the co-financing from the contributor does not significantly exceed the total eligible 
expenditure planned for the project excluding the value of such contributions. 
491. 
To easy produce to data on in-kind contribution, HEEP will develop data collection 
instruments  to  be  used  at  different  levels  of  the  Programme.  These  shall  be  captured 
through the HEEP M&E system. Technical staff and other stakeholders shall be trained on 
application of these instruments. These instruments shall be developed by the HEEP M&E 
staff  and  distributed  to  all  technicians  and  stakeholders  involved  in  Programme 
interventions with potential in-kind contribution. 
492. 
To ensure that they are auditable, beneficiary contributions shall be inserted in 
payment request form and dully authorized by relevant expense authorization authorities. 
Beneficiary  contribution  shall  be  treated  as  a  normal  revenue  and  shall  be  recorded  in 
accounting systems.  
STEP 5: FINANCIAL REPORTING AND AUDITING 
Financial reporting is necessary to enable timely and informed decision making 
493. 
by management and IFAD. It includes internal financial reports (refer to Appendix 10 for 
sample internal financial reports) and external reports. Periodic financial progress reports 
are a requirement of the IFAD Financing Agreement. Sufficient information must be made 
available about what the money is spent on, how much is spent and what the results are. 
The major financial reports include the following: interim financial reports (as addressed 
in Step 4), supervision reports, annual financial statements and audit reports. 
Audit  arrangements.  The  project  audit  is  an  ex-post  review  of  financial 
494. 
statements, records of  transactions and financial systems.  It examines the adequacy of 
accounting  systems  and  procedures,  capacity  to  maintain  appropriate  accounts  and 
documentation of the project expenditures. The objective of the project audit is to provide 
credibility and assurance of accountability. Refer to Appendix 9 for sample audit terms of 
reference.  
495. 
External  audits.  External  audits  for  the  project  will  be  performed  by 
independent private firms during the initial years of implementation in line with guidelines 
spelt  out  in  the  IFAD  Handbook  on  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing  for  IFAD  funded 
projects. IFAD will continuously perform reviews together with the Office of Comptroller 
and Auditor General of Zimbabwe to assess its readiness in staffing capacities to conduct 
audits  for  IFAD  funded  projects.  The  audit  will  provide  an  opinion  on  the  financial 
statements as well as ensure a review of the internal control framework of the project for 
which  a  management  letter  will  always  be  issued  together  with  the  audited  financial 
statements. IFAD Guidelines for Project Audit provide a comprehensive guide for both PCU 
and the auditor  and include audit Terms of Reference.  The audited financial statements 
need to be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after the end of the fiscal year. 
496. 
Internal  audits.  Internal  audit  will  be  covered  by  the  lead  agency/MLAWRR 
internal auditors. However, there is also the option of outsourcing to an internal audit firm 
should the Lead Agency fail to provide the services. 
PROJECT COMPLETION AND CLOSING 
211 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
497. 
The closing of the project is due six months after the project completion date. 
Both the completion and the closing date of the project have financial implications on the 
project management such as: development and submission of a recovery plan, ensuring 
eligibility  of  expenditures  and  submission  of  the  necessary  documents  outlined  below. 
Please also refer to section 1.3 of the Disbursement Handbook. 
498. 
Recovery plan of the Authorised Allocation. To ensure that the designated 
account is completely and timely justified, the Program Accountant /PMU has to develop 
and  submit  to  the  Fund  a  recovery  plan  outlining  the  percentages  per  withdrawal 
application  that  will  be  recovered  and  paid  respectively.  The  recovery  plan  should  be 
submitted  to  the  fund  around  6  months  before  the  completion  date  or  when  the 
outstanding  balance  (amount  still  undisbursed  by  IFAD)  is  less  than  the  double  of  the 
authorised allocation. Refer to Appendix 8 for a sample recovery plan. 
Project  Completion.  The  project  completion  date  will  be  defined  in  the 
499. 
Financing  Agreement.  By  the  completion  date  all  the  project  activities  must  have  been 
finalised.  The  payments  can  be  done  also  after  the  completion  date,  as  long  as  the 
commitments/  contracts  are  signed  prior  to  the  completion  date.  Activities  that  have 
continued  after  the  completion  date  are  considered  as  ineligible  expenditures  and  can 
therefore not be financed by the IFAD funds. 
500. 
After the completion date but no later than the closing date (six months after 
the  completion  date)  the  PMU  can  still  incur  expenditures  related  to  winding  up 
expenditures e.g. Final Audit, Project completion report, Project staff salaries involved in 
the winding up activities, PMU maintenance cost, project completion workshop. 
The final audit report has to cover, the final project year up to the project closing 
501. 
date  and  it  can  be  paid  from  the  loan  available  balance  by  using,  for  example,  direct 
payment or reimbursement of pre-financed expenditures. 
212 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
213 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
20. Appendix 15: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget Templates 
Table 1: Detailed AWBP Template 
Sub -Component/ Activity 
Planned Quantities 
Unit 
(US$) 
Unit 
Budget (US$'000) 
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000) 
Qtr. 1  Qtr. 2  Qtr. 3  Qtr. 4   
Qtr. 1  Qtr. 2  Qtr. 3 Qtr. 4 Total 
IFAD Loan 
OFID Loan 
Smallholders 
Agribusiness 
GoZ 
Total 
Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 
Activity X 
Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 
Activity X 
Matching Grants for Inclusive VC Investment 
Activity X 
Policy and Institutional Support 
Project Coordination 
Activity X 
Activity X 
214 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Total 
Table 2: AWBP Summary Table by category and financier 
IFAD Loan 
OFID 
Smallholders   
Agribusiness   
Government   
Total 
Category 
Amount  %  Amount 
% 
Amount 
%  Amount 
%  Amount 
%  Amount 
% 
1. Works 
- 
-   
2. Grants & Subsidies 
3. Goods, Services & Inputs 
4. Equipment and Materials 
5. Consultancies 
6. Training and Workshops 
7. Recurrent Costs 
Total 
215 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Table 3: AWPB Summary Table by component and by category 
Sub 
Component 
Sub 
Sub 
Component 1.2 
Component 1.3 
Sub 
Component 
3.1 
Sub 
Component 
1.1 
Component 2.0 
Total 
3.2 
I. Category 1 
II. Category 2 
III. Category 3 
III. Category 4 
III. Category 5 
Total 
216 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
21. Appendix  16:  Guidance  on  Financial  Management  Quality 
Assessment 
Area  
Organisation 
staffing 
and 
Considerations  
a)  Adequacy of organizational structure to meet functional needs of the programme. 
Therefore, the structure above should not be changed without IFAD concurrence; 
b)  Availability of clear job description for key programme positions, including fiduciary 
positions; 
c)  Adequacy  of  project  financial  management  staff  (numbers  and  skill)  matching 
functional needs of programme; 
d)  Availability and adequacy of operating manuals and guidelines for staff; 
e)  Existence  of  a  performance-based  evaluation  system  in  place  and  timely 
completion of performance evaluation for all staff; 
f)  Adequacy of health insurance coverage for all staff; 
g)  Timely payment of social security fees; and 
h)  Staff adequately informed about IFAD’s anti-corruption policy and relevant contact 
details. 
Funds flow  
a)  Timeliness  of  funds  disbursed  by  different  sources  (and  co-financiers  funding  if 
applicable). 
b)  Timeliness of counterpart funds disbursed. 
c)  Efficiency of the funding channels. Timeliness and traceability of funds flows. 
d)  Designated Account(s) and Operating Account Management, Disbursements. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Adequacy of the authorized allocation to ensure a smooth flow of funds; 
Appropriateness of disbursement methods used; 
Adequacy of documentary support for SOE disbursements, reimbursements, 
directs payments and Special Commitments; 
Timely preparation and accuracy of Withdrawal Applications; 
Authorization of WA preparation; 
Status  on  expenditures  withdrawn  from  Designated  Account  but  not  yet 
claimed (old cases will be queried); 
Regularity  of  Designated  Account(s)  monitoring  and  monthly  reconciliations 
signed by the project Coordinator. Mission will always review and assess the 
reconciliations; and 
Disbursement rate compared to the AWPB and whether satisfactory given the 
remaining implementation time. 
Work 
budgeting 
plan 
and 
a)  Timely preparation and approval of AWPB. 
b)  Alignment of AWPB with expenditure categories in Financing Agreement Schedule 
2. 
c)  Financing sources and implementing agencies for each category in the AWPB are 
identified. 
d)  Linkage between AWPB and Procurement plan. 
Accounting system 
a)  Basis of accounting – HEEP should comply with the cash basis of accounting with 
the required disclosures; 
b)  Adequacy  and  reliability  of  accounting  system  –  the  project  should  ensure  to 
comply with the internal controls around the accounting system; 
c)  Recordkeeping (including documentation and filing/archiving); 
d)  Fixed assets register maintained and reconciled; 
e)  Adequate  documentation  and  controls  for  Information  Systems,  including 
documented accounting procedures, backup of financial records, integration of all 
sub-systems; 
217 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Area  
Considerations  
f)  Adequacy of chart of accounts for project accounting purposes; 
g)  Timeliness  of  recording  transactions,  regularity  of  performance  and  approval  of 
reconciliations, controls on erroneous recordings; and 
h)  Appropriate/ adequate accounting and reporting of counterpart funds contributions 
(including tax and tax exemptions) as well as beneficiary contributions. 
Internal controls 
a)  Segregation  of  duties-  are  the  following  functional  responsibilities  performed  by 
different units or persons: 
i.  authorization of a transaction;  
ii.  execution of a transaction; 
iii.  recording of the transaction; and 
iv.  Custody of assets involved in the transaction. 
b)  Clarity  and  adequacy  of  decision  processes  and  sequence  of  events  for  control 
functions in project implementation reflected in the Financial Manual (or equivalent 
there-of). 
c)  Adherence to Project Management manuals. 
d)  Effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  internal  controls  over  inflows  of  funding  sources 
other than IFAD. 
e)  Adequacy  of  contract  management  (use  of  contracts  registers  and  monitoring 
form) and filing there-of. 
f)  Effectiveness and efficiency of internal controls over expenditures (full cycle from 
commitment,  payment,  receipt  of  goods  and  services,  approval  of  payments, 
classification, etc.) 
g)  Documentary  evidence  to  confirm  delivery  and  acceptance  of  contracted  goods, 
works or services. 
h)  Physical controls over cash, documents and records. Adequacy of filing systems. 
Missions  will  review  the  petty  cash  subject  to  monthly  reconciliation  as  well  as 
surprise checks; custody of cash box and control of keys. 
i)  Adequacy of physical management of cash. 
j)  Timely payment to suppliers and consultants. 
k)  Eligibility of expenditures with respect to Financing Agreements. 
l) 
Legality/eligibility of advances from project funds and timely justification for use 
thereof. 
m)  Compliance with financial management covenants in the Financing Agreement and 
Letter to the Recipient (LTR). 
n)  Adequacy of up-to-date record keeping for fixed assets and inventories. 
o)  Adequacy of controls concerning project assets including: 
i.  Vehicle and other assets management (assets should be property tagged and 
a physical inventory count done on a regular basis) 
ii.  Fuel management (Drivers should maintain a vehicle log book) 
iii.  Travel  authorisations  (including  Daily  Subsistence  Allowance  (DSA)  paid  to 
staff) 
iv.  Adequacy of vehicles and assets insurance. 
p)  Workshops: 
i.  Availability of list of participants 
ii.  DSA paid to participants 
iii.  Receipts for workshop expenditure 
q)  Adequacy  of  controls  and  authorisation  process  for  use  of  funds  (payments, 
transfers, Cash/Bank balance management) / and other operational accounts. 
r)  Banking arrangement and controls (reconciliation of bank statements with financial 
accounts). 
s)  Existence of a proper IT support unit in place. 
Financial reporting  
a)  Completeness, accuracy, usefulness, and timeliness of financial reports; 
218 
Area  
External audit  
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Considerations  
b) 
Interim  FM  reports  and  linkage  to  progress  reports  -  timely  preparation, 
submission to IFAD; 
c)  Preparation  of  reports  showing  actual  vs  budget  income/expenditure  and  AWPB 
execution rate; 
d)  Follow up of previous aide-memoirs fiduciary recommendations; and 
e)  Reasonable alignment between disbursement rate of recurrent versus investment 
cost categories. 
a)  Adequacy of scope and ToR 
b)  Adherence to ToR 
c)  Timeliness of audit report 
d)  Quality of audit 
Internal audit 
a)  Existence of internal audit arrangements. 
b)  Adequacy of internal audit arrangements (organization - staff capacity). 
c)  Adequacy of internal audit scope of work and quality of reports. 
d)  Assessment of matters raised in audit reports. 
Loan closure  
a)  Confirmation of last withdrawal application; 
b)  Submission of final audit report; 
c)  Submission of project completion report 
219 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
22. APPENDIX 17: Quarterly Interim Financial Report 
Guidance on IFRs  
502. 
Principles of IFRs. The guiding principles can be summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The first objective is to provide regular, timely financial information, offering 
fiduciary assurance to IFAD that the funds are being used for the purposes intended and 
in the most efficient way. IFRs should also provide comparative figures with respect to the 
approved AWP/B. 
(b) 
expenditures incurred at projects. 
A second objective of IFRs is to support disbursements / justifications of eligible 
(c) 
At the minimum, IFRs should include only sources and uses of funds from IFAD 
Financing  and  other  Project  financing  sources  administered  by  IFAD.  Any  additional 
financing  sources  (such  as  counterpart  financing  or  beneficiary  contribution)  may  be 
included as supplementary information, if considered necessary by the Finance Officer to 
monitor  financial  progress.  Annual  financial  statements,  on  the  other  hand,  include  all 
project financial sources and uses. 
IFRs should be read together with related documents such as the AWP/B, the 
(d) 
Project  Design  Report,  WAs,  annual  project  financial  statements  and  audit  reports  –  as 
well  as  implementation,  supervision  aide  memoires,  mid-term  reviews  and  completion 
reports – to get a complete picture of the financial progress of a project. As far as possible, 
the B/R should not be required to provide IFAD with information already available to the 
Fund. 
(e) 
The format  of IFRs  should provide the  minimum information indicated in the 
reporting template provided.  However, some  customisation may be necessary based  on 
specific project features. During the design phase, the FO/FMS consultants should consider 
other-donor  reporting  requirements  to  harmonize  reporting  formats  and  reduce  project 
workload. Common reporting and monitoring arrangements should be agreed with other 
donors where feasible. 
(f) 
Projects  should  prepare  IFRs  using  the  same  accounting  basis/standard  and 
currency that they use for annual financial statements. Otherwise, the financial data of the 
IFR will not reconcile with the data of the audited annual financial statements. 
(g) 
The  reporting  currency  of  IFRs  can  be  either  the  functional  currency  (the 
currency in which transactions are recorded in the accounting system – usually the local 
currency) or the currency of the DA (e.g., US$). Selection of a presentation currency other 
than  the  functional  currency  should  be  agreed  with  IFAD/FMD  during  preparation  and 
should be consistently followed throughout the project period.  
(h) 
The  DA  Activity  Statement  (Report  III  in  the  template)  will  always  be  in  the 
currency  of  the  Designated  Account.  When  the  report  on  Sources  and  Uses  of  Funds 
(Report  II)  is  prepared  in  the  functional  currency,  the  equivalent  amounts  for  the  DA 
Activity statement (Report III) should be calculated using the forex rates on a FIFO basis. 
The FIFO method will also apply to determine the amounts to be justified. Projects may 
need some guidance on the exchange rates to be used for conversion of transactions and 
balances in the PIM/FM manual. 
(i) 
Cash  forecasts  (Report  I)  should  be  backed  up  by  working  papers  that  link 
expenditure forecasts to procurement plans and progress reports, updated every quarter. 
220 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Forecast figures should be converted to DA currency based on period-ending forex rates. 
Forex rates used for conversion should be disclosed in the IFR. 
(j) 
The financial information presented in IFRs should ideally be generated using 
an accounting software. Excel spreadsheet should only be used to edit and combine data 
derived from accounting software to fit the agreed format.  
(k) 
We  should  not  request  B/R  to  repeat  information  that is  already  available  at 
IFAD  in  other  reports  or  systems.  Although  IFRs  focus  mainly  on  financial  data,  some 
additional management information reports (fixed asset register, signed contract listing) 
and physical progress indicators may also be requested as an option.  
(l) 
To  support  fiduciary  assurance,  Finance  Officers  may  obtain  certification  on 
reliability of  IFRs  from  project auditors (or internal auditors where these are available), 
after  considering  project  financial  management  risks.  This  could  be  specified  in  auditor 
TORs.  
503. 
Content of the IFR and report template 
(a) 
The  aim  of  IFRs  is  to  answer  the  following  questions  regarding  a  reporting 
period: what expenditures were incurred, paid for by which financing source, at what time 
and purpose. The financing sources will normally include IFAD Financing / instrument and 
other sources that are administered by IFAD. 
(b) 
the financial variances and some supplementary information to facilitate monitoring.  
These reports should be accompanied with a set of brief explanatory notes on 
(c) 
(i) 
(ii) 
IFAD 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Mandatory reports: 
Cash flow forecast (his should cover next 2 quarters on a rolling basis); 
Sources and uses of funds (IFAD financing and financing administered by 
Summary of expenditures by loan/grant categories and by component 
 DA activity statement. 
(d) 
profiles, and may include the following: 
Supplementary reports are to be customized to fit a project’s activity and risk 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Procurement progress report 
Rural finance/credit line report 
Project management cost report 
Fixed asset register 
Progress report on resolving audit findings / recommendations 
(vi) 
reconcile with IFAD’s Loan Account. 
List of  Withdrawal Applications  (WAs)  submitted to  IFAD to date, to help 
The need and capacity for such reports should be based on FM risk ratings and 
(e) 
capacity assessments and should be jointly discussed by FOs and CDs during the project 
design process.  
221 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Some documents will normally not be required for disbursement purposes, but 
(f) 
may be requested prior to or during supervision missions, especially for High / Substantial 
Risk projects. These include: 
i.Transaction lists/Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) for specific expenditure categories 
ii.Copies of bank statements (of DA and project bank statements) or a summary of closing 
balances in each bank account 
504. 
Submission & Recording IFRs in FMDB 
(a) 
IFRs should be submitted on a quarterly basis no later than 45 days of the quarter-
end. When Report based disbursements are introduced, IFRs should be submitted along 
with the WAs. Only in exceptional circumstances will WAs for disbursements be accepted 
without an IFR being attached. 
(b) 
Submission of IFRs is due by projects even though no cash disbursement to the DA 
is being sought from IFAD, so four are mandatory each year, except of Year 1 or the final 
year, where the reporting period can be shorter than one full year. In cases when project 
becomes  effective  in  the  middle  of  the  calendar  quarter,  the  first  quarterly  submission 
should be for a period less than a quarter.   
Non-submission or irregular submission of IFRs should be seen as a red flag and 
(c) 
should be followed up by the FMS/FO to understand reasons and provide required support. 
(d) 
The FO will need to upload IFRs for insertion into FMDB however the future systems 
plan is that these will be uploaded directly into FMDB from ICP. In view of the above a date 
insertion and inclusion of authorized signatories on IFRs form would be needed, however 
this may change later when these are uploaded into ICP by relevant approver in project.  
Always  obtain  most  updated  version  of  Interim  Financial  Reporting  template 
from your IFAD Finance Officer 
222 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
223 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
23. Appendix 18: Fixed Asset Register 
ASSET 
REF. NO. 
ASSET 
DESCR 
IPTION 
COMPO 
NENT 
FINANCING 
SOURCE 
BENE 
FICA 
RY 
AGEN 
CY 
LOCAT 
ION 
ASSIG 
NED TO 
TAG NO. SUPP 
LIER 
NAME 
PMT/IN 
V.  REFER 
ENCE 
DATE 
OF 
PURC 
HASE 
DATE  OF 
RECEIPT 
PURCHASE 
VALUE 
REMARKS 
Total 
224 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
24. APPENDIX  19:  Community  Contribution  Form  and  Acceptance 
Statement 
COMMUNITY CONTRIBUTION FORM 
N. 
Type 
Units 
Quantity 
Unit Price 
Total 
Sum 
Contribution 
Community 
Comments 
Other 
organization
s 
1 
2 
3 
Designation 
Name 
Date 
Signature 
Project District Manager 
Technical supervisor 
 ACCEPTANCE STATEMENT 
 /  
20     
Community Acceptance Statement 
the 
behalf 
The parties,  
community, and (name, surname)  
on  behalf  of  the  contractor, 
hereby  sign  this  (name,  surname),  Acceptance  Statement  acknowledging  that  the  community  has 
delivered  and  the  contractor  has  accepted  the  following  materials/labour/premises  for  sub-project 
implementation: 
on 
of 
, 
Materials/Labour/Premises 
Unit 
Quantity 
Unit cost 
Total 
1 
2 
Signed 
Designation 
Name 
  Date 
Signature 
Community representative  
Contractor representative 
2
225 
2
5 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
25. Appendix 20: Vehicle Log  
Vehicle registration number   
Assigned driver   
Date 
Time 
Mileage 
Trip 
Fuel purchase 
Driver 
signature 
Responsible 
staff 
Departing 
Arrival 
Departing 
Arrival 
Destination 
Purpose 
Mileage 
Quantity 
226 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
26. Appendix 21: Vehicle History Record 
Vehicle registration number    
Assigned driver   
Date 
Repairs 
Service & maintenance 
Insurance 
Fitness tests 
Description of repair 
Garage 
Cost 
Description  of 
service 
Garage 
Cost 
Type 
Period 
covered 
Cost 
Checked 
by 
Cost 
Report accidents in the space below, providing all relevant details for each occurrence: 
Date: 
Place: 
Name of driver: 
Circumstances: 
Damage to PCU vehicle: 
Damage to other vehicles: 
Injuries  (indicate  name  of  victims  and  describe  injuries):  Insurance 
settlement: 
227 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
27. Appendix 22: Sample Recovery Plan 
Recovery 
Plan 
Designate
d Account 
IFAD 
No.: 
Loan 
IFAD Loan Amount (SDR) 
20 
000.00 
000 
Project 
Date: 
Completion 
31-Dec-
12 
Loan 
Date: 
Closing 
30-Jun-
13 
Particular
s 
Reporting 
Period 
1 
Authorized 
Allocation 
Justification: 
WA No. 
Date 
US $ 
EUR 
18/01/200
6 
$ 
250 000.00 
€ 
€ 
0.00 
Exchange 
Rate: 
- 
- 
SD
R 
172 648.51 
Unjustified 
balance 
R 
US$
SD
172 648.51 
0.00 
(77 351.49) 
#VALUE! 
Ref. 
No. 
WA No. 
Date 
Estimated 
WA 
value 
(SP) 
Estimated 
WA 
value 
(US$) 
Proposed 
Recovery 
% 
Recovery 
Amount 
(US$) 
Cumulative 
Recovery 
Amount 
(US$
) 
Cumulative 
Unjustifie
d 
balanc
e 
(US$) 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
21-Feb-
23 
3-Mar-23 
5-May-23 
7-Jul-23 
5-Sep-23 
31-Dec-
23 
10-Jun-
23 
111 832.56 
72 685.11 
74 685.11 
70 885.11 
64 885.11 
82 627.66 
26 065.11 
45% 
35% 
35% 
42% 
40% 
80% 
100
% 
50 324.65 
50 324.65 
(50 324.65) 
25 439.79 
26 139.79 
29 771.75 
25 954.04 
66 102.13 
75 764.44 
(75 764.44) 
101 904.23 
(101 904.23) 
131 675.98 
(131 675.98) 
157 630.02 
(157 630.02) 
223 732.15 
(223 732.15) 
26 267.85 
250 000.00 
(250 000.00) 
TOTAL 
503 665.77 US$ 
250 000.00 US$ 
In accordance with IFAD procedures, any amount unjustified at the time of loan closing date will be promptly refunded to IFAD. 
Prepared by: 
Confirmed by: 
Date 
Date 
228 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
28. Appendix 23: Sample Audit Terms of Reference36  
505. 
The  following  are  the  terms  of  reference  (‘ToR’)  on  which  the  LPA  agrees  to 
engage  audit  firm  ‘the  Auditor’ to perform an Audit and to report in connection with the 
Agreement  with  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development (IFAD)  concerning 
Horticulture  Enterprise  Enhancement  Project  (HEEP)  where  in  these  ToRs  the  ‘Contracting 
Authority’  is  mentioned  this  refers  to  IFAD  which  has  signed  the  Agreement  with  the 
Borrower  and  finances  the  services.  The  Contracting  Authority  is  not  a  party  to  this 
engagement. 
1. Background  
  The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is aiding the borrower/ 
recipient in the form of loan(s) [and/or grant(s)].  
  A  financing  [and  /or  grant]  agreement  or  agreements  has/have  been  signed 
between IFAD and the [borrower/recipient]; refer to appendix 1.  
 
[Insert  for  private  auditor]:  IFAD  requires  the  borrower/recipient  to  appoint  an 
independent auditor to audit the accounts related to the project, in accordance with 
the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing.  
  The reporting entity is [xxx].  
  The  entity  prepares  its  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  [applicable 
accounting standard].  
  The auditor conducts its audit in terms of [applicable auditing standard].  
 
[Insert any other information that may be relevant to the auditor].  
2. Objective  
36 Available in Appendix 5 of IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed 
Projects 
website: 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/39421009/IFAD+Handbook+for+Financial+Reportin
g+and+Auditing+of+IFAD-Financed+Projects_e.pdf/133b165d-15c7-4f79-8217-
aef95b79dd67?t=1651150952856  
IFAD 
the 
on 
229 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
506. 
573. The objective of this audit is to enable the auditor to express an opinion on 
whether the financial statements (including additional disclosures as outlined in section 5) 
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the reporting entity as at 
[insert year-end date], and/or the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years 
then ended, in conformity with the [applicable accounting standards].  
3. Responsibilities of the [borrower/recipient]  
I. General  
  Provide financial statements for the activities financed by the loan/[grant] that are 
reconcilable to its records and accounts.  
  Provide  the  auditor  with  access  to  all  legal  documents  and  correspondence  with 
consultants, contractors and other persons  or firms engaged by the project, and 
any  other  information  associated  with  the  project  and  deemed  necessary  by  the 
auditor. Ensure that the accounting policies are consistently applied and disclosed.  
to  prevent 
internal  controls  are 
that  appropriate 
implemented 
  Ensure 
misstatements and susceptibility to fraud.  
  Ensure compliance with all relevant laws and regulations that pertain to the entity, 
as well as with the financing agreement between the [borrower/recipient] and IFAD.  
  Provide  the  financial  statements  to  the  auditor  within  a  reasonable  time  and  be 
available for any queries that the auditor may have. 
II. Financial Statements  
The [borrower/recipient] shall:  
  Prepare  financial  statements  covering  the  reporting  period  [date]  to  [date],  in 
accordance  with  [IPSAS/IPSAS  “Financial  Reporting  under  the  Cash  Basis  of 
Accounting”  standards].  In  addition,  the  following  specific  disclosures  will  be 
included in the financial statements:  
  Withdrawal application statement– appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects;  
  Sources  and  uses  of  funds  statement  –  appendix  2  to  the  IFAD  Handbook  on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects;  
 
  Designated Account statement and reconciliation – appendix 3(a) and 3(b) to the 
IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects;  
[Statement  of  Expenditure  –  appendix  4  to  the  IFAD  Handbook  on  Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects] – applicable to grants;  
[Expenditure  transaction  list  –  online  template  provided  in  IFAD  Grant  Forms 
repository see document C.2 ‘Transaction List’] – applicable to grants.  
 
4. Responsibilities of the auditor  
I. Auditing standards  
The  auditor  is  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  an  opinion  on  the  financial 
• 
statements in accordance with [ISA/ISSAI/national auditing standards];  
II. General Principles  
By agreeing to these terms, the auditor confirms that:  
  The firm is independent from the project, its staff and activities, in accordance with 
international best practices.  
  The firm is not providing consultancy services to the project or preparing its project 
financial statements (nor has it done so in the previous two years).  
230 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
  The auditor is suitably qualified and a member of a professional body affiliated with 
 
the International Federation of Accountants.  
[The  office  of  [public  auditor]  is  a  member  of  the  International  Organization  of 
Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).]  
  The auditor is able to conduct the audit in line with auditing standards acceptable 
to IFAD, pursuant to paragraph 4.1.  
  The firm can assign an audit team to the audit that has the necessary competence 
and skills.  
  The  firm  has  a  proven  track  record  in  conducting  audits  of  a  similar  nature  and 
complexity.  
III. Management letter  
The management letter is an integral part of the audit package that documents accounting 
and internal control issues identified by the auditors. The management letter should:  
  Outline  the  auditor’s  recommendations  to  improve  identified  accounting  and 
 
internal control issues;  
Include the responses of project management to the identified control issues, and 
its proposal to address the issues identified within a specific time period.  
  Where  applicable,  follow  up  on  the  issues  identified  in  the  previous  year’s 
management letter.  
IV. Reporting  
The Auditor is required to deliver an audit package that includes:  
  The  audited  financial  statements,  including  additional  disclosures  as  outlined  in 
paragraph 3.2;  
  An  audit  opinion  on  the  financial  statements,  within  the  scope  as  outlined  in 
paragraph 5;  
  A report on factual findings, within the scope of agreed-upon procedures as outlined 
in paragraph 6. Any ineligible expenditure identified should be clearly mentioned.  
  A management letter, including the information outlined in paragraph 4.3;  
  The audit report should provide sufficient detail as to the nature and extent of the 
procedures performed by the auditor. The auditor is required to provide the audit 
package by no later than [insert date]. Reports are to be delivered in English.  
5. Scope of the financial audit  
In performing the audit, at a minimum the auditor shall:  
  Obtain an understanding of the internal controls related to the financial reporting 
process, to identify and assess any weakness in internal control that might result 
in misstatements, whether due to fraud or to error;  
  Design and conduct audit procedures in response to any weaknesses identified in 
the  internal  controls  relating  to  the  financial  reporting  process,  to  obtain  audit 
evidence that the financial statements are fairly presented and free from material 
misstatements, in accordance with the applicable accounting framework;  
  Verify whether expenditure that was incurred in the name of the project is in line 
with the terms of the financing agreement(s) (appendix xx) and incurred for the 
purposes intended in this agreement. Both IFAD and third-party funding should be 
taken into consideration;  
231 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
  Verify  that  the  amount  of  the  in-kind  contribution  is  reported  according  to  the 
agreed  accounting  principles  and  the  reported  fair-market  value  for  all  in-kind 
contribution  items  is  reasonable  and  correctly  and  fully  disclosed  in  the  financial 
statements;  
  Verify that the inventory and fixed assets held by the entity exist, are complete, 
are properly accounted and are used for the project purposes;  
  Note  any  weaknesses  in  the  internal  control  environment  and  in  the  financial 
reporting process, and communicate those in the management letter.  
6. Scope of the agreed upon procedures 
The auditor is required to perform the following specific procedures and report on factual 
findings as required in paragraph 4.4. 
I.Withdrawal application statement 
The auditor is requested to obtain the individual withdrawal applications (WAs) submitted 
to  IFAD,  as  summarized  in  the  withdrawal  application  statement,  and  develop  test 
procedures to: 
  Determine  whether  the  Designated  Account  currency  equivalent  was  determined 
using the historical exchange rate of transfers to the operating account; 
  Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold; 
  Determine  whether  the  expenditures  claimed  through  SOE  procedures  were 
properly  and  appropriately  authorized,  classified48  and  supported  by  audit 
documentation; 
 
 
Identify any ineligible expenditure; 
[List additional procedures, if applicable].49 
II.Designated account statement 
The auditor is requested to review the activities of the designated account(s) associated 
with the project, including the initial advance, replenishments, interest that may accrue 
on  the  outstanding  balances,  and  the  year-end  balances.  The  auditor  is  requested  to 
develop test procedures to: 
• 
Check the accuracy of the Designated Account reconciliation(s); 
Confirm that the Designated Account(s) have been maintained in accordance with 
• 
the provisions of the financing agreement; 
• 
[List additional procedures if applicable]. 
III.Certified Statement of Expenditure 
  The  auditor  is  requested  to  obtain  the  certified  Statement  of  Expenditure  as 
submitted to IFAD, and develop test procedures to: 
  Determine  if  expenditures  incurred  are  related  to  the  project  description  in 
according with the grant agreement; 
  Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold; 
  Determine  whether  the  expenditures  claimed  through  SOE  procedures  were 
properly  and  appropriately  authorized,  classified50  and  supported  by  audit 
documentation; 
232 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Identify any ineligible expenditure; 
[List additional procedures if applicable]. 
IV.Expenditure transaction list 
[Applicable to grants] 
The auditor is requested to obtain the expenditure transaction list submitted to IFAD and 
develop test procedures to: 
  Determine  if  the  expenditure  incurred  is  related  to  the  project  description  in 
accordance with the grant agreement; 
 
[List additional procedures if applicable]. 
V.Other 
 
EU-specific requirements: [to be advised by IFAD] 
  Confirm  that  the  Statement  of  Expenditure  (SoE)  for  the  reporting  period  as 
submitted to IFAD comprises the project information (name of the recipient, grant 
number,  currency  of  the  grant  agreement,  name  of  the  project  and  reporting 
period) as well as whether the presentation of the expenditures is per expenditure 
category  and/or  project  component  as  set  out  in  the  Schedule  2  of  the  grant 
agreement; 
  Confirm that the total of the expenditure transaction lists for the reporting period 
agrees with the total cumulative expenditures for the same period as described in 
the SoE submitted to IFAD; 
  Confirm that the reported expenditure meet with the project eligibility criteria as 
described  in  the  Schedule  4  of  the  grant  agreement  and  other  eligibility 
requirements including but not limited to the correct exchange rates are used where 
applicable;  duties,  taxes  and  charges  included  in  the  financial  report  cannot  be 
recovered  by  the  Recipient,  and  expenditure  specifically  considered  ineligible  by 
the Schedule 4 of the grant agreement is not included in the SoE; 
  Confirm that the expenditure is recorded in the accounting system of the Recipient 
or  of  the  Sub-Recipients  (Third  Parties  with  Subsidiary  Agreements  such  as 
Implementing Partners, sub-recipients, service providers, etc.) in accordance with 
the  applicable  accounting  standards  and  the  Recipient’s  usual  cost  accounting 
practices. 
  Confirm  that  the  expenditure  is  backed  up  by  sufficient  and  effective  supporting 
documentation  listed  at  www.ifad.org/grantforms,  which  shall  be  constantly 
available and stored in accordance with paragraph 3.11 of the Schedule 3 of the 
Grant Agreement. 
  Select a sample of a maximum of 40 transactions from the Recipient’s expenditure 
transaction listing. This sample shall represent up to 20% of reported expenditure 
(Sampled transactions will be sorted by amounts and added up starting with the 
lowest amount. The transaction that brings the total above 20% shall be accepted). 
Where 
transactions  with  Sub-Recipients 
(liquidations of advance payments, direct payments, reimbursements), the auditor 
can select a maximum  of 5 expenditure items  per implementing partner with an 
overall maximum of 20 expenditure items across all Sub-Recipients. 
transaction 
includes 
listing 
the 
 
[List additional procedures if applicable]. 
7. Public disclosure  
233 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
IFAD  promotes  public  disclosure  of  project  financial information  to  enhance  the  level  of 
transparency and accountability. IFAD will disclose project audit reports, as appropriate, 
in line with the Fund’s disclosure policy. Management Letters issued by auditors are not 
subject to public disclosure by  IFAD.  In agreeing to the terms of  reference, the auditor 
explicitly  acknowledges  IFAD’s  right  to  publicly  disclose  audit  reports  (audited  financial 
statements and audit opinion) and will issue reports without a limitation of use clause.  
To facilitate the public disclosure process, the auditor is requested to submit two separate 
files as follows:  
  Audited  financial  statements  ,  audit  opinion  and  report  on  factual  findings  (the 
latter where applicable); and  
  Management Letter.  
8. Appendices  
[list as applicable]  
Appendix: Financing/grant agreement(s)  
Appendix: Letter to the Borrower  
Appendix: IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Projects  
Signed 
_________________________________________________________________  
by: 
Date: 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
234 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
29. Appendix  24:  Sample  Templates  for  Monthly  Report  for 
Management Use 
Table 1: Monthly Budget Execution Report 
Monthly Budget Execution Report 
Budgeted 
Actual 
Variance 
Current 
Month 
Year- 
To date 
Cumula 
tive - 
To date 
Current 
Month 
Year-To 
date 
Cumulative 
- To Date 
Current 
month 
Year-To 
date 
Cumul 
ative- 
TO 
date 
Commitme 
nts  Entered 
(not payed) 
To - Date 
Cash  Payments 
per component 
/subcomponent 
4 
Project Management 
Total 
Cash Payments per 
Expenditure category 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Total 
235 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Table 2: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Project 
Date of reconciliation 
Part I. Petty cash reconciliation 
Petty cash balance brought forward (a) 
Replenishments during the current month (b) 
Total petty cash balance (c = a + b) 
Disbursements during the current month (d) 
Petty cash book balance (e = c – d) 
Cash count balance (f) – see part ii. Below 
Difference (G = E – F) 
Explanation Of Difference 
Part II - Cash Count 
Description 
Quantity 
Total amount 
Bank notes 
100 
50 
10 
Coins 
Total in local currency 
Counted/reconciled by (Assistant Accountant)   
Reviewed by (Program Accountant)  
Date   
236 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Table 3: Monthly fuel consumption report  
Project Name: 
Lead Project Agency: MLAWRR Reporting period: 
Monthly 
DD/MM/YYYY 
fuel 
Consumption 
report 
as 
at 
Vehicle 
Location 
Quantity 
Cost  (reporting 
Annual 
Planned 
Cumulative 
Cost 
(litres) 
period in US$) 
(US$) 
(annual in US$) 
Variance (%) 
Total 
237 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
30. Appendix 25: List of Smallholder Irrigation Scheme in Zimbabwe 
Irrigation 
system 
Water 
Source 
Pumped surface  Dam 
Area 
(HA) 
37 
Beneficiar
ies 
139 
Gravity fed Drag 
hose 
River 
28 
93 
Gravity 
surface 
fed 
Dam 
30 
158 
Gravity 
Piped surface 
fed 
River  with 
weir 
20 
43 
Ward 
6 
10 
2 
10 
Pumped  Piped 
surface 
Dam 
81 
117 
10 & 32 
1.  MASVINGO PROVINCE 
Scheme 
Name 
Chinyamatu
mwa 
Kufandada 
Mashoko 
Nharira 
Rozva 
Shereni 
Banga 
Location 
20o09’40’’S 
31o42’17.8’’E 
20o29’40’’S 
31o46’05.8’’E 
20o03’40’’S 
31o28’25.8’’E 
200 
25.99’’S 
0300 
39.99’’E 
3’ 
28’ 
20o00’40’’S 
31o35’45.8’’E 
20o05’11’’S 
31o32’00.8’’E 
20o50’40’’S 
30o59’17.8’’E 
Gravity 
Surface  
fed 
River  
20 
43 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
61 
30 
289 
30 
Bindamombe  20o25’40’’S 
30o37’20.8’’E 
Pumped 
Hose sprinkler 
Drag 
Dam 
Dombo 
Gondo 
Musvuugwa 
Makonese 
Nyamakwe 
Chambuta 
Chilonga 
34’ 
20’ 
200 
26.35’’S 
0300 
23.54’’E 
20o10’40’’S 
30o27’37.8’’E 
20o22’40’’S 
30o19’17.8’’E 
20o14’40’’S 
30o17’17.8’’E 
20o21’40’’S 
30o42’17.8’’E 
21o13’40’’S 
31o47’07.8’’E 
21o13’40’’S 
31o38’17.8’’E 
Sprinkler 
Dam 
16 
73 
Pumped-Surface  River 
20 
61 
Pumped-Surface  River  with 
72.2 
590 
Surface  
weir 
Dam 
Pumped-Surface  Dam 
Pumped surface  Runde 
River 
63 
45 
30 
383 
53 
120 
Pumped surface  Runde 
512 
315 
River 
238 
10 
26 
18 
16 
8 
14 
9 
16 
7 
6 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Irrigation 
system 
Water 
Source 
Area 
(HA) 
Beneficiar
ies 
Ward 
Scheme 
Name 
Dendere 
Fungayi 
Labhamba 
Magogogwe 
Malikango 
Manjinji 
Manyeredzi 
Mokambe 
Nyangambe 
Location 
20o56’15’’S 
32o07’17.8’’E 
21o29’40’’S 
32o10’17.8’’E 
20o41’40’’S 
31o42’14.8’’E 
22o09’40’’S 
31o22’57.8’’E 
21o40’40’’S 
31o14’17.8’’E 
22o05’40’’S 
31o24’17.8’’E 
20o38’40’’S 
31o37’17.8’’E 
21o91240’’S 
31o35’37.8’’E 
20o43’40’’S 
31o44’07.8’’E 
Pumped surface 
Save River  40 
30 
Pumped surface  Open 
10 
100 
shaft mine 
Gravity surface  Manjirenji 
100 
150 
Dam 
Pumped surface  Boreholes  50 
111 
Gravity surface  Mwenezi 
65 
113 
River 
Pumped surface  Boreholes  60 
51 
Pumped surface  Manjirenji 
35 
106 
Dam 
Pumped surface  Runde 
42 
28 
River 
Gravity surface  Manjirenji 
260 
200 
Dam 
Rupangwana  21o00’40’’S 
Pumped surface 
Save River  10 
62 
St Joseph 
Syphone 1 
Tshovani 
Matezva 
Ranga 
Ruti 
Zvavahera 
32o10’17.8’’E 
20o49’40’’S 
32o11’17.0’’E 
20o38’40’’S 
31o38’47.8’’E 
20o57’40’’S 
32o09’17.8’’E 
19o54’40’’S 
31o25’17.8’’E 
19o43’40’’S 
31o22’07.8’’E 
19o39’40’’S 
31o43’07.8’’E 
19o34’40’’S 
31o23’17.8’’E 
Pumped surface 
Save River  73 
703 
Gravity surface  Manjirenji 
11 
 20 
Dam 
Pumped surface 
Save River  360 
120 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
Dam 
Pressurised- 
Semiportable 
sprinkler 
10 
51 
49 
40 
46 
171 
270 
40 
239 
2 
4 
20 
14 
11 
15 
20 
13 
23 
4 
2 
20 
3 
23 
22 
13 
9 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Beneficiar
ies 
Ward 
Irrigation 
system 
Water 
Source 
Pumped-Surface  Dam 
Area 
(HA) 
6.5 
Pumped-Surface  River 
16 
Pumped-Drag 
Hose Sprinkler  
Borehole 
16 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
57.7 
175 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
45.3 
54 
Location 
20o05’40’’S 
30o27’0.8’’E 
20o03’40’’S 
30o59’07.8’’E 
20o12’40’’S 
30o52’20.8’’E 
20o48’40’’S 
31o11’57.8’’E 
20o26’40’’S 
30o51’17.8’’E 
20o00’40’’S 
31o13’57.8’’E 
20o15 ‘48’’S 
30o57’17.8’’E 
20o02’40’’S 
30o56’07.8’’E 
20o33’10’’S 
31o06’57.8’’E 
20o01’40’’S 
31o03’07.8’’E 
20o 50’40’’S 
31o07’19.8’’E 
Scheme 
Name 
Chomugwak
u 
Hwendedzo 
Longdale b 
Magudu 
Mapanzure 
Marova 
oatlands 
Rufaro 
Rupike 
Stanmore B 
Tokwane-
Ngundu 
Dombo 
Chizumba 
Dinhe 
Lapache 
Murove 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
Pumped-Drag 
Hose Sprinkler  
Dam 
38 
12 
Pumped-Surface  Borehole 
27 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
100 
Pressurised- 
Semiportable 
sprinkler 
River  with 
weir 
32 
Gravity Surface 
Dam 
250 
200 
26.35’’S 
300 
23.54’’E 
20’ 
Sprinkler 
Dam 
16 
34’ 
21o10’40’’S 
30o33’17.8’’E 
21o11’40’’S 
30o33’37.8’’E 
21o23’40’’S 
30o41 ‘27.8’’E 
21o06’40’’S 
30o30’17.8’’E 
Pumped Surface  Mwenezi 
40 
River 
Pumped Surface  Mwenezi 
55 
River 
Pumped Surface  Menezi 
90 
River 
Pumped Surface  Manyuchi 
40 
Dam 
240 
54 
79 
30 
19 
12 
5 
200 
32 
98 
73 
200 
143 
85 
141 
23 
9 
32 
7 
30 
18 
8 
13 
6 
32 
29 
16 
7 
8 
16 
6 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme 
Name 
Musaverema  20o46’40’’S 
Location 
30o32’17.8’’E 
Irrigation 
system 
Water 
Source 
Pumped Surface  Musavare
ma Dam 
Area 
(HA) 
34 
Fuve 
Panganai A 
Fuve 
Panganai B 
Fuve 
Panganai C 
Fuve 
Panganai D 
Mabvute 
Machena 
Njovo 
Nyatare A 
Nyatare B 
Shashe 
20o17’31’’S 
31o36’17.8’’E 
Gravity 
surface 
fed 
Dam 
8 
Gravity 
Piped Surface  
fed 
Dam 
Gravity 
Piped Surface 
fed 
Dam 
80 
54 
Gravity 
Piped Surface 
fed 
Dam 
150 
Pumped Surface  Dam 
Pumped Surface  Dam 
75 
22 
Pumped  Piped 
Surface 
Pumped 
hose sprinkler 
Drag 
Pumped 
hose sprinkler 
Drag 
Borehole 
6 
Dam 
10 
Dam 
12.5 
Surface 
center pivot 
and 
river 
92 
20o19’40’’S 
31o39’17.8’’E 
20o21’40’’S 
31o39’17.8’’E 
20o21’40’’S 
31o39’17.8’’E 
20o35’40’’S 
31o27’17.8’’E 
20o35’40’’S 
31o28’17.8’’E 
20o38’40’’S 
31o24’17.8’’E 
20o20’40’’S 
31o28’17.8’’E 
20o29’40’’S 
31o28’17.8’’E 
22o 
05’02.04’’S 
29016’29.02’’
E 
Beneficiar
ies 
Ward 
3 
15 
15 
15 
15 
28 
31 
30 
13 
13 
1 
144 
52 
82 
53 
130 
180 
110 
33 
20 
20 
60 
241 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
2.  MIDLANDS PROVINCE  
Scheme Name 
Location 
Donsa 
Exchange 
Hozoli 
Mayorca 
Ngondoma 
Senkwazi 
Somalala 
Biri 
Biri-Extension 
Chimwe-Chegato 
Chonge-Gaha 
Makuva 
Mpwapwezi 
Vurasha 
Zvavachari 
Charandura 
Irrigation 
system 
Flood 
Flood 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Gweru River 
70 
Exchange 
Dam 
169 
Flood 
Gweru River 
16 
hose 
Drag 
sprinkler  
Maliyami 
dam 
Flood 
Flood 
Flood 
Ngondoma 
Dam 
Senkwazi 
Dam 
Somalala 
Dam 
76 
54.8 
46 
 7 
Flood 
Biri Dam 
38.4 Ha 
Flood 
Mundimatag
a Dam 
117.5 Ha 
Drag-Hose 
Chimwe Dam  64 Ha 
Flood 
Dam  
2.3 Ha 
Flood 
Dam 
5.2 Ha 
Flood 
Dam  
50 Ha 
Flood 
Vurasha Dam  30 Ha 
S180 47’ 55.2” ,  
E28° 59’ 42.7’’ 
S18° 50’ 51.5”, 
 E 029° 04’ 36.1” 
S18°59 16.3”,  
E 029° 17’ 29.6” 
S180 46’ 43.2” ,  
E 029° 35’ 49.4” 
S18° 25’ 19.0” ,  
E 029° 25’ 03.6” 
S18° 34’ 25.5”,  
E 029° 26’ 08.7” 
S18° 43’ 34.7”,  
E 029° 27’ 02.4” 
20⁰50’47.83”S; 
30⁰10’10.73’’E 
20°50'48.42"S 
30°10'16.02"E 
20⁰49’27.7”S; 
29⁰55’28.3”E 
20⁰59’03.7”S; 
29⁰49’20.4”E 
20⁰ 54’ 2.8”S;  
30⁰ 04’ 07.2”E 
20°40'7.75"S 
30°19'42.04"E 
20°56'39.87"S 
30°23'47.75"E 
20⁰ 55’17.87”S;  
30⁰ 12’ 26.83”E 
19°42'38.91"S 
30°37'27.21"E 
Flood 
Surface 
Zvavachari 
Dam 
20 Ha 
Charandura 
dam 
8 
242 
Beneficia
ries 
73 
982 
36 
76 
209 
123 
78 
71 
273 
128 
15 
25 
58 
260 
60 
78 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme Name 
Location 
Irrigation 
system 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Beneficia
ries 
HamaMavhaire 
Mhende 
Siyaso 
Tagarika 
Chuni 
Gonye 
Gutsaruzhinji 
Mugumba 
Ruchanyu 
Senamwe 
Shungudzevhu 
Taguta 
Zananda 
Bannockburn 
Budirirai 
namabasa 
Bwedzedze 
Chomuyaka 
19°49'56.24"S 
30°37'11.67"E 
19°46'21.77"S 
30°30'2.53"E 
19°32'10.77"S 
30°42'32.79"E 
19o 24’44.64’’S 
30031’0.08’’E 
S19° 47’ 16.29’ E 
30° 05’ 9.48” 
S19° 43’ 4.34”, 
 E 30° 10’ 42.34” 
S190 39’ 1.7”,  
E 30° 02’ 35.65” 
S19 47’ 18.89” , 
 E 30° 15’ 50.48” 
S19 50’  36.77” , 
 E 29° 58’ 44.53” 
S19O 33’ 08.24” , 
E 30° 16’ 47.22” 
S19°  37’  23.11”, 
E 30° 06’ 23.07” 
S19O 40’ 45.12” , 
E 30° 18’ 33.28” 
S190 49’ 13.50” ,  E 
30° 17’ 42.63” 
S200  15’  54.8”  E 
029° 50’ 25.8” 
S18°59  16.3”,  E 
029° 17’ 29.6” 
S20° 04’ 28.8”, E 
30° 06’ 20.0” 
S20°003’  24.1”, 
E 029° 27’ 02.4 
Draghose,Drip  Hamamavhai
103 
re dam 
Surface 
Mhende dam  80 
Surface 
Shashe River 
13 
Surface 
dam 
Flood 
Borehole 
Flood 
Flood 
Flood 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Sprinkler 
River 
Flood 
Dam 
Sprinkler 
Dam 
Flood 
River 
Flood 
Dam 
12 
4 
3 
80 
10 
44 
8 
21 
10 
20 
Flood 
Ngezi River 
53 
Sprinkler 
Runde River 
3.5 
Drag Hose 
Dam 
Flood 
Chomunyaka 
Dam 
9 
 4 
243 
103 
256 
28 
24 
51 
28 
106 
85 
85 
32 
42 
40 
28 
88 
14 
40 
20 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Irrigation 
system 
Flood 
Dam 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Beneficia
ries 
Scheme Name 
Location 
Danga 
Homme 
Kwayedza 
Mabwematema 
Mukaufunge 
Mupani 
Mupape 
Mutambi 
Ngatibatsiranei  
Shauke 
Vhukuzenzele 
Insukamini farm 
S20° 07’ 31.8”, E 
30° 08’ 19.2” 
S20° 09’ 24.5”, E 
30° 06’ 26.8” 
S20° 04’ 10.7”, E 
30° 01’ 17.0s” 
S18° 25’ 19.0” , E 
029° 25’ 03.6” 
S20° 10’ 58.0”, E 
30° 07’ 14.7” 
S20° 23’ 29.4”, E 
031° 18’ 58.3’’ 
S20° 33’ 10.1”, E 
30° 25’ 08.4” 
S20° 27’ 45.8”, E 
030° 17’ 03.6” 
S20°07  56.4”,  E 
30° 05’ 15.3’’ 
S20° 01’ 25.3”, E 
029° 59’ 10.5” 
S200  16’  17.7”  , 
E29° 52’ 23.0” 
19°  22’  24.4,S  
29° 35’ 25.7”E 
3 
6 
2 
Bucket System  River 
Bucket system  River 
Flood 
Mabwe-
matema Dam 
94 
Bucket system  River 
Flood 
River 
Flood 
Flood 
Flood 
Flood 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
5 
5 
2.5 
10 
6 
2 
Flood/Sprinkle
r 
Sprinkler 
Ngezi River 
10 
Insukamini 
Dam 
Two 
Boreholes 
Two 
Boreholes 
41 
13 
10 
sprinkler 
Gweru River 
77.7 
Insukamini 
youth farm 
lot 
S19O  23’  06.9”  , 
E29° 39’ 21.8”   
Flood 
London farm 
Mambanjeni 
19°23'34.97"S 
29°41'26.64"E 
S19° 18’ 56.5”, E 
029° 31’ 20.4”. 
Sprinkler 
Maodza irrigation 
S19°10  34.3”,  E 
030° 00’ 46.9” 
Gravity 
surface 
fed 
Maodza Dam  15 
Mkoba irrigation 
S19° 22’ 53.6”, E 
029° 32’ 10.7” 
Gravity 
flood surface 
fed 
Mkoba dam 
10.2 
244 
20 
24 
12 
110 
20 
12 
14 
40 
59 
20 
38 
126 
50 
36 
168 
98 
75 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Mutorahuku 
Dam 
14.6 
Shagari Dam 
20 
Beneficia
ries 
143 
40 
Scheme Name 
Location 
Mutorahuku 
Shagari 
Irrigation 
system 
Gravity fed 
S19°13  47.7”,  E 
029° 55’ 32.1” 
S19° 13’ 07.6”, E 
029° 27’ 21.4” 
Gravity 
flood surface 
fed 
245 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
3.  MATABELELAND SOUTH PROVINCE 
Scheme Name 
Location 
Irrigation 
system 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Benefic
iaries 
Homola 
Ingwenya 
Moza 
Somnene 
Tshankwa 
Bambanani 
Ingwezi 
Outgrowers 
20o12’17.9’’S 
27022’ 20.8’’E 
20o14’3.04’’S 
27031’8.02’’E 
Gravity fed 
dam 
Gravity fed 
dam 
2'53.41"S 
20° 
27°38'56.93"E 
20o10’3.04’’S 
27059’36.’’E 
Surface + Drip  Dam 
surface 
dam 
20o20’35.04’’S 
27052’8.02’’E 
Surface  +  drag 
hose 
dam 
5 
5 
96 
20 
40 
21o0’46.04’’S 
27055’30.02’’E 
21o07’26.04’’S 
27052’36.09’’E 
Surface 
dam 
100 
surface 
dam 
100 
Shashe Nkologwe  21o35’46.04’’S 
28017’’5.02’’E 
surface 
river 
Thornville 
21o06’11.04’’S 
28009’41.02’’E 
surface 
dam 
Duncal 
portbury 
umzinyatini 
zimbili 
Bili 
20o 10’38.04’’S 
28047’39.02’’E 
surface 
Dam 
boreholes 
and 
20o 26’38.04’’S 
2907’15.02’’E 
20o 24’10.04’’S 
2900’55.02’’E 
20o 04’20.04’’S 
28058’33.02’’E 
21o 58’37.04’’S 
29013’38.02’’E 
sprinkler 
river 
surface 
dam 
sprinkler 
dam 
Surface 
dam 
22 
40 
14 
32 
32 
46 
21 
350 
61 
450 
185 
43 
162 
130 
50 
80 
53 
20 
81 
26 
42 
246 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme Name 
Location 
Irrigation 
system 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Benefic
iaries 
Dombolidenje 
21o 37’53.06’’S 
26026’26.06’’E 
Surface 
center pivot 
and 
dam 
21o 44’29.04’’S 
29037’14.02’’E 
Surface 
center pivot 
and 
River 
Ipaye 
Lilombe 
Tongwe 
River Range 
Shashe 
Jalukange 
Kwalu 
Ndambe 1 
Ndambe 2 
Silalabuhwa 
Makoshe 
Siwaze 
Malole 
Zhulube 
57 
16 
95 
5 
18 
21o 57’08.04’’S 
29023’40.02’’E 
Surface + Drip  Dam 
& 
10 
Boreholes 
21o 52’42.04’’S 
29028’27.02’’E 
Drip 
surface 
and 
Dam 
Boreholes 
& 
11 
21o 56’38.04’’S 
29058’29.02’’E 
22o 08’38.04’’S 
29055’57.02’’E 
surface 
dam 
27 
sprinkler 
river 
71.5 
22o 05’02.04’’S 
29016’29.02’’E 
Surface 
center pivot 
and 
river 
200 
22o 00’37.04’’S 
29014’34.02’’E 
surface 
river 
21o 52’10.04’’S 
29042’29.02’’E 
21o 51’20.04’’S 
29042’36.02’’E 
20o 47’14.04’’S 
29017’59.02’’E 
20o 56’41.04’’S 
30010’29.02’’E 
20o 50’38.04’’S 
28040’29.02’’E 
20o 40’14.04’’S 
29037’33.02’’E 
20o 37’15.04’’S 
29013’57.02’’E 
drip 
river 
surface 
dam 
surface 
dam 
437 
Drip 
Dam 
surface 
Dam 
surface 
dam 
surface 
dam 
10 
20 
25 
15 
247 
71 
64 
75 
83 
187 
140 
110 
120 
26 
39 
883 
41 
80 
170 
40 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Irrigation 
system 
flood 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
dam 
5.4 
Benefic
iaries 
Scheme Name 
Location 
Sifinini 
Sidzibe 
Guyu Chelesa 
Mankonkoni 
Matsholomotshe 
Ntsimbane 
Rustlers Gorge 
Silikwe 
Sukwe 
20o 49’35.04’’S 
29033’56.02’’E 
20o 49’08.04’’S 
29024’04.06’’E 
20o 22’35.04’’S 
30019’42.08’’E 
21o 45’35.04’’S 
29003’09.08’’E 
20o 51’57.04’’S 
29006’09.08’’E 
21o 25’57.04’’S 
28058’47.08’’E 
21o 46’00.07’’S 
28058’36.08’’E 
20o 46’41.’’’S 
29 o08’27.08’’E 
21o 28’42.07’’S 
29017’53.08’’E 
flood 
dam 
sprinkler 
river 
surface 
river 
20 
85 
40 
surface 
dam 
38.8 
surface + drip 
Dam 
boreholes 
& 
6 
surface 
river 
Surface + drip 
dam 
31 
20 
Surface + drip  Dam 
& 
22 
boreholes 
Tuli Lishongwe 
20o 58’50.07’’S 
28046’33.08’’E 
Drip 
sprinkler 
+ 
boreholes 
25 
Tuli Makwe 
Thuthukani 
20o 38’12.07’’S 
28045’59.08’’E 
20o 46’50.07’’S 
29009’01.08’’E 
surface 
dam 
202 
overhead 
dam 
5 
Antilope 
Outgrowers 
21o 03’49.07’’S 
28028’40.08’’E 
 surface 
dam 
150 
Mbembeswanwa 
Tshatshani-
Bhothela 
21o 01’51.07’’S 
28015’19.08’’E 
20o 44’23.07’’S 
28014’15.08’’E 
sprinkler 
dam 
surface 
dam 
10 
61 
248 
29 
N/A 
160 
44 
131 
40 
41 
40 
48 
58 
445 
51 
100 
34 
104 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme Name 
Location 
Valley irrigation 
20o 53’50.07’’S 
28024’08.08’’E 
Amazon 
Mosenthals 
Kumbudzi 
Chikwarakwara 
Sebasa 
Mambale 
Rinetsi 
Bhopoma 
Zidlaebusuku 
Patana 
20°27'36.49"S 
29°13'40.18"E 
20°25'45.54"S 
29°13'21.85"E 
20°37'38.48"S 
28°53'52.52"E 
22°19'50.10"S 
31° 4'24.67"E 
21°47'4.83"S 
29° 3'34.04"E 
21°27'47.49"S 
29°11'58.02"E 
20°35'39.03"S 
29°10'47.12"E 
20°36'49.86"S 
28°51'23.15"E 
21°44'27.89"S 
29° 7'48.64"E 
Irrigation 
system 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Benefic
iaries 
Center pivot 
dam 
200 
surface 
dam 
surface 
dam 
drip 
dam 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
Surface + drip 
boreholes 
sprinkler 
boreholes 
surface 
dam 
Surface 
dam 
15 
20 
10 
65 
65 
65 
6 
5 
8 
8 
400 
50 
100 
34 
120 
120 
120 
30 
30 
40 
40 
249 
18 
20 
13 
33 
100 
50 
50 
40 
62 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
4.  MASHONALAND WEST PROVINCE 
Scheme Name 
location 
Binge 
Makonde 
greenvalley 
makonde 
emily park  
makonde 
Chifundi 
makonde 
Irrigation 
system 
Pivot 40ha and 
hose reel 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Dam 
60ha 
Benefici
aries 
Pivot 60ha and 
hose reel 
dam 
80ha 
Pivot 60ha and 
hose reel 
Pivot 80ha and 
hose reel 
boreholes 
80ha 
boreholes 
100ha 
Nyamangara 
Zvimba 
Sprinkler 
Hunyani river  50ha 
Machilori 
Zvimba 
Sprinkler 
Hunyani river  25ha 
Musarurwa 
Zvimba 
Sprinkler 
Hunyani river  25ha 
Seke Sanyati 
Sanyati 
Flood 
Seke Dam 
40ha 
Magunje 
Hurungwe 
Drag hose 
Dam 
31ha 
250 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
5.  MASHONALAND CENTRAL PROVINCE 
Scheme Name 
location 
Irrigation 
system 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Benefi
ciaries 
Tsakare 
Mt Darwin 
16 50 04.67s 
Tsakare Dam 
20ha 
31 27 34.31e 
Chibuli 
Mt Darwin 
16 44 13.04s 
Dam 
5ha 
31 20 22.68e 
Chesa 
Mutondwe 
-
Mt Darwin 
16 43 07.47s 
Chesa Dam 
21ha 
31 43 37.81e 
Chimhanda 
Rushinga 
16 39 55.63s 
32 07 29.55e 
Chimhanda 
Dam 
72ha 
Dotito Muchenje  Mt Darwin 
16 33 39.42s 
Dam 
10ha 
31 35 20.06e 
Pfunyanguwo 
Mt Darwin 
16 28 11.77s 
Dam 
5ha 
31 54 1866e 
Tsakare B 
Mt Darwin 
16 50 04.67s 
Tsakare Dam 
20ha 
31 27 34.31e 
mutondwe 
Mt Darwin 
16 46 06.9s 
River 
1oha 
31 39 34.9e 
chipa 
Mt Darwin 
16 49 30.1s 
River 
96ha 
31 16 53.65e 
Eben 
Shamva 
17 04 29.79s 
Eben Dam 
21ha 
31 30 49.1e 
Princepe B 
Shamva 
17 06 53.93s 
31 40 00.78e 
Mazivandagara 
Shamva 
16 59 56.74s 
31 25 31.6e 
Mupfurudzi 
River 
30ha 
Mazivandaga
ra Dam 
8.5ha 
Banana 
Shamva 
17 06 25.47s 
31 39 15.33e 
Mazivandaga
ra Dam 
21ha 
48 
20 
42 
138 
20 
40 
48 
20 
19 
42 
30 
17 
42 
251 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme Name 
location 
Siyalima 
Guruve 
Nyamuseve 
Guruve 
Princepe A 
Shamva 
Chipoli 1 
Shamva 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Irrigation 
system 
02 68 868 
81 57 434 
Dam 
Dam 
17 06 55.75s 
31 40 34.67e 
Mazivandaga
ra Dam 
17 15 24.1s 
31 40 02.09e 
Mazowe 
River 
50ha 
50ha 
30ha 
53ha 
Benefi
ciaries 
96 
70 
30 
103 
Bruton 
Bindura 
 16 53 56.47s 
31 14 06,1e 
252 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
6.  MASHONALAND EAST PROVINCE 
Ward 
23 
7 
7 
6 
5 
4 
6 
Scheme Name 
Balahai 
Bonchance 
Gresham 
Irene 
Igudu 1&2 
liliport  
Kesera 
District 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Machiki 
Ndemera 
Nyagambe 
Nyamakaira 
Nyandoro 
Rapture 
Ruwari 
Shayanhohwe 
Sufolk 
Sussex 
Taomba 
utikik 
Vred 
Waddlove 
Wenimbi 
Buenavista 
Belmont 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Marondera 
Goromonzi 
Goromonzi 
21 
6 
3 
21 
11 
3 
23 
23 
3 
3 
7 
6 
23 
18 
6 
22 
17 
Location 
18.256325    31.677018 
18.375964    31.574779 
18.427890     31.666972 
18.381219    31.646910 
18.452861    31.582755 
17.9980         31.471373 
18.389309     31.66503 
18.366623    31.831788 
18.317171    31.581890 
17.953806     31.608846 
18.233460    18.857754 
18.361444    31.132551 
17.949660    31.700073 
18.259571    31.724273 
18.111535     31.763436 
17.945166    31.643583 
17.939147    31.680935 
18.403662    31.662283 
18.328476     31.584858 
18.220633     31.657778 
18.238563    31.315305 
18.287595    31.645168 
 18.006931  31.206340 
17.807597    31.420777 
system 
Sprikler 
Sprikler/pivots 
Surface/sprinkler 
Hose reel 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Surface 
Pivot/Sprinkler/Hose 
reel 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler/pivot 
Drag Hose 
Drag Hose 
Sprinkler 
Sprikler/pivots 
FloodedDrag Hose 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Sprnkler 
Sprinkler 
Drip 
Drag Hose 
Hose reel/Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
253 
Water Source 
Dam 
River 
Dam/river 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
 Safari Dam 
Area (HA) 
70 
240 
50 
16 
102 
50 
120 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Boreholes 
Boreholes 
River 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Boreholes 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
246 
30 
320 
35.2 
18 
90 
360 
24 
60 
50 
54 
40 
70 
10 
70 
288 
30 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme Name 
District 
Chabwino A 
Goromonzi 
Chabwino B 
Goromonzi 
Chibvuti  A 
Goromonzi 
 Chibvuti B 
Goromonzi 
Chinyika 
Goromonzi 
Dunstan  
Goromonzi 
Dzvete 
Goromonzi 
Goromonzi 
Dudzo 
Lot 2A Buenavista  Goromonzi 
Goromonzi 
Harveydales 
Goromonzi 
Mapfeni 
Goromonzi 
Mukwene 
Goromonzi 
Masala 
Goromonzi 
Rochester 
Goromonzi 
Svisva 
Goromonzi 
Xanadu 
Goromonzi 
Northfield 
Goromonzi 
Belvedo 
Goromonzi 
Gurnesey 
Goromonzi 
Almasfield 
Goromonzi 
Ingwenya 
Goromonzi 
Glenavon 
Goromonzi 
Mana farm 
Goromonzi 
Secuter 
Athlone 
Murewa 
Doune Rungano  Murewa 
Ward 
7 
7 
7 
7 
16 
22 
10 
18 
22 
22 
13 
7 
9 
17 
8 
23 
17 
17 
13 
13 
21 
23 
20 
22 
24 
24 
Location 
system 
17.681450   31.279029 
Pivot/Sprinkler 
17.686153   31.260034 
Pivot/Sprinkler 
17.661367   31.236315 
Hose reel/Sprinkler 
17.670665   31.244803 
Hose reel/Sprinkler 
17.826327   31.366214 
Drag Hose 
18.007486   31.229548 
Sprinkler/Pivot 
17.533290   31.500117 
Drag Hose 
17.827795   31.500441 
Sprinkler 
17.993018    31.190672 
Sprinkler 
17.980448    31.129045 
Sprinkler 
17.797085   31.325571 
Sprinkler 
17.677693   31.224245 
Sprinkler 
17.618511   31.432940 
Sprinkler 
17.826723   31.472883 
Hose reel/Sprinkler 
17.681659   31.297400 
Sprinkler 
18.007486   31.229548 
Sprinkler 
17.800818    31.504944 
Sprinkler 
17.815694     31.459450 
Sprinkler 
17.781826     31.353830 
Sprinkler 
17.750376      31.393858 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
17.922844       31.450210 
18.08168          31.254733   Sprinkler 
18.047901        31.392386  Sprinkler 
18.029133        31.309869  Pivot 
17.853889   31.910252 
17.949539   31.697422 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Water Source 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
River 
River 
Weir 
Dam 
Weir 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
River 
Weir 
Dam 
Dam 
Boreholes 
Nora river 
Dam 
Boreholes 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Area (HA) 
72 
60 
100 
140 
18.5 
100 
26 
8.5 
60 
220 
54 
40 
140 
80 
120 
100 
80 
120 
80 
52 
60 
160 
52 
180 
210 
320 
254 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme Name 
District 
Castledine Pine1  Murewa 
Castledine Pine2  Murewa 
Murewa 
Howgate 
Murewa 
Jekwa 
Maryland/Shungu  Murewa 
Murewa 
Mug  1&2 
Murewa 
Mug  Hapaore 
Murewa 
Musami 
Murewa 
River valley 
Murewa 
Saushambi 
Hwedza 
Bita 
Hwedza 
Chigondo 
Hwedza 
Madhanha 
Hwedza 
Mvurachena 
Hwedza 
Mhakwe 
Hwedza 
Nyanhemba 
Hwedza 
Nhekairo 
Hwedza 
Shefield 
Mutoko 
Chipo 
Mutoko 
Chitora 
Mutoko 
Chimukopa 
Mutoko 
Gwiranenzara 
Mutoko 
Jembere 
Mutoko 
Kubatana 
Mutoko 
Murara 
Mutoko 
Nyamutsahuni 
Ward 
24 
24 
23 
20 
24 
24 
24 
13 
22 
24 
4 
10 
10 
4 
2 
8 
7 
2 
25 
25 
7 
26 
20 
29 
14 
10 
Location 
17.983175   31.772071 
17.983175   31.772071 
18.039142    31.871494 
17.727078    32.071917 
17.965712    31.850557 
17.930713    31.810149  
17.965712    31.850557 
17.746956    31.620817 
17.886995     32.039160 
17.952836    31.827418 
18.603651     31.368326 
18.856081    31.719585 
18.9393343  31.719987 
18.591621      31.490967 
18.461695      31.481878 
18.752435     31.724674 
18.665422     31.682340 
18.462327      31.469327 
17.455874      32.045152 
17.521370     32.961135 
17.521370     32.961135 
17.553604     32.961135 
17.387204     32.318603 
17.753438     32.271101 
17.228173     32.451190 
17.411332     32.060595 
Water Source 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Weir 
Dam 
Weir 
Dam 
Dam 
Weir 
Dam 
River 
Dam 
Spring 
Dam 
Weir 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Mutoko River 
Dam 
Nyadire  Dam 
Area (HA) 
70 
30 
114 
6 
54 
120 
38 
6 
102 
38 
60 
10 
6.5 
20 
60 
18 
10 
36 
9 
36.5 
20 
12 
2.4 
10 
12.5 
30 
system 
Sprinkler/surface 
Sprinkler 
Pivot 
Drag hose 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Surface 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Pivot 
Drag hose 
Flooded drag hose 
Sprinkler 
Drag  hose 
Drag  hose 
Sprinkler 
Drag  hose 
Drip 
Drag  hose 
Surface 
Sprinkler 
255 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
District 
Scheme Name 
Mutoko 
Nyaitenga 
Mutoko 
Nyazvikatsi 
Mutoko 
Tabudirira 
UMP 
Chibvi 
UMP 
Chiore 
UMP 
Muda 
UMP 
Mutata 
UMP 
Nyakasoro 
Nyaitenga 
UMP 
Sapuranyambuya  UMP 
UMP 
Porepore 
Mudzi 
Kudzwe 
Mudzi 
Mavhurazi 
Mudzi 
Mutsinga 
Mudzi 
Mutondo 
Mudzi 
Nyamatanda 
Seke 
Aucksnest 
Seke 
Dangarendove 
Seke 
Hanaral 
Seke 
Eladale 
Seke 
Masasa 
Seke 
Kildonan 
Seke 
Nhuku 
Seke 
Nyambiri 
Ward 
25 
26 
25 
14 
7 
14/15 
2 
3 
12 
6 
15 
2 
18 
12 
14 
7 
9 
21 
20 
10 
17 
9 
9 
9 
system 
Location 
Drip 
17.437980     32.957994 
Sprinkler 
17.675662     32.010494 
Sprinkler 
17.507068     32.052251 
Sprinkler 
17.42713       31.733037 
Sprinkler 
17.17070        31.814020 
Flooded Drag hose 
18.073331      31.29016 
Flooded Drag hose 
16.881302      32.190499 
Surface 
16.916723       32.192073 
Drip 
17.42907      31.93892 
Sprinkler 
17.12184       32.009183 
Drag  hose 
17.21372       31.41055 
Surface 
17.913056      32.555170 
17.217262       32.560582 
Surface 
17.155777        32.859254  Surface 
17.291578     32.579285 
17.142445      32.373346 
18.164734      30.957365 
18.642297      30.750592 
18.624702      30.769240 
18.624702      30.769240 
18.375464      31.128845 
18.168224      31.061155 
18.088602      31.009654 
18.152079      31.042571 
Drag Hose 
Surface 
Sprinkler 
Drag hose 
Sprinkler 
Sprinkler 
Drag hose 
Sprinkler 
Pivot 
Pivot/Sprinkler 
Centre  
pivot/sprinkler 
Water Source 
Nyaitenga Dam 
Dam 
Nyadire River 
Chibvi  Dam 
Mazowe River 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Nyaitenga Dam 
Dam 
Mazowe River 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam 
Mine Shaft 
Dam 
Weir 
Mamina Dam 
River 
Dam 
Dam 
Dam(3) 
Dam 
Chinungu Dam 
Area (HA) 
14 
60 
100 
40 
12 
4 
2.5 
10 
60 
100 
3 
2.4 
9.6 
2.5 
9.5 
24 
80 
70 
20 
40 
15 
246 
60 
120 
Dam 
55 
BBH Chigara 
Chikomba 
8 
19.116330     30.852290 
256 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Scheme Name 
Chikwezvero 
Damba 
Nyahoni 
Sachipiri 
Kurumani 
Mutekedza 
Sadza 
Utyzit 
District 
Chikomba 
Chikomba 
Chikomba 
Chikomba 
Chikomba 
Chikomba 
Chikomba 
Chikomba 
Ward 
23 
23 
18 
14 
7 
23 
25 
8 
system 
Drag  hose 
Sprinkler 
Surface 
Surface 
Location 
18.736280      31.442370 
18.732488       31.398110 
19.070838       31.323178 
19.055332       31.248876 
18.618857        30.837370  Sprinkler 
18.4754            31.2219           Drag  hose 
18.891944        31.463743  Surface 
19.019848        30.719451  Sprinkler 
Water Source 
Save  River 
Mbove  River 
Nyahoni  River 
Dam 
Weir 
Borehore(8) 
Dam 
Dam 
Area (HA) 
80 
80 
28.5 
80 
80 
18 
6 
60 
257 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
7.  MATABELELAND NORTH PROVINCE 
Scheme Name 
location 
Irrigation 
system 
sprinkler 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
River  
410 
Beneficia
ries 
Surface 
Dam  
110 
19o 47’45.07’’S 
28049’12.08’’E 
Sprinkler 
Hose reel 
& 
Disused  mine 
shaft 
Bulawayo Kraal 
Lungwalala 
Mlibizi 
Nabusenga 
Tyaba 
Diglis Park 
Hauke 
Pollards 
Horse Shoe 
Bona 
Glen more 
Inkosikazi 
Chentali 
Cheziya 
Lambo 
17o 45’01.07’’S 
27020’12.08’’E 
17o 56’09.07’’S 
27034’00.08’’E 
17o 57’51.07’’S 
27005’30.08’’E 
17o 27’31.07’’S 
28003’56.08’’E 
17012’26”S 
280044’1”E 
19o 24’56.07’’S 
28036’34.08’’E 
19o 39’32.07’’S 
28048’01.08’’E 
19o 53’55.07’’S 
28048’14.08’’E 
18045’S 
290 15’E 
19o 18’36.07’’S 
28044’55.08’’E 
19o 26’56.07’’S 
28028’45.08’’E 
18o 24’06.07’’S 
26047’28.7’’E 
18o 03’33.07’’S 
26037’22.08’’E 
18o 23’53.07’’S 
26049’02.08’’E 
Sprinkler 
River 
surface 
Dam 
Surface  
Dam  
surface 
Dam  
Surface  
Dam  
19 
19 
8 
40 
40 
45 
Drip  
Borehole  
12 
Centre pivot 
Borehole  
Hose reel 
Dam  
surface 
Dam  
Surface  
Dam  
surface 
River  
surface 
Dam  
60 
15 
20 
40 
5 
2 
258 
219 
38 
68 
54 
8 
79 
105 
13 
54 
23 
34 
47 
24 
20 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Irrigation 
system 
surface 
Dam  
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Beneficia
ries 
73 
43 
72 
60 
64 
57 
54 
13 
13 
24 
26 
15 
Scheme Name 
location 
Lukosi 
Makwa 
Simangani  
Makhovula 
18o 21’21.07’’S 
26038’10.08’’E 
18o 04’44.07’’S 
26041’03.08’’E 
17o 16’09.07’’S 
27014’00.08’’E 
18o 56’03.07’’S 
27054’30.08’’E 
surface 
River  
Drip  
Dam  
surface 
Dam  
27 
15 
5 
15 
Tshongokwe 
18o 40’06.07’’S 
27034’58.08’’E 
surface 
Dam 
borehole 
& 
24 
Zinaphi 
Fanisoni 
Eluhlaza 
Alicedale 
Phaphamani 
Redwood 
Thembanani 
Vusanani  
18o 44’08.07’’S 
27046’19.08’’E 
19o 00’28.07’’S 
28053’54.08’’E 
19o 49’34.07’’S 
27043’18.08’’E 
19055’11,2”S 
028013’0,92”E 
19o 51’22.07’’S 
28013’7.54’’E 
19o 44’25.07’’S 
28024’53.08’’E 
19o 49’38.07’’S 
28022’10.08’’E 
19o 49’38.07’’S 
28022’10.22’’E 
surface 
Wetland  
15 
surface 
Dam 
Hose reel 
Borehole  
Hose reel 
Borehole  
15 
5 
22 
50 
Hose reel 
Borehole  
79 
Sprinkler 
Borehole  
50 
sprinkler 
borehole  
20 
259 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
30 
33 
20 
18 
14 
15 
18 
18 
5 
1 
3 
8.  MANICALAND PROVINCE 
Scheme Name 
location 
Buhera 
Bonde 
Buhera 
 Deure 
Chipinge 
Chibuwe 
Chipinge 
Chisavanye 
Buhera 
Murambinda 
Buhera 
Mutunha 
Chipinge 
Kushinga 
Chipinge 
Masocha 
Chipinge 
Miekles 
/Bwerudze 
Chipinge 
Maunganidze 
Chipinge 
Musani 
Chipinge 
Musikavanhu 
Chipinge 
Musirizwi 
Chipinge 
Mutandwe/ 
Vimbanayi 
Chipinge 
Mutema 
Chipinge 
Taona 
Chipinge 
Zuvarabuda 
Irrigation 
system 
19053’38.3’’ S 
32017’43.7’’E 
 -19.882°S 
32.323°E 
20o30’37.31S 
32o17’43.08 E 
20039’31.04S 
32o15’35.59’’E 
 19o16’38.4 S 
31o39’40.1’’ E 
 19 o20’32.1’’S 
31o47’29.3E 
20o26’49.6’’ S 
35o 35’18.9’’E 
20o29.5’51.1’’
S 
32o32’48.6’’E 
20o16’17,7’’ S 
29052’23.0’’E 
29057’12.4’’S 
32o21’10.6’’E 
20005’21.4’’ S 
32042’42.6E 
20o30’37.31’’S 
32o17’43,08’’ 
E 
20004’51.1’’S 
32o32’48.6’’ E 
21o01’37.4’’ S 
32o11’52.9’’E 
-
20.14945833°
S 
32.36251389°
E 
20o06’56.87’’S 
32o21’02.74’’E 
21o04’35.1’’S 
32o15’58.4’’E 
260 
Pumped Semi-
portable 
Sprinkler 
Gravity-fed 
Surface 
surface 
Benefic
iaries 
River 
River 
borehol
e 
surface 
dam 
Gravity-fed 
Surface 
Gravity-fed 
Surface 
River/ 
weir 
Dam 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
surface 
surface 
Surface 
borehol
es 
borehol
e 
borehol
es 
borehol
es 
16,20,22 
surface 
18 
29 
3 
3 
30 
Drag hose 
river 
surface 
river 
sprinkler 
borehol
es 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Benefic
iaries 
river 
surface 
Scheme Name 
location 
Makoni 
Bhiri 
Makoni 
Chiduku Tikwiri 
Makoni 
Chiduku Ngowe 
Makoni 
Chikunzvi 
Makoni 
Chimuriwo 
Makoni 
Madondo 
Makoni 
Mukonomvi 
Makoni 
Nyadhimba 
Makoni 
Romsly 
Makoni 
Upper Lesape 
Mutare 
Chipendeke 
Mutare 
Hamamaoko 
Mutare 
Himalaya 1 
Mutare 
Himalaya 2 
Mutare 
Marange 
Mutare 
Masvaure 
Mutare 
Nyachowa 
Mutare 
Nyamajura 
Mutasa 
Butsi 
Irrigation 
system 
18o39’29.9’’S 
31o59’35E 
18o39’17.9’’S 
32o04’23.4’’E 
18o30’57.4’’S 
31o53’29.3’’E 
18o39’59.4’’S 
31o50’02.3’’E 
18o33’59.8’’S 
32o02’09,4’’E 
18o37’11.3’’S 
31o 57’18.8’’E 
18o38’ 46’’S 
31o47’57.6’’E 
17o54’31.7’’S 
32o29’33.7’’E 
18o55’44.8’S 
31o57’28,9’’E 
18o25’42.2’’S 
32o17’10.6’’E 
19o19’14.2’’S 
32o43’05.6’’E 
19006’05.9’’S 
32o25’54.1 
19o19’41.4’’S 
32o45’22.4’’E 
19o22’08.2S 
32o45’08.1E 
19o11’45.2’’S 
32o29’55.4’’E 
19o22’37.39’’S 
32o22’31.87’’E 
19o08’09.2’’S 
32o41’25.9’’E 
18o47’06.8’’S 
32o28’16.4’’E 
18o36’34.06’’S 
32o43’46.08’’E 
261 
15 
16 
44 
24 
12 
15 
24 
3 
31 
20 
22 
34 
22 
22 
12 
25 
15 
1 
10 
sprinkler 
river 
sprinkler 
river 
surface 
river 
surface 
dam 
surface 
dam 
surface 
dam 
surface 
Dam 
Surface  
river 
 surface 
river 
hose 
river 
 Drag 
sprinkler 
sprinkler 
river 
river 
Semi  portable 
sprinkler 
sprinkler 
river 
surface 
river 
gravity 
river 
surface 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
surface 
rivers 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
Benefic
iaries 
5 
19 
8 
30 
7 
7 
7 
6 
3 
4 
19 
11 
12 
23 
8 
30 
6 
30 
Drag hose 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
Drag hose 
river 
surface 
river 
surface 
dam 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
surface 
spring 
sprinkl
er 
river 
River 
surface 
surface 
Pumped Semi-
portable 
Sprinkler 
Scheme Name 
location 
Mutasa 
Buwu 
Mutasa 
Chidzinzwa 
Mutasa 
Honde 1 
Mutasa 
Musara Heights 
Mutasa 
Manunure 
Mutasa 
Mutarazi 
Mutasa 
Mupangwa 
Mutasa 
Rujeko 
Nyanga 
Kapata 
Nyanga 
Nyatsanzaa 
Nyanga 
Nyajezi 
Nyanga 
Nyakomba 
Nyanga 
Nyamaropa 
Nyanga 
Nyarubvurwe 
Nyanga 
Nyabobwe 
Nyanga 
Shiri 
Nyanga 
Matize 
Buhera 
Bonde 
Irrigation 
system 
18o26’44.09’’S 
32o49’58.02’’E 
18o38’42.07’’S 
32o41’10.08’’E 
18o35’17.05’’S 
32o47’25.06’’E 
18o25’03.05’’S 
32o56’08,04’’E 
18o34’51.02’’S 
32o42’18.07’’E 
18o31’04.03’’S 
32o48’06,04’’E 
18o31’52.06’’S 
32o45’41.04’’E 
18o30’25.01’’S 
32o48’52.07’’E 
17o29’48.3’’S 
32051’40.0’’E 
17o57’18.8’’S 
32o42’35’’E 
17o48’03.2’’S 
32o58’16.7’’E 
17o01’00.9’’S 
32o55’32.5’’E 
17033’38.8’’S 
32o49’30.6’’E 
17o49’21.5’’S 
32038’33’’E 
17o40’40’’S 
32o50’45.8’’E 
19053’38.3’’ S 
32017’43.7’’E 
262 
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project (HEEP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
________________________________________________________ 
Water Source  Area (HA) 
surface 
Benefic
iaries 
borehol
e 
surface 
dam 
Gravity-fed 
Surface 
Gravity-fed 
Surface 
River/ 
weir 
Dam 
surface 
river 
surface 
river 
20 
18 
14 
15 
18 
18 
Scheme Name 
location 
Chipinge 
Chibuwe 
Chipinge 
Chisavanye 
Buhera 
Murambinda 
Buhera 
Mutunha 
Chipinge 
Kushinga 
Chipinge 
Masocha 
Irrigation 
system 
20o30’37.31S 
32o17’43.08 E 
20039’31.04S 
32o15’35.59’’E 
 19o16’38.4 S 
31o39’40.1’’ E 
 19 o20’32.1’’S 
31o47’29.3E 
20o26’49.6’’ S 
35o 35’18.9’’E 
20o29.5’51.1’’
S 
32o32’48.6’’E 
263 
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
1/12
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
High
High
High
High
High
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
High
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
Substantial
Moderate
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
High
High
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Stakeholders
2/12
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
The deepening economic crisis exacerbated by COVID-19, shortages of goods in
particular food, the declining purchasing power due to high inflation has led to
considerable public discontent in the context of preparation for 2023 elections. This
could lead to instability which may affect commitment
Mitigations:
HEEP will encourage dialogue and stakeholder involvement to help build
confidence on market- based solutions that were proposed by the GOZ in the
Ministry's Horticultural Framework. HEEP is based on the GOZ initiative and counts
on full ownership and commitment for smooth implementation of the project. IFAD
is an important partner for Zimbabwe, even more so now that debt arrears hinder
GOZ from accessing several other sources of external funding. Strong KM and
sharing of results and good practices throughout the implementation period will be
an additional element to create ownership.
Governance
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Zimbabwe ranks poorly in governance indicators, as evidenced by a declining
freedom of press, government effectiveness, rampant corruption and low
prosecution of cases, lack of investment in infrastructure, declining public service
system, and declining health system. The poor economic and financial governance
spans for decades, which increases risk for investments in agriculture.
Mitigations:
HEEP safeguard mechanisms will mitigate risks and perceptions of risk with project
associated investments. These include ensuring adherence to IFAD procurement
and anti-corruption rules, and competitive recruitment of a HEEP procurement
officer, National Project Coordinator and Chief Accountant, is mandatory to ensure
good project governance.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Macroeconomic instability, including risks related to high international and domestic
debt overhang, hyperinflation, unstable currency and currency convertibility,
negative trade balance, limited access to credit, declining GDP and inconsistent
economic policies have contributed to contraction of the economy, which affects
efforts to commercialise smallholder agriculture. Investment inflows remain weak
and due to debt arrears, several sources of external credit are not accessible yet. 
Additional economic stress is caused by the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak and
related lockdown and in 2022 by the Ukraine crisis with substantive increases in
fuel, fertilizer and commodity prices. Severe drought in 2022 is also affecting the
economic situation, particularly that of the poorest.
Mitigations:
3/12
As has been demonstrated in the cases of Vietnam and Bangladesh, for example,
global value chains (GVC) trade is more influential than traditional trade in
supporting growth and poverty reduction. HEEP’s focus on horticulture for export –
combined with support to nutrition and home consumption – aims at reducing the
vulnerability of the poor to macroeconomic shocks. In its policies, GOZ promises to
undertake economic reforms, restoration of fiscal balance, stimulation of production
and exports, tackle external debt, and attract foreign direct investment among
others. The diaspora remittances have increased. HEEP will contribute to
increased production and foreign currency earning through exports. The project will
also promote access to productive finance for 4Ps through the Export Horticulture
Revolving Fund in Component 2. HEEP disbursements will be made in the
currency of the contract which is USD.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
High
High
High
High
Zimbabwe continues to rank amongst the top 10 most fragile countries in the world
in 2021. This in line with indicators on governance, political situation, economy,
security, human development and environment. Fragility in Zimbabwe is driven by
policy volatility, corruption, and a low institutional capacity to deliver basic services.
Zimbabwe is included in the 2022 list of fragile countries by the World Bank.
Mitigations:
Fragility is a crosscutting issue in IFAD’s country programme and in the HEEP
design. HEEP will help address fragility by assigning the private sector a greater
role in promoting inclusive agricultural development. CLPE and Government
engagement are promoted. IFAD’s participation in UN coordination offers a
platform for dialogue in priority topics.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
HEEP is in line with the Strategic Objectives of COSOP and it directly supports key
GoZ agricultural policies and in particular the Horticultural Recovery Growth Plan.
Mitigations:
Regular country-level policy engagement (CLPE) and support, notably through
HEEP but also ongoing projects (SIRP and SACP).
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
GoZ policy development capabilities are weak and the implementation of well
thought and relevant policies can be lacking behind.
Mitigations:
HEEP through its work with horticultural value chain actors will provide high quality
and timely input into the policy development process. The GoZ is keeping involved
in the HEEP implementation and best practices and implementation challenges are
discussed frequently. Policy-oriented KM products will be developed by the project.
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
River pollution, excessive water abstraction, soil erosion, and land degradation
may have significant adverse impacts on food and nutrition security, agricultural
productivity, access to markets, value chains, infrastructure, and the incidence of
pests and diseases, resulting in increased vulnerability or deterioration of target
populations’ livelihoods and ecosystems.
4/12
Mitigations:
Climate-resilient agriculture techniques will ensure environmental sustainability,
such as integrated soil fertility management and diversified cropping systems. In
addition, water use efficiency will be promoted in the irrigation schemes. No
infrastructure investments will be made before the local authorities confirm the
beneficiaries’ land and water user rights for investments in small-scale irrigation.
The site-specific ESMPs will include mitigation measures, including the ability of
downstream users to use water and any environmental flows required to maintain
the integrity of the freshwater ecosystem.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The country is highly vulnerable to climate change (droughts, intermittent floods,
prolonged dry spells). Projections estimate an increase between 1 to 1.5 degrees
by 2040. This will have negative consequences on yield, food security, and
nutrition—incidences will increase due to climate change.
Mitigations:
HEEP will support climate-resilient agronomic methods, equipment, and
infrastructure in the targeted areas to reduce climate vulnerability to natural
hazards, food insecurity and nutrition, and exposure to climate change. Sustainable
land use, including the use of renewable energy, will contribute to reducing GHG
emissions. Climate-resilient infrastructure (small-scale irrigation, protected
agriculture etc.) will secure production and reduce the risk of low yields. The
promotion of good climate-resilient agricultural practices will address drought,
flooding, pests, diseases incidences, and land degradation
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
HEEP is fully aligned with Government’s key development policies and strategic
priorities related to poverty reduction, food security and nutrition, it is also in line
with IFAD’s 2020-2025 COSOP for Zimbabwe and IFAD’s core corporate priorities.
The design mission met prospective smallholder beneficiaries and confirmed the
relevance of the proposed interventions.
Mitigations:
Through close and active engagement with relevant government authorities,
different stakeholders and partners, IFAD will assure that new ideas and priorities
are streamlined to HEEP approaches and implementation arrangements. The
project’s M&E system will ensure that regular beneficiary feedback will be collected
to ensure the continued relevance of HEEP interventions.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There is limited experience and technical capacity in the Ministry implementing
large scale export oriented commercial horticulture programme. The 4P approach
of HEEP is new to Zimbabwe. On the other hand, the RBZ has experience
managing foreign currency funds such as the proposed Horticultural Export
Revolving Fund.
Mitigations:
HEEP will provide capacity building to PMU and relevant institutions engaged in the
implementation of the HEEP, on the job training, hands on experience, and learning
by doing are part of the programme execution. Once approved and operational, the
4Ps will be implemented largely through 4P partners, as well as private service
providers and PFIs.
5/12
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
The village horticultural gardens (VHG) that HEEP will support under Component 1
may involve too many beneficiaries for having an impact on their livelihoods and/or
food security. This was the case in a VHG visited by the design team during its field
visits.
Mitigations:
HEEP will limit the number of farmers involved in one VHGs to a maximum of 50. It
will also ensure a minimum of 200 square meters of commercial plot per
beneficiary household.
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
The establishment of 4P requires a substantive amount of trust between famers
and anchor firms. Building this trust for new partnerships may be difficult and
lengthy, which may lead to side-selling by smallholders and reluctance by anchor
firms to engage with newly established Agricultural Producer Groups (APGs).
Mitigations:
Subcomponent 1.2 will be fully dedicated to the identification and the capacity
building of 4Ps. 4Ps following the anchor firm hub and spoke model will be selected
based on competitive calls for Expressions of Interest (EOI)s issued by the PMU. If
the 4P EOI shows promise, the PMU will work with the 4P partners to strengthen
the partnership by jointly developing a full 4P business plan. Technical assistance
and training will be provided and will include farming as a business, group
organization and dynamics.
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Under subcomponent 1.4, the project will involve a rural infrastructure element,
including construction of farm and feeder roads, local storage, power and water
provision, renewable energy etc. The need for these public infrastructure
investments will be identified by 4P partners in consultation with the appropriate
local/district officials, who will be responsible for operation and maintenance. There
are often delays in the implementation of infrastructure interventions, carrying the
risk that the 4P business plan will not take off while the infrastructure is delayed.
Mitigations:
Close monitoring of the project’s activities will ensure smooth delivery of the
complex activities involving infrastructure. Continuous evaluation of expenditure,
and careful economic analysis of the benefits at project mid-term and closure will
adequately evaluate the project’s viability.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
6/12
Risk 1: There is limited experience and technical capacity in the Ministry to
implement large scale export oriented commercial horticultural programmes. Low
implementation capacity in some government structures has in various cases led to
low disbursements and weak implementation performance in development projects
in Zimbabwe. The 4P approach of HEEP is new to Zimbabwe. On the other hand,
the RBZ has experience managing foreign currency funds such as the proposed
Horticultural Export Revolving Fund. 
Risk 2: Limited capacity of the PMU and the Ministry to manage matching grant
investment pipeline generation, prioritization, investment decisions, and
disbursements, procurements, accounting and reporting on the funds utilization and
counterpart contributions. This may lead to delays in the expected implementation
schedule of the project and/or missing information in the project financial and
progress reports.
Mitigations:
Mitigation 1: The market and private sector focus in HEEP implementation
approaches aims to mitigate this threat. The joint PMU being developed by the lead
agency will bring economies of scale that should support implementation. 
Constant identification of lessons learned and analysis of bottlenecks and best
practices, will enhance the implementation capacities. 
HEEP will provide capacity building to PMU and relevant institutions engaged in the
implementation of HEEP. On the job training, hands on experience, and learning by
doing are part of the programme execution. Once approved and operational, the
4Ps will be implemented largely through 4P partners, as well as private service
providers and PFIs. Constant identification of lessons learned and analysis of
bottlenecks and best practices, will enhance the implementation capacities. 
Mitigation 2: Programmatic matching grant approach in IFAD-financed value chain
projects in Zimbabwe (i.e. HEEP, and ongoing SACP) enables coordinated
capacity building support, by IFAD to ensure effective matching grant
implementation. The existing matching grant guideline, already developed under
SACP, will be utilized for HEEP, including for the process of pipeline generation,
prioritization, investment decisions, disbursements, accounting and reporting. In
HEEP, additional procurement support by PMU staff will be provided to
beneficiaries to ensure access to highest quality available input materials and
equipment, and affordable pricing. At HEEP, start-up phase, dedicated technical
assistance will be provided by IFAD to HEEP as well as SACP in the
implementation and accounting of the matching grant manual.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
In SIRP, insufficient human and financial M&E resources in the PMU make it
difficult to set up a solid results-management system. 
The flow of data from the field to the project Management Information System (MIS)
has been patchy and untimely. 
In HEEP, anchor firms may fail to provide data to the project without clear
structures and incentives to do so.
Mitigations:
The PMU will include HEEP-dedicated senior M&E officer, assistant, and KM
officer. The budget for M&E (excluding KM) will be at least 2% of total cost or 17%
of Coordination and management cost. . 
HEEP will provide agricultural extension officers with data bundles to enable digital
data collection in the field and reduce labour intensive manual data input by PMU
staff. 
Through the innovation grants, HEEP will promote the adoption by anchor firms of
software solutions which make it easier to run contract farming with smallholders,
and provide the full traceability demanded by export markets and supermarket
chains. The data collected through these platforms will be made available to
HEEP’s M&E system.
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
7/12
Whilst there are no proposed accounting staff at the design stage of the project,
recruitment will be conducted for the program accountant and an assistant
accountant once the project is approved. 
There are no anticipated challenges with regard to recruitment of finance staff.
However, there will be need to orient the finance team to be recruited on IFAD
financial management procedures. 
Given the economic instability in the country, there is potential risk of high staff
turnover affecting continuity and creating a lengthy learning curve/slowing down
implementation of the project.
Mitigations:
Ensure recruited FM staff are trained in IFAD procedures. FM staff in existing
projects can support the onboarding process of the new staff. 
Continuous capacity building, covering among others, IFAD financial management
procedures/requirements will be provided during the start-up workshop as well as
during supervision/ implementation support missions.
Project Budgeting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There has been consistently low budget execution in the past years (30-40%
annual average absorption) mainly due to (i) unrealistic budget preparation, (ii)
delays in budget approval, and (iii) delays in no-objection due to budget revisions.
HEEP will be implemented by the same Lead Implementing Agency. Based on
experience with SIRP, there is a risk of budgets not being executed in an orderly
and predictable manner resulting in funds not being available when needed.
Mitigations:
In order to support the project to prepare timely and realistic annual work plans and
budgets (AWPB), training on budgeting procedures and guidelines will be provided
during the start-up workshop.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Due to the historical problems with the Zimbabwe dollar, most of the payments are
done in USD. Use of the local currency is limited to few transactions and therefore
exposure to foreign exchange risk is minimal. 
Even though exposure to foreign exchange risk is minimal, shortage of USD could
lead to project funds held in the DA being inaccessible which could impact
implementation of project activities
Mitigations:
Quarterly cash flow forecasts should be done to ensure sufficient liquidity for the
project. 
Training on interim financial reporting will be provided to the accounting staff who
will be recruited for the project.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that internal audit arrangements are insufficient to provide assurance on
the effectiveness of internal control systems and processes leading to unreliable
internal control systems and non-compliance with the financing agreement, LtR,
PIM and GoZ requirements.
Mitigations:
As part of start-up, internal audit staff assigned to the programme will be trained in
IFAD procedures. 
Supervision missions will report on the activity of the internal audit with respect to
HEEP by reviewing their reports and assessing management’s responsiveness to
any recommendations formulated as a complementary measure.
8/12
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The software has been customised to produce IFAD-specific financial reports that
include reports by categories, components and sub-components, and by financiers.
The software is not web-based but there may not be need for such functionality
since processing of all accounting transactions is centralised at the PMU. However,
there are no back-ups for the accounting software.
Mitigations:
The software service provider should be engaged to propose a technical solution to
mitigate this risk and allocation made in the relevant AWPB to cover the cost of the
solution (if any).
Project External Audit
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Office of the Auditor General does not have sufficient capacity. For SIRP, the audit
is conducted by a private sector auditor, and the same is expected for the HEEP
project. However, this does not strengthen the country systems.
Mitigations:
The potential of the Comptroller and Auditor General office is expected to be
progressively achieved. This should be assessed during implementation to
determine suitability to conduct project audits.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Lack of national standard bidding documents for shopping; insufficient procurement
monitoring at national level and low public access to procurement information.
Mitigations:
The Project will develop its own templates for shopping and will submit them to
IFAD for review & approval. The Procurement Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe
(PRAZ) should be encouraged to fast-track the creation of databases on
procurement, so as to increase procurement monitoring and increase public
access to public information. To that end, PRAZ’s website is already structured to
accommodate said databases. The project will achieve its procurement monitoring
obligations through the use of IFAD’s Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT) and the
project team will be training on the use of the CMT since the start-up phase.
Additionally, the quality of data inserted on the CMT will be assessed at each IFAD
supervision mission. Finally, the project will enhance public access to its
procurement information by widely advertising bidding opportunities and contract
awards (also by publishing ICB opportunities on UNDB online).
Accountability and Transparency
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Transparency International scored Zimbabwe 23/100 on the Corruption Perception
Index for calendar year 2021. The Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (ZACC)
has the constitutional mandate to investigate corruption. However, the ZACC is not
independent, being administered under the Office of the President and Cabinet.
9/12
Mitigations:
All procurement entities, as well as bidders, suppliers, contractors, consultants and
service providers, shall observe the highest standard of ethics during the
procurement and execution of contracts financed under IFAD funded projects, in
accordance with paragraph 69 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. The
Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and
Operations shall apply to all projects, vendors and third parties, in addition to the
relevant national anticorruption and fraud laws. Recommend that IFAD strongly
encourage government through policy dialogue to make the ZACC an independent
Anti-Corruption agency, through the COSOP consultations with the government.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
a) The Procurement Officer at SIRP is suspended in March 2021. Despite the
upcoming departure of the Procurement Officer a.i., SIRP and the Ministry of
Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Resettlement (the “Ministry”) lack a
clear way forward on the recruitment of a Procurement Officer to take over the
work; b) The level of Procurement document produced by the procurement is
considered Mediocre and need more elaboration and enhancement to answer the
International Best Practices in different procurement aspects.
Mitigations:
a) HEEP to recruit competitively Procurement Specialist, and Procurement
assistant with adequate experience in donor-funded public procurement without
delays and to provide them with the adequate training; b) HEEP to use IFAD SBD.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
a) Procurement staff do not participate in the preparation of the annual work plan
process. They are involved downstream after the finalisation of the AWPB; b)
Minimum number of days for advertised procurement under competitive bidding
processes (40 dys ICB and 20 dys NCB) are less than the IFAD recommendation;
c) Minutes of bid openings taken sent only to bidders who requested them; d) The
evaluation committees are not appointed ad hoc, rather a fixed list of officers
participating to evaluations is approved directly by the Permanent Secretary of the
Ministry who are chosen based on their experience; e) Weak contract
administration and management at different level.
Mitigations:
a) To ensure participation of procurement in the preparation of the AWPB, as it has
implication on the Procurement Plan, and to ensure the use the IFAD PP Template;
b) To include in the PIM at least 45 days for ICB and no less than 30 days for NCB
(included in the PIM); c) Minutes of the bid opening to be dispatched to all bidders,
even those who do not request them; d) To ensure with the PMU that Evaluation
committee are composed on ad-hoc basis for every single bid process under
HEEP project; e) To ensure that HEEP will: follow IFAD process and procedures
for contract management, use the IFAD contract template, the Procurement Officer
is involved in the follow up with suppliers/contractors/consultants to monitor
contract implementation and delays, actively use the CMT to follow up on the
contract progress.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Moderate
Substantial
Low
Low
Risk:
Substantial
Low
There is a risk that clearing land for agriculture, deforestation for household
energy, setting up irrigation schemes will result in loss of biodiversity, ecosystems
and ecosystem services, or the unsustainable use of living natural resources.
10/12
Mitigations:
HEEP infrastructure will be small-scale in non-sensitive locations. Agricultural
intensification will be promoted as opposed to expansion. Capacity building will
focus on the promotion of agro-ecological principles, enhancing ecosystem
services, and sustainably using natural resources and soil conservation. HEEP will
promote the planting of fruit trees which are instrumental in biodiversity
conservation.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Low
Land and water resources may be polluted through increased use of agro-
chemicals as smallholders invest in improved agricultural productivity and become
integrated into value chains. Discharge from the drainage in the irrigation schemes
may also result in pollution.
Mitigations:
Use of appropriate disposal facilities, use of appropriate drainage structures, use of
organic soil fertility enhancement, proper storage of materials, capacity building in
safe use and handling of agro-chemical. Farmers will be trained on water pollution
management.
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
There is a very low risk that HEEP will be implemented in areas of cultural heritage
sites where it could cause loss of resources of historical, religious or cultural
significance. 
The risk that women may be prevented from participating due to patriarchal norms
is also low, as shown by the experience of ongoing project in Zimbabwe (SIRP and
SACP both successfully target women).
Mitigations:
The targeting strategy will ensure that HEEP will not target cultural heritage sites
for its interventions. The strategy will also ensure that women are directly involved
in project activities and ripe the benefits from participation. The M&E system will
collect gender and age dis-aggregated data to monitor the performance of the
targeting strategy.
Indigenous People
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The potential risk that HEEP may cause physical, social, or economic impacts on
indigenous peoples, or in threats to or the loss of resources of historical or cultural
significance to them.
Mitigations:
There is very low risk that HEEP will affect indigenous populations; self-identified
indigenous peoples are 0.03% of total population.
Labour and Working Conditions
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
There is low risk that HEEPP may cause an increase in gender-based violence,
discriminatory and unsafe/unhealthy working conditions for people employed to
work specifically in relation to the project, including third parties and primary
suppliers
11/12
Mitigations:
HEEP will promote viable enterprises that generate enough income for decent
labour practices. The project will raise awareness against gender-based violence,
and unsafe working conditions. Required clauses will be included in contacts with
APGs, MSMEs, and anchor firms. HEEP will engage targeted households on the
benefits of equitable sharing of labour through GALS. The contracts for
infrastructure development will also include clauses to ensure decent working
conditions. Labour saving technologies will be introduced. The PMU will carry out
regular field visits to ensure that decent labour practices are adopted by all
implementing partners and project stakeholders.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Potential community health and safety risks could arise from exposure to agro-
chemicals, zoonotic diseases, COVID-19, pollution from project interventions and
from gender-based violence.
Mitigations:
The Environmental and Social management Plans for each site will include
measures to minimise the risks. Capacity building for smallholders will also include
safe use and handling of agro-chemicals. HEEP will develop road infrastructure to
improve transport safety. Communities will access training on gender-based
violence, reproductive health rights, child feeding and nutrition education. Labour
saving technologies will improve the health and will being of women. For COVID-
19, HEEP’s efforts will be towards increased awareness on social distancing,
wearing masks, washing hands and increasing the use of digital platforms.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The potential risk is that the HEEP may cause physical, social, cultural or economic
impacts, especially for marginalized groups, from involuntary loss of land, assets,
access to assets, income sources, or means of livelihoods. Some of these risks
may result from infrastructure development activities.
Mitigations:
Infrastructure development proposals will be screened to ensure no physical or
economic resettlement will result from these activities.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
There is a moderate risk that HEEP may result in green-house gas emissions as a
result of land clearing and a change in the land use and thereby contribute to
anthropogenic climate change.
Mitigations:
Screening of investments will ensure no forests are cleared for agricultural
production and intensification. The CSA activities such as integrated soil fertility
management and agroforestry will increase carbon sequestration. The mitigation
potential of the project will be calculated every year. GEF funding will help to better
address climate change adaptation by facilitating climate-resilient technology such
as the use of solar renewal energy from production to storage and processing, and
the promotion of sustainable natural resource management techniques
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
12/12
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Most of the HEEP target beneficiaries depend on rain-fed agriculture for their
livelihoods. This dependency increases their vulnerability to variable climate. Some
of the HEEP locations are also water stressed, which increases the vulnerability of
the ecosystems.
Mitigations:
Climate resilient investments will reduce the vulnerability to climate variability and
change. The capacity building will also increase the knowledge base of the
smallholders to manage the climate change related risks. Irrigation and water
supply schemes will contribute to addressing water stress and incidents of drought
and prolonged dry spells.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
The likelihood of adverse reaction by stakeholders including smallholders, anchor
firms, PFIs, and NGOS towards HEEP implementation is ranked low.
Mitigations:
Comprehensive consultation process with the stakeholders during the Concept
Note mission, covering both the smallholder producers and agro-businesses,
demonstrated great interest by all parties to develop the value chains to the mutual
benefit of all stakeholder groups. The M&E/KM unit will ensure regular
consultations with stakeholders, who will be involved in the development of AWPBs
as well as in project evaluations.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
4Ps involve SHFs and MSMEs with far less sophistication in articulating
grievances with more sophisticated anchor firms. This could lead to unaddressed
stakeholder complaints that may undermine project implementation and the
achievement of project development objectives.
Mitigations:
HEEP will put in place a strong stakeholder grievance and a beneficiary feedback
mechanism through which beneficiaries can lodge grievances first to the 4P anchor
firms and NGOs, and then if not resolved to be taken by HEEP. This will be backed
by community validation mechanisms at each stage in project implementation.
HEEP will raise awareness on an anti-corruption policy and establish contact
telephone numbers for grievances.
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: HEEP Exit Strategy 
HEEP has several approaches for ensuring the sustainability of the project investments 
for smallholders, farmer groups/cooperatives, private sector value chain actors and 
national government. These include (i) undertaking all investments with a public (GoZ) 
or private sector (e.g. 4Ps) counterpart ; (ii) building capacity of institutions and 
individuals; (iii) linking smallholder farmers to established private sector horticulture 
firms ; (iv) introduction of climate smart horticulture production technologies; (v) use of 
participatory approaches to ensure beneficiary ownership; (v) development of a clear 
plan for operation and maintenance of all infrastructure, assets and equipment provided 
under the project; (vi) establishment of a commercially run revolving fund to ensure 
continued access to finance along the value chain, and (vii) including HEEP in the JMU 
already established for overall programmatic coordination of investments in the Country.   
The Table below presents the approach to HEEP sustainability and exit strategy from the 
point of view of the key activities in the project. 
Component/Activity   Sustainability and Exit Strategy 
Component 1: 
Village Horticultural 
Garden and 4P 
Mobilization and 
Development.  
The overall sustainability of Component 1 is based on a 
market demand assessment to identify appropriate and 
profitable horticulture value chains that smallholders and the 
private sector can jointly invest in to upgrade production, 
processing, marketing and infrastructure needs. 
Component 1 comprises of subcomponent 1.1, Village 
Horticulture Garden Mobilization and Development, 1.2 4P 
Identification, Mobilization, and Capacity Building, 1.3 4P 
Matching Grants and 1.4 Public Infrastructure in the 4P 
catchment area.  
C1.1: An ARDA managed process will identify horticulture 
crop market demand from private sector companies, 
processors and traders, followed by a feasibility and 
profitability analysis with smallholders to identify which 
horticulture crops they want to invest in. Technical production 
and extension support will be provided by AGRITEX. Technical 
support services will ensure that beneficiaries have the 
required capacities to plan, invest and sustainably operate 
their farms as businesses, as part of larger commercial value 
chains. The services will also ensure that all investments are 
socially and environmentally sustainable, in view of local 
economic and social structures, natural resource 
management, as well as changing climatic conditions. As part 
of a larger hub and spoke model, the VHG will benefit from 
the existing linkages between the irrigation scheme and the 
market. Investment in climate resilient irrigation and water 
harvesting structures will provide long term stability of 
horticulture production. All VHGs should graduate to being 
fully independent, financially robust and self-managing within 
two years of project engagement, as they will have the skills 
and confidence to grow their farm enterprise, manage climate 
risks and face fewer social barriers to their development.  
C1.2:    Development of funded 4Ps is the key aspect for 
sustainability and exit from HEEP activities. All HEEP activities 
are based on this 4P sustainable private sector-based 
approach, which includes a clear plan to continue after the 
project support expires. Interested anchor firms/farms who 
are willing to increase their linkages with, and include VHG 
smallholders in in their business activities will be invited to 
submit proposals for funding of their inclusive business plan. 
Following PMU approval a full business plan that outlines the 
technical and financial viability and sustainability, as well as 
the social and environmental safeguards of their proposed 
activities will be developed. Through a competitive selection 
process the most viable proposals will be approved by the 
PSC to receive HEEP technical and financial assistance.  
C1.3: To provide co-financing to the approved 4P proposals a 
Matching Grant mechanism will be developed with three 
windows – Window 1 for core financing of start-up costs (e.g.  
inputs, services, equipment, machinery etc), Window 2 for 
climate-resilient agriculture (e.g. drip irrigation, protected 
agriculture, solar power) and Window 3 for innovations (e.g. 
introduction of new crops/varieties, agronomic 
methods/equipment, new crop protection and fertilizer 
options, the use of smart-phone based farmer registration 
and extension systems, and new processing techniques). 
C1.4 The public infrastructure built under the project will have 
three pathways to sustainability, leading towards a successful 
project exit. First, the infrastructure is demand driven, 
prioritising the infrastructure that serves the needs of the 
community and the 4P partners best; second, the owners and 
beneficiaries of the infrastructure will contribute at least 10% 
of the required financing in cash; and third, the management 
arrangements for the infrastructure will be competence-
driven, with users paying for services. Maintenance 
agreements will be signed with the Rural District Councils and 
the District Development Fund for all roads developed under 
the project.  
The overall sustainability of Component 2 is based on 
developing a revolving fund with a commercial interest rate 
and full repayment requirements, and strengthening of the 
capacity of established and experienced financial institutions 
to develop and deliver financial services to SHFs and MSMEs 
in commercial horticultural and/or those participating in HEEP 
4Ps.  
Component 2 comprises of subcomponent 2.1: Export 
Horticultural Revolving Fund and subcomponent 2.2: Capacity 
Building for Enhanced Agricultural Lending. 
C2.1 A key financing sustainability issue and exit strategy is 
the development and access to long term commercial finance 
that is taken as a commercial loan, with an interest rate and 
that is repayable in full the lender. This fund will actually 
increase in size with time and therefore provide increase 
financing to the horticulture sector beyond the life of the 
project. 
C2.2 To improve and sustain access to finance for SHFs, 
APGs, and MSMEs, capacity building will be conducted to 
increase the capacity of existing and experienced financial 
Component 2: 
Access to Finance 
institutions to develop and deliver financial services to SHFs 
and MSMEs in commercial horticultural and/or those 
participating in 4Ps. Commercial banks and building societies 
will be supported to develop value chain, group, or individual 
financing instruments.  Microfinance Institutions and 
community banks/SACCOs will develop and deliver financing 
instruments for SHFs and MSMEs. Insurance companies will 
be assisted to develop suitable products for the horticultural 
sector. 
Zimbabwe
Horticulture Enterprise Enhancement Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
15/06/2022 to 24/06/2022
Document Date:
02/11/2022
Project No.
Report No.
2000003944
6232ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender Transformative
 Youth Sensitive
1/2
 Nutrition Sensitive
 Persons with Disabilities
 Indigenous Peoples
 Climate Finance
 Adaptive Capacity
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies,
 National youth policies,
strategies and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems
and opportunities, by gender
strategies and actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and
opportunities by youth
group
 National nutrition
policies, strategies and
actors
 Key nutrition problems
and underlying causes, by
group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
 National policies,
strategies and actors
 Main groupings among
PwDs
 Context-based barriers
and opportunities for PwDs
 International standards,
national policies, strategies
and key IPs' organizations
 Main IPs communities,
demographic, social, cultural
and political characteristics
 Important livelihoods
constraints and opportunities
for IPs and their cultural
heritage
Theory of
change
Logframe
indicators
 Gender policy objectives
 Pathways to youth
(empowerment, voice,
workload)
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Gender transformative
 Youth employment
pathways
 Policy engagement on
included in project
objectives/activities
GEWE
 Outreach disaggregated
 Outreach
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Women are > 40% of
outreach beneficiaries
 IFAD empowerment index
(IE.2.1)
disaggregated by sex,
youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Persons with new
jobs/employment
opportunities (CI 2.2.1)
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth
activities
 Funds for IFAD
empowerment index in M&E
budget
activities
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between
problems, outcomes and
impacts
 Pathways to PwDs’
 Pathways to IPs'
socioeconomic empowerment
using a twin-track approach
socioeconomic
empowerment
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth and IPs (if
appropriate)
 Targeted support to
improve nutrition (CI 1.1.8)
Outcome level CIs
 CI 1.2.8 MDDW
 CI 1.2.9 KAP
 Staff or partner with
nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition
activities
 Outreach disaggregated
by sex, youth, disability and
IPs (if appropriate)
 Outreach indicator
disaggregated by sex, youth
and IPs
 IPs are > 30% of target
beneficiaries
 Staff with disability
inclusion-specific TORs
 Funds for disability
inclusion-related activities
(including accessibility)
 Staff with IPs-specific
TORs
 Funds for IPs related
activities, including FPIC
$9,233,000
$0
$9,233,000
IFAD
Adaptation
Finance
IFAD
Mitigation
Finance
Total IFAD
Climate-
focused
Finance
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
Persons with Disabilities
Indigenous Peoples
☐ No social inclusion themes
2/2
