Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
4Ps                Public-Private-Producer Partnerships
ADPCG          Agricultural Development Partners Coordinating Group
AfDB             African Development Bank
Agritex          Dept of Agriculture, Technical and Extension Services
APG               Agricultural Production Group
ASAP 2          Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
AWPB            Annual Work Plan and Budget
AVANTI         Advancing Knowledge for Agricultural Impact
BDS              Business Development Services
BMGF            Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
CA                 Conservation Agriculture
CCA               Climate Change Adaptation
CAADP           Comprehensive Africa Development Programme
COSOP          Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
COMESA        Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
CC                 Climate Change
CCMD            Climate Change Management Department
CI                 IFAD’s Core Indicator
CLPE             Country-Level Policy Engagement
CNAs             Core Nutrition Actions
CSA               climate smart agriculture
DDF               District Development Fund
DoI               Department of Irrigation
DoM              Department of Mechanisation
DSF               Debt Sustainability Framework
EMA              Environmental Management Agency
EMP               Environmental Management Plan
GALS             Gender Action Learning System
GDP              Gross Domestic Product
GNI               Gross National Income
GCF               Green Climate Fund
GoZ               Government of Zimbabwe
FM                Financial Management
Ha                 hectare
HDI               Human Development Index
ILO               International Labour Organisation
IFAD             International Fund for Agricultural Development
IMF               International Monetary Fund
IPSAS            Public Sector Accounting Standards
IPRM             Integrated Project Risk Matrix
JPMU             Joint Project Management Unit
KM                Knowledge Management
LE                 Lead Enterprise
M&E              monitoring and evaluation
MCCRA          Multi Country Climate Risk Assessment
METH            Ministry of Environment, Tourism and Hospitality
MFI               Microfinance Institution
MLAWRR        Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement
MYSR            Ministry of Youth, Sports and Recreation
ME                Microenterprise
MSME            Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
MoFED           Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
MTR              Mid-Term Review
MWACSMED   Ministry of Women Affairs, Community, and SME Development
NAO              National Audit Office
NAPF             National Agricultural Policy Framework
NEPAD           New Partnership for Africa’s Development
NDC              National Determined Contribution
NPMU            National Project Management Unit
OFID             OPEC Fund for International Development
PCR               Project Completion Report
PDO              Programme Development Objective
PDR               Programme Design Report
PIM               Project Implementation Manual
PPIU              Provincial Project Implementation Unit
PRIME           Programme in Rural Monitoring & Evaluation
PFMS             Public Financial Management System
PS                 Permanent Secretary
PCU               Project Coordination Unit
PMU              Project Management Unit
PSC               Project Steering Committee
RC                 Resident Coordinator
RDC              Rural District Council
RTGS             Real Time Gross Settlement
SA                 Special Account
SACP             Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
SADC            Southern African Development Community
SDG              Sustainable Development Goal
SECAP           Social Environment and Climate Assessment
SIRP              Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme
SBCC             Social and Behaviour Change Communication
SME              Small and Medium Enterprise
SO                Strategic Objective
SSTC             South-South Triangular Cooperation
TAC               Technical Assessment Committee
TOC               Theory of Change
TOT               Training of Trainers
ZTSP             Transitional Stabilisation Programme
US$               United States Dollar
VC                 value chain
WB                World Bank
WCDI            Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation
WDF              World Food Programme
ZTSP             Zimbabwe Transitional Stabilisation Programme
ZUNDAF        Zimbabwe United Nations Dev. Assistance Framework
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/29
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$14,061,000
$0
$14,061,000
Economic and social context. Before 2000, Zimbabwe was one of the strongest economies in sub-Saharan Africa, with diversified
industrial and agricultural sectors, and an extensive agro-processing industry. However, a series of political and economic crises, over
the past 20 years, have resulted in major economic setbacks. Zimbabwe is classified as a low middle-income country, with its gross
national income per capita at US$ 2,661 in 2018, which is still below the 1990 level. As Zimbabwe’s economy has contracted, social
indicators have deteriorated, with an estimated 8 million people (more than half of the population) expected to be food insecure in
2020[1]. Zimbabwe continues to rank amongst the top 10 most fragile countries in the world. As a result of the impact of COVID-19,
GDP growth is projected to continue to contract by about 10 per cent in 2020, with modest growth starting only in 2021. Seventy-six
per cent of rural households are currently classified as poor, which is high.
Agricultural Sector. Agriculture underpins Zimbabwe’s economic growth, food security and poverty reduction, with approximately 70
per cent of the population depending directly or indirectly on agriculture as a source of livelihood. Challenges, which hamper
Zimbabwe’s agriculture and rural transformation include: (i) climate change (CC) related water scarcity; (ii) limited access to
agricultural finance; (iii) input shortages (including seeds, fertiliser and fuel); (iv) pest and disease outbreaks; (v) low and unstable
producer prices; (vi) unsupportive regulations; (vii) deteriorating transport and market infrastructure; (viii) under-resourced research
and extension services; (ix) poor farming practices; (x) gender and age disparities in land allocation; (xi) land tenure insecurity; and
(xii) declining soil fertility. These contribute to low smallholder crop and livestock productivity.
Smallholder Agricultural Policy. In the past two decades, agricultural policy has been inconsistent and has not supported sustained
rural growth. Since 2018, the Government of Zimbabwe’s (GoZ) strategy has focused on efforts to commercialise smallholder
agriculture. This includes: (i) organising smallholders into groups and associations and eventually converting them into small and
medium enterprises (SMEs); (ii) connecting farmers and their groups into profitable value chains (VCs) and markets; (iii) facilitating
contract farming along profitable VCs; (iv) developing smallholders’ capacity in marketing and business skills; (v) revitalising
infrastructure, including marketing and agro-processing hubs; (vi) promotion of climate smart agriculture; and (vii) strengthening of
income pathways for improved food security and nutrition.
Lessons learned. Key lessons from IFAD’s interventions in Zimbabwe as well as other development projects in the country include:
(a) public sector driven VC projects have proven to be ineffective and costly; (b) building VCs around private lead companies has
provided better results; (c) financial sector continues to face major challenges and is unable to effectively finance VC development, (d)
business development services (BDS) and capacity building, including climate-smart agriculture (CSA) promotion, are required
elements in any smallholder development programme; (e) enhancing the climate change resilience of the smallholders requires a
holistic approach starting with risk identification, tailored adaptation options and resources for investment to adopt proposed
technologies and techniques and (f) successful women and youth inclusion requires special project-resourced and focused strategies.
Project rationale. To transform smallholder agriculture and increase productivity and rural incomes, both the GoZ’s and IFAD’s
respective strategies promote the establishment of smallholders into well-governed and well-functioning cohesive groups and
associations; connecting them to profitable VCs, markets and financial services; developing smallholders’ capacity in climate smart
production, marketing and business skills; and revitalising market access infrastructure. This joint vision forms the core of the rationale
for the Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP).
If the SACP proves to be successful, it can provide a robust framework for designing future IFAD-supported projects in Zimbabwe,
using a programmatic approach.
Goal and development objective. SACP’s goal is: “Increased household incomes and improved nutrition, through sustainable
transformation of the smallholder farming sector”. The Project Development Objective of SACP is: “To increase smallholder
participation in market-oriented and climate-smart value chains”.
Project area. SACP will be implemented in five out of the ten country’s provinces: Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East,
Mashonaland West, Midlands and Matebeleland North. Within these five targeted provinces, SACP will be implemented in 18 out of
the 60 rural districts, covering around 400 wards (out of total of 1,552). The districts in the Midlands province overlap with IFAD-
supported SIRP targeted districts, in order to promote lesson learning between the two interventions.The wards will be further
organised into production clusters to allow for effective aggregation and economies of scale in smallholder-based VC development.
The clusters will be confirmed through viability assessments and community consultations to ensure potential for sustainable and
inclusive value chain development. All SACP activities will thereafter focus on the development of value chains in the target clusters.
Target group. SACP will implement an inclusive targeting strategy to ensure project benefits to a large number of poor smallholder
farmers. The main benefit flow will be derived through the mobilisation of 800 Agricultural Production Groups (APGs) from the
targeted communities. Around 24,000 low-income beneficiary households will be members of these APGs and receive capacity
building and financial services from the project to further develop their livelihoods. An additional 24,000 labourers will benefit from
employment opportunities created by APG investments. The SACP support to micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and
Value Chain Lead Enterprises (VCLEs) is estimated to directly impact around 15,240 additional (non-APG members) beneficiary
households, and 13,000 of the APG members will benefit from the generated supply chain and employment and opportunities, through
VC development by MSMEs and VCLEs. Around 30,000 beneficiaries will benefit from irrigation, water supply, sanitation and access
roads infrastructure, out of which 50 per cent will account for direct beneficiaries (15,000 beneficiary households). The total SACP VC
support is projected to target approximately 78,240 households, corresponding to 391,200 household members[2]. The SACP’s
primary target group in all project activities, including matching grants to APGs, will include a minimum of 50 per cent women and 30
per cent youth (aged 15 to 35 years).
2/29
SACP’s indirect target group is estimated to be 45,000 households, which includes in particular the villagers, who live in direct vicinity
of the supported agribusinesses and rural road construction sites but are not immediately part of the SACP VC production systems.
Components and Activities. SACP’s activities are articulated around four mutually interdependent components: Component 1:
Inclusive VC Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed VC Infrastructure, Component 3: Policy and Institutional Support and
Project Coordination, and Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response.
Component 1:Inclusive Value Chain Development.Although the skills level and agricultural sector potential in Zimbabwe are
among the highest in Africa, the country’s gaps in smallholder-based value chain organization result in low productivity. Challenges
persist in commercial smallholder production systems, and the financial sector is unable to channel urgently required financing for
investments by smallholder farmers and agribusinesses. Component 1 of SACP, which is the project’s key investment component, is
designed to address these challenges through the following sequence of key activities: (i) Call for VC Lead Enterprise Expressions of
Interest; (ii) Identification of SACP Production Clusters within the target districts; (iii) Mobilization of Agricultural Producer Groups and
Agribusinesses for VC upgrading; (iv) Technical services to APGs and Agribusinesses for upgraded production capacity; (v) Business
planning and competitive selection of matching grant recipients; and (vi) APG and Agribusiness investments to upgrade the VCs.
Component 1 activities are organized under three inter-linked sub-components: 1.1: Expressions of Interest, Cluster Identification and
VC Mobilization, 1.2: Technical Services for AGPs and Agribusinesses, and 1.3: Financing for Inclusive Value Chain Investments.
Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization. This sub-component’s expected results are: (i) eight (8) smallholder
production clusters identified, (ii) 800 farmer groups mobilized and organized, and (iii) 200 microenterprises and 40 VC lead
enterprises identified and mobilized.
Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Microenterprises. The projected results of this sub-component are: (i) 800
APGs received BDS and are able to complete bankable climate smart business plans, (ii) 200 Agribusinesses received BDS and are
able to complete bankable business plans, which comply with Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) standards, and (iii) 800
APGs implement CSA practices. The technical services will target APGs and Agribusinesses identified through Subcomponent 1.1. A
balanced gender inclusion will be ensured in the targeting of services, and special attention will be given to the rural youth.
Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investments. SACP will co-finance, through a competitive selection process, privately
owned and managed investments by smallholders and agribusinesses for VC upgrading. Matching grants (MG) will be made available
in three categories, whereby the expected results include: (i) US$16 million of competitive co-investments with 800 APGs; (ii)
US$4.4 million of competitive co-investments with 200 rural microenterprises; and (iii) US$2.5 million of competitive co-investments
with 40 VCLEs. In addition, a US$-denominated Line of Credit worth US$2.5 million will be established at a selected financial
institution, to initiate access to commercial bank finance by those SACP’s partner VC Lead Enterprises that operate in the export
sector and have adequate hard currency revenues for loan repayment.
Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure. This component’s objective is to improve irrigation water supply and
management, domestic water supply, and local level feeder roads, to facilitate the commercialisation of smallholder agriculture. The
implementation of activities under this component will encourage private sector investments in SACP areas, promote the production
and marketing of large quantities of quality produce and reduce the time and cost of transport to the markets. The component will
consist of two sub-components: Participatory ward level infrastructure investment planning (Sub-component 2.1), and Climate proofed
infrastructure investments (Sub-component 2.2).
Component 2 will invest in public and semi-public infrastructure. VC infrastructure to be financed by the private sector will be
supported under Component 1. The expected results of this component include: (i) prioritised ward level community infrastructure
investments identified through participatory stakeholder consultations; (ii) approximately 1,780 ha equipped with improved irrigation
systems; (iii) 150 km of roads rehabilitated and climate proofed; and (iv) 100 wards with improved water supply and sanitation
facilities.
Component 3: Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. This component is divided into two sub-components:
3.1. Policy and Institutional Support and 3.2. Project Coordination.
Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support. The purpose of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to support the efforts to create a
conducive policy and institutional environment for private sector-led smallholder agriculture transformation in Zimbabwe. Specialists
will be recruited to develop relevant knowledge products, policy proposals as well as investment opportunity papers and briefs on
new, promising crops and commodities. Based on the accumulated knowledge and information, policy dialogue and other discussion
forums and events will be organised, aiming particularly at the development of action-oriented plans to support the diversification and
commercialisation of smallholder agriculture.
Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination. The Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR) will
be the Lead Agency for the implementation of SACP, with the Permanent Secretary (PS) of this Ministry as the responsible officer.
MLAWRR will establish a Joint Management Unit (JMU), which will include the functions of both the Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
of the SIRP project and the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) of SACP. A joint Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be
constituted for SIRP and SACP, chaired by the PS of MLAWRR.
In order to manage the field operations, SACP will establish four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU). At the district level,
implementation will be carried out through the Department of Agriculture, Technical and Extension Services’ (Agritex) extension
network, which has implementation teams in all the 16 districts covered by SACP. The district level field operations will be supported
by SACP-resourced staff from other public institutions and private sector service providers.
3/29
Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response. Given the recurrent weather extremes in Zimbabwe, in particular droughts, this
component has been included to enable IFAD to respond urgently in its support to smallholder farmers, who are the most impacted.
Specifically, this component, which has not been costed at design, is expected to facilitate and expedite the implementation of level-2
project restructuring, in the event of an emergency or disaster.
Social, Environment and Climate Assessment. The environmental and social categorisation of SACP is B, as activities will be in
non-sensitive areas and mainly consist of small-scale infrastructure related investment. The potential negative impacts are mostly
reversible and can be managed with site specific plans that will be elaborated. The climate risk classification for SACP is high with the
main climate change risks identified as droughts, floods and increasing temperatures. The target beneficiaries have low adaptive
capacity and geographic area includes agro-climatic zones where periodic crop failures occur due to mid-seasons dry spells and
delayed commencement of rain. A detailed climate change vulnerability analysis has articulated adaptation options that will build the
resilience of the target beneficiaries.
Project costs and financing. SACP’s total costs for the planned six-year project period (2021–2026) are budgeted at approximately
US$67.4 million. An IFAD loan will finance US$35.69 million or 52.9 per cent of total project costs. From the IFAD financing,
US$14.061 million (39 per cent) will be dedicated to climate financing. The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) will
finance US$15 million of Component 2 (Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure). The smallholders (APGs’ members) will finance
US$4.2 million or six per cent of the total project costs. The agribusiness sector will finance US$7.2 million or 11 per cent of the total
project costs. Co-financing from the beneficiaries and the private sector will be under the Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive
VC Investment. The Government will finance US$4.6 million in the form of shared costs for Component 2 (Climate Proofed Value
Chain Infrastructure) and Component 3 (Institutional Support and Project Coordination), as well as taxes and duties, comprising seven
(7) per cent of the total project costs.
Financial and economic analysis. Four illustrative APG farm models have been developed to examine the financial viability of the
MG investments. All farm system types examined were found financially viable. Incremental returns to incremental labour provide a
sound incentive for household production as well as an argument against outmigration of labour. The overall SACP project economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) is 25 per cent. The estimated economic net present value (ENPV) at a 10 per cent discount rate is
US$56.5 million. The benefit-to-cost ratio (BCR) of 2.4 implies a return of US$2.40 for every dollar invested. These results indicate
that SACP is a sound investment yielding a positive rate of return as the EIRR greater than the hurdle rate (10 per cent) and the
ENPV is greater than zero. An examination of the response of the project to drought reveals it remains viable in the face of multiple
short and medium drought sequences (EIRRs of 16.9 and 12.0 percent respectively). The project becomes unviable with a severe and
persisting longer-term drought (EIRR of 6.3 percent), but it is important to recall that historical trends and projections in do not foresee
such a long-term weather shock for Zimbabwe.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans. A draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) has been prepared. In addition, a
draft Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and a draft procurement plan (PP) have been prepared for the first 18 months of project
implementation, as part of the SACP design process. These documents aim to ensure that the project implementation starts, without
unnecessary delays during the first year of the project. The JMU with SIRP is expected to speed up the project start-up. The
comprehensive guidelines and detailed procedures agreed for the first call for APGs and agri-enterprises to participate in SACP
activities also aim at a fast and smooth start of the SACP implementation, immediately after project effectiveness.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
Economic and Social Context. Zimbabwe covers a land area of 390,757 square kilometres and its population was estimated at
14.64 million in 2019, which is projected to grow to over 30 million by 2050. From the country’s 39.6 million hectares (ha) of land,
about 42 per cent is utilised for agriculture. Approximately 365,000 ha of land are suitable for irrigated agriculture, but less than
half of this is currently equipped with irrigation facilities. Forests comprise 38 per cent of land and include both indigenous forests
and plantations.[3]
Before 2000, Zimbabwe was one of the strongest economies in sub-Saharan Africa, with diversified industrial and agricultural
sectors, and an extensive agro-processing industry. However, a series of political and economic crises, over the past 20 years,
have caused major economic setbacks. On the macroeconomic front, these setbacks include hyperinflation in 2009, 2018 and
2019; banking crises in 2015 and in 2019/20; a lack of independent monetary and exchange rate policies; continued limited
access to international capital; at least three currency reforms; as well as escalation of public debt and liabilities.
Zimbabwe is classified as a low middle-income country (LMIC). Its gross national income (GNI) per capita declined from
US$2,693 (1990) to US$ 1,698 (in 2010), before increasing to US$2,661 in 2018, which is still below the 1990 level. This
notwithstanding, its 2018 Human Development Index (HDI) was 0.563, ranking the country at a low 150th place out of 189
countries.[4] Extreme household poverty increased from 16.2 per cent in 2011 to 21.9 per cent in 2017.[5] About 76 per cent of
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
rural households and 38.2 per cent of urban households are poor. At the same time, Zimbabwe continues to be highly vulnerable
to shocks, including droughts as well as fluctuations in the global economy.[6]
4/29
Zimbabwe continues to rank amongst the top 10 most fragile countries in the world, despite a positive rate of change in its 2019
Fragile States Index (99.5) compared to 2018 (102.3). Zimbabwe is locked in a fragility trap driven by multiple factors: (i)
macroeconomic stress created by huge debt burden, over-reliance on minerals as well as agriculture and currency volatility; (ii)
low state capacity including gaps in the rule of law, accountability and governance structures; and (iii) climate stress in the form of
recurring droughts, floods and outbreak of pests/disease leading to a negative food balance sheet; and (iv) the on-going severe
impact of COVID-19, including a large decline in remittances.
In 2019, Zimbabwe’ ranked 140th among 190 countries in the ‘Ease of doing business’ index.[7] Key barriers to business include
macroeconomic risks, erratic electricity supply, high start-up costs, border inefficiencies, complex property registering, and the
inconsistent tax regime. The financial sector has become significantly weaker over the past 15 years. The commercial banks’
portfolios, denominated mostly in local dollars, have lost their value as a result of currency devaluation and the consequent
hyperinflation, and the extensive use of quasi-currency instruments has exacerbated financial sector fragility. These crosscutting
elements of fragility in the national economy are likely to prolong the country’s recovery process.
Following the 2018 general elections, Zimbabwe introduced an open-door policy to attract investment. To achieve
macroeconomic stability and promote private capital inflows, the country is implementing structural reforms, through its
Transitional Stabilisation Programme (ZTSP) 2018-2020. The ZTSP is supported by an International Monetary Fund (IMF) Staff-
Monitored Programme, which is now off-track[8], as policy implementation and constitutional reforms have been slow.
Prior to the unanticipated shock of COVID-19 and its impact on the global economy, African economies and the Zimbabwean
economy, the Government of Zimbabwe (GoZ) and most international institutions, including the World Bank, were relatively
optimistic about the country’s development prospects for the next 10 years. While GDP was expected to contract by around 10
per cent in 2020, partly because of the drought, a positive growth rate of 1.2 per cent was projected for 2021, followed by
average annual growth of 5.3 per cent up to 2024. However, due to COVID-19, much more negative trends are now expected to
materialise. This includes a large decline in remittances which stands at approximately US$ 1 billion annually and a significant
decline in tourism earnings. GDP is expected to continue to contract by about 10 per cent in 2020, but with modest projected
rebound in 2021.
Hyperinflation is expected to continue in 2020 at a projected 800 per cent. While the overall macroeconomic situation remains
highly uncertain at this stage, the March 2020 Article IV IMF review concludes that for the coming years, “COVID-19 will
adversely impact the economic outlook for Zimbabwe and require additional health-related spending and international support.
COVID-19 will make it even harder to balance the policies needed to restore macroeconomic stability with those address urgent
social needs”.[9] As per the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Inform COVID-19 risk
index, Zimbabwe risk classification is rated as high (5.3 points out of 10) and ranks 45th out of 191 countries.[10]
One key obstacle hindering economic recovery is the large volume of loans arrears with key international partners, including the
World Bank, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the European Investment Bank (EIB)[11]. The successful settlement of
these arrears would require the implementation of a package of major economic and political reforms, which may take time and
would thus delay the start-up of fresh external lending. It is important to note that in terms of Zimbabwe’s arrears with IFAD, in
2015 IFAD's Executive Board approved a five-year Debt Rescheduling Plan for SDR17.69 million, and Zimbabwe completed the
last payment in November 2020.
Agricultural Policy and Transformation. Agriculture underpins Zimbabwe’s economic growth, food security and poverty
reduction, with approximately 70 per cent of population depending directly or indirectly on agriculture as a source of livelihood.
Zimbabwe has 1.3 million smallholder farmers and about 18,000 medium- to large-scale farmers.[12] Following land redistribution,
smallholders occupy 70 per cent of agricultural land[13] with nearly 70 per cent deriving livelihood from less than 2 hectares. In
2019, agriculture’s contribution to GDP was 12.1 per cent. This contribution, however, has tended to vary significantly. Having
increased by 8.1 per cent in 2018, agricultural GDP declined by 16.3 per cent in 2019[14], partly as a result of one of the worst
droughts in Zimbabwe’s history.
Challenges, which hamper Zimbabwe’s agriculture transformation include: (i) climate change (CC) related water scarcity; (ii)
limited access to agricultural finance due to the weakly functioning financial sector and unstable local currency market; (iii) input
shortages (including seeds, fertiliser and fuel); (iv) pest and disease outbreaks; (v) low and unstable producer prices; (vi)
unsupportive regulations; (vii) deteriorating transport and market infrastructure, particularly community roads network and cooling
and storage facilities; (viii) under-resourced research and extension services; (ix) poor farming practices; (x) gender and age
disparities in land allocation; (xi) land tenure insecurity; and (xii) declining soil fertility. These contribute to low smallholder crop
and livestock productivity. Maize yields declined from 1.2 metric tons (MT)/ha in 1990-1995 to very low 0.749 MT/ha in 2010-
2016.[15] Zimbabwe has become a net importer of foods, which contributes substantially to the country’s high trade deficit.
12.
Opportunities to improve smallholder agriculture include: (i) supporting adoption of improved technologies/practices for climate-
resilient production; (ii) revitalising infrastructure to lower production costs; (iii) improving food availability by promoting adoption
of improved post-harvest management technologies/practices; (iv) organising and linking farmers to lucrative value chains; (v)
creating rural employment through small to medium-scale agro-processing and value-addition; (vi) strengthening rural private
sector’s capacity to supply extension and marketing services; and (vii) mainstreaming nutrition into rural food systems.
13.
The Government strategy to improve agriculture development and its sustainable commercialization is articulated in its Vision
2030 document (2019) and further elaborated in the National Agriculture Policy Framework 2018-2030 (NAPF). At its core, the
NAPF, particularly Pillar V, presents the strategy to commercialise smallholder agriculture. This includes: (i) organising
smallholders into groups and associations and eventually converting them into small and medium enterprises (SMEs); (ii)
connecting farmers and their groups into profitable VCs and markets; (iii) facilitating contract farming along profitable VCs;
(iv) developing smallholders’ capacity in marketing and business skills; (v) revitalising infrastructure, including marketing and
agro-processing hubs; (vi) promotion of climate smart agriculture; and (vii) strengthening of income pathways for improved food
security and nutrition. Multi-stakeholder platforms, including representatives from key donors, are currently working on plans to
effectively operationalise the above-cited commercialisation strategies, and how to move to their wider implementation, once the
overall macroeconomic situation starts to improve.
5/29
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
Gender. While Zimbabwe has, in recent years, progressed in terms of gender equality, it still lags behind particularly in terms of
women’s economic empowerment and financial inclusion. In 2018, Zimbabwe scored 0.525 on the Gender Inequality Index (GII)
and was ranked 126 out of 162 countries[16]. Approximately 80 per cent of women in Zimbabwe live in communal areas, where
they constitute 61 per cent of the subsistence farmers and provide 70 per cent of the labour.[17] Female-headed households are
mostly categorized as poor and consist of 35 per cent of households. Women face a number of constraints along the agricultural
value chains, including: (i) in production, low paid employment, limited assets and security of tenure resulting from discriminatory
customary laws, and large share of women in agricultural labour; (ii) in marketing, lack of facilities, limited agricultural information
and unfair prices; (iii) unsafe transportation, (iv) limited participation in decision making processes both at household and
community level; and (v) increased vulnerability to climate change impacts due to underlying power relations, structures and
gender inequalities. Rural women, who are already in a disadvantageous position, will also have a lower climate change (CC)
adaptive capacity. SACP will tackle the above gender-based constraints using Gender Action Learning System (GALS)
approach, as an entry point, to achieve gender transformation.
Youth. Zimbabwe is experiencing a youth bulge with young women and men, aged 15 to 34 years, constituting 35.7 per cent of
the population. This potential demographic dividend is yet to be fully harnessed – over 80 per cent of the productive youth have
not been able to access permanent paid work[18]. Some of the factors inhibiting youth employment include lack of appropriate
skills such as life-skills, vocational skills, leadership skills, entrepreneurial skills or management skills; and lack of productive
resources including land or capital to start own ventures. Youth unemployment is higher among rural youth with young rural
women least likely to secure employment, as shown by an employment to population ratio of 19.7 per cent for rural females
compared to 32 per cent for rural males, 37.5 per cent for urban females and 54.7 percent for urban males[19]. Since many young
women and men in Zimbabwe prefer jobs outside agriculture that bring quicker returns, there are high levels of youth migration to
urban areas or neighbouring South Africa and Botswana. This is a major challenge for youth inclusion, raising the need for
innovative strategies to interest the youth in agriculture and to unlock rural economies to create decent and attractive employment
for young rural men and women in on-farm and off-farm activities. Systematic training and enhancing productivity and efficiency
in agricultural value chains and related off-farm activities could offer real opportunities for rural youth.
Nutrition. Zimbabwe ranks 109th out of the 117 qualifying countries in the 2019 Global Hunger Index with a score of 34.4, which
indicates that the country “suffers from a level of hunger that is serious”[20]. Malnutrition remains a pervasive challenge, with 1 in
3 children, who are either stunted or suffering from chronic malnutrition.[21] Children living in rural areas are more likely to be
stunted and underweight than those in urban areas due to a combination of factors, which include reduced food availability due to
poor agricultural performance, lower access to nutritious food due to high levels of poverty and poor food material utilization due
to lack of knowledge on how to use the available food. Malnutrition is also a challenge among women of child-bearing age, of
whom 28.8 per cent are anaemic.[22]
The country is experiencing high levels of food insecurity, and this is more pronounced in rural areas where, in 2018, only 38 per
cent of rural households had an acceptable food consumption score.[23]The Zimbabwe National Nutrition Strategy (2014-2018)
identifies inadequate nutrition knowledge and practices, weak value chains for nutrient dense foods and poor water and
sanitation facilities as contributing to high malnutrition in the country. Hence in Zimbabwe, interventions that increase household
income, through development of value chains, accompanied by nutrition education and women empowerment, could have a high
impact on nutrition.
Environment. Zimbabwe faces several environmental challenges, including biodiversity loss, pollution of land and water
resources, land degradation, poor watershed management, and wildfires, all of which adversely affect the natural resource
base[24]. Zimbabwe is water stressed with some of the population relying on seasonal water sources particularly in the semi-arid
and arid regions. Deforestation is a cause of concern due to clearing for agriculture, fuelwood and pole collection and
infrastructural development. Approximately 0.6% of the country’s indigenous forests are annually lost to agricultural expansion
and other household uses such as energy supply, construction and food production. Most soils in the country are already acidic
and highly leached (Acrisols), requiring proper soil fertility management to maintain and enhance production[25].
Environmental challenges linked to agriculture include erosion along streams and riverbanks and siltation of water bodies,
particularly in communal areas. Overstocking of livestock and exceeding of the carrying capacity in communal areas leads to land
degradation from erosion of bare soils. Compacting of soils results in reduced water penetration, increased run-off and gully
formation. In order to address the environmental and natural resources challenges, Zimbabwe has enacted laws and articulated
policies that promote integrated land use planning to achieve sustainable land use. The country also adopted integrated water
management principles since the 1990s.
20.
Climate Change (CC). Rainfall variability is a key climate parameter in Zimbabwe with associated risks of droughts and
intermittent floods negatively impacting livelihoods and economic development. The vulnerability of the agricultural sector is
accentuated by the reliance on rain-fed farming of at least 80 per cent of the rural populations. CC adaptation in the agriculture
sector is one of the priorities elaborated in Zimbabwe’s Nationally Determined Contributions, which also recognise the mitigation
21.
22.
23.
24.
co-benefits from climate smart agriculture and sustainable agro-forestry management practices.
6/29
Most climate models foresee a reduction in precipitation, change in rainfall distribution, with a change in the timing of the onset of
the rainy season[26]. Droughts and inadequate management of water resources could cause a decline in Zimbabwe’s GDP of
over 2 per cent[27]. The yield of maize is estimated to be 7.5 per cent lower compared to a future with no climate change[28].
Zimbabwe has experienced several droughts related to the El-Nino phenomenon in the recent past (2015/6, 2018/9) and was
impacted by Cyclone Idai. The recent droughts led to decreased agricultural output and left 2.8 million people food insecure in
the country[29]. Cyclone Idai resulted in US$ 1 billion worth of infrastructural damage and displaced 60,000 people.  The
increased incidences of droughts, as a result of CC, have led to changes in wetland conditions and habitat as well as loss of
species.
Indigenous peoples (IPs). The Tshwa San peoples live nomadically, in the Matebeleland region. There are around 2,500 San
people in Zimbabwe, who live in the area of Tsholotsho, close to the border with Botswana. The Doma (1,050 people) reside in
Gururve and Mbire districts, Mashonaland Central and Karoi district in Mashonaland West province. These are the poorest
groups in Zimbabwe. There is no specific policy on IPs in Zimbabwe, since the Government considers all Zimbabweans to be
indigenous. SACP will proactively engage with representatives of these groups to ensure free prior and informed consent (FPIC).
People Living with Disabilities (PWD) and other marginalised groups. The prevalence of disability in Zimbabwe is estimated
to be 7 per cent, representing approximately 914,000 persons[30]. The male population living with disability is estimated to be 56
per cent of the total PWD population, while females make up 44 per cent. PWD have challenges in accessing employment,
education, health care and they are also vulnerable to food insecurity and accessing water and sanitation facilities.
The prevalence of poverty among the PWD is 74.1 per cent compared to 69.5 per cent for the non-disabled. Other marginalised
groups include female headed households, child headed households, households headed by the aged, uneducated, chronically ill
as well as households belonging to the apostolic religious sect. PWD and marginalised groups will benefit through SACP,
including by: (i) being integrated in the agricultural production groups (APGs); (ii) receiving nutrition sensitive education and (iii)
increased employment opportunities that are likely to result from SACP interventions. This will complement the social protection
interventions by WFP, UNICEF and other humanitarian development partners.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
IFAD’s strategy in Zimbabwe, confirmed during the Country Strategic Opportunities Programme (COSOP) in-country
consultations, supports the implementation of the National Agriculture Policy Framework (NAPF) 2018-2030.[31] With its long-
term support to Zimbabwe’s agriculture, IFAD is a trusted development partner for the Government. It is also considered to be a
neutral broker between government and other stakeholders on agriculture and rural development policies. Moreover, IFAD has a
comparative advantage in supporting Zimbabwe’s agriculture sector, which stems from its extensive experience and support to: a)
commercialisation of smallholder agriculture; b) increasing production and productivity; c) agro-processing and facilitating
farmers’ access to markets; and d) developing sustainably inclusive value-chains, while contributing to improved nutrition.
In order to transform smallholder agriculture and increase productivity and rural incomes, the Government of Zimbabwe’s strategy
relies on organising smallholders into well-governed and well-functioning cohesive groups and associations; connecting them to
profitable value chains, markets and financial services; developing smallholders’ capacity in climate smart production and in
marketing and business skills; and revitalising market access infrastructure. The Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural
Resettlement (MLAWRR) confirmed the Government’s commitment to transform smallholder agriculture by using the private
sector-led value chain approach as a critical instrument in this commercialisation process. At the same time, the private
agribusiness sector confirmed its capacity, interest and commitment to implement a value chain-based economic development
project with the planned SACP support (see survey results in the PIM). The Government deems the SACP to be a key project for
the agriculture sector, which is expected to contribute to the implementation of the upcoming Zimbabwe National Develop Plan
2021-2025, since it will highlight the need for increased transformation and liberalisation of Zimbabwe’s economy.
As the afore-mentioned strategies/approaches are also at the core of IFAD’s policies for smallholder agriculture transformation,
the new SACP intervention will be based on this overall approach of using private sector-led VCs as crucial instruments for
climate-smart and commercially viable smallholder development.
SACP is fully in line with the COSOP’s overall transformation target and its objectives of reducing poverty and improving incomes
along the VCs, through better market access and climate-smart and more effective production systems. The strong capacity
building focus and effective targeting of SACP activities will ensure that IFAD’s corporate mainstreaming priorities in CC, gender,
youth and nutrition issues are appropriately built into the project design. While the income pathway itself may not lead to
improved social inclusion outcomes, SACP will incorporate appropriate and context specific set of activities to ensure gender
transformation and improved nutrition are achieved. The nutrition-related activities are linked to the COSOP’s strategic objective,
namely “Enhanced market access to nutritious foods”. Furthermore, SACP is fully in line with the national priorities on food
security and nutrition as defined in the National Food and Nutrition Security Policy and Zimbabwe National Nutrition Strategy.
The SACP is an initial intervention within the framework of a longer-term programming approach: If the SACP strategies and
implementation approaches prove successful, they can provide an appropriate framework for the interventions when designing
future IFAD-supported operations in Zimbabwe. Furthermore, key international development partners share the same strategic
views on smallholder agricultural transformation, which is anchored on climate resilience. The major development partners (e.g.,
World Bank and AfDB) are, however, currently not investing in Zimbabwe, due to arrears. In such a situation, it is likely that the
experiences and results from SACP implementation will influence the project designs of the larger international financiers, when
their lending to Zimbabwe resumes.
B. Lessons learned
30.
7/29
The SACP design process is informed by lessons learned and best practices from: (a) previous IFAD experiences in Zimbabwe;
(b) results from IFAD projects in other countries of the region; and (c) similar projects financed by the Government or other
develop partners in the country. Particularly relevant have been the experiences from the implementation of the IFAD-supported
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP), the DFID-funded Livelihoods and Food Security Programme and the
USAID-funded Enhancing Nutrition, Stepping up Resilience and Enterprise Programme. In the context of the fluctuating
economic environment of Zimbabwe, the key lessons from past and ongoing operations include:
In recent years, trials for agriculture productivity improvement through public sector driven interventions have been costly and
had limited successes, including the large-scale Command Agriculture input subsidy mechanism.[32] For this reason, a more
private sector-based, commercially oriented has been adopted for SACP.
Well-managed private firm-led and smallholder production-based VCs, such as in smallholder tobacco[33] in the past ten
years, have shown consistently good results and impact, and their key lessons, such as a system of provision of inputs,
extension and aggregation services by the lead company, have been incorporated, as applicable, to in the design of SACP.
Earlier Zimbabwe experience shows that a regional development strategy based on Growth Points can only be successful if
they are linked to the economic opportunities and farming activities around them instead of pure infrastructure focus. Attention
needs to be given to conditions for investment including: (i) labour skills, (ii) natural comparative advantage; (iii) existence of
the provision of other non-agriculture related services such as electricity; (iv) cost and access to capital; and (v) adequate tax
regime that stimulates investment.
The decapitalised and challenging status of the financial sector reduces the potential of using commercial debt instruments in
VC development. COVID-19 and the related hyperinflation have further delayed the recovery of the financial sector. At the
same time, success has been recorded in Zimbabwe on the use of competitive grants for companies and other VC
participants, such as the SNV Rural Agriculture Revitalisation Programme’s “Matched Grant Facility”[34], Zimbabwe
Agriculture Growth Programme “Matching Grant Funds for Investment” supported by the European Union[35], and the ILO-
supported “Green Enterprise Challenge Fund”, implemented with the Ministry of Women Affairs, Community, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development.[36] In light of these successes, a matching grant facility is selected as the main financing
instrument to support the establishment and growth of smallholder and micro-enterprise operations.
The key experiences of Matching Grant Facility implementation in Zimbabwe and neighbour countries include: (i) technical
assistance by an experienced and independent organization is required for business planning and for monitoring of
implementation of grant proceeds, and (ii) financial flows and transactions are best to be implemented through a partnership
with a trusted financial institution. For the Ministry of Land, Agriculture, Water and Rural Settlements implementation of
matching grants, these lessons are key to ensure effectiveness and avoid elite capture.
Climate change and disaster risk management mechanisms need to be included in the value chain development strategies.
Inclusion of CSA technologies, such as efficient water management systems, drought resistant crop varieties and
intercropping, should be a required element in practically all VC support operations as means and strategy to mitigate and
adapt to climate risk.
Local participatory planning processes, fully involving women and youth in problem diagnosis, prioritisation of solutions,
identification and planning of beneficiary is important to ensure an increased ownership of projects and sustainable results as
well as youth economic empowerment, particularly if focus is on quick and high returns.[37] In this regard, SACP devotes
attention and adequate resources in ensuring a strong involvement by women as well as youth.
SIRP has experienced challenges in effective youth inclusion due to: (i) migration of business-minded youth to cities and
outside Zimbabwe, particularly to South Africa, (ii) low access by youth to agricultural land and (iii) overall low interest by youth
to participate in primary agriculture production, while the interest is higher in post-harvest operations and agriculture-related
trade. By adopting a commercialisation approach involving also agro-trade and post-harvest activities, it is expected that SACP
will encourage interest from young women and men.
As clearly indicated through SIRP’s ongoing implementation, capacity building and Business Development Service (BDS)
operations, as well as infrastructure support activities, need to be: (a) fully resourced by the project to avoid dependence on
unreliable and often absent contributions by local governments and (b) designed, largely based on performance-based service
contracts.
As also shown with SIRP, efficient implementation of the start-up phase requires substantial technical support from IFAD and
recruited technical advisers/specialists, particularly in key areas such as technical and financial planning, M&E set up and
procurement.
The experience from SIRP has shown the need to build in a system of frequent withdrawal applications and payment flexibility
(e.g., direct payments with funding agencies and careful planning in the use of different currencies) to address fragility-induced
monetary policy instability, ensuring at the same time financial reporting and audit compliance.
Systematic initial support in procurement need to be incorporated in the supervision and implementation support action plan.
Specific attention will also be needed to ensure higher response rates for competitive procurement processes. Similarly to
prior experience with SIRP, intense procurement training will be required, at least during the first 6 months of start-up, given
that the Zimbabwe Government has limited experience of procurement operations with international loan funds. A thorough
monitoring of contract execution and capacity building in managing contracts also needs to be reinforced.
The SIRP experience shows that an efficient mainstreaming of nutrition requires a clear baseline, sufficient budget allocations
as well as a clearly defined impact pathway with SMART indicators and clear responsibilities during implementation.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
8/29
31.
The project goal of the proposed SACP is: “Increased household incomes and improved nutrition, through sustainable
transformation of the smallholder farming sector”.
32.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of SACP is: “to increase equitable smallholder participation in market-oriented and
climate-smart value chains”.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
Geographic area of intervention. The project will be implemented in five out of the country’s ten provinces namely:
Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Midlands and Matebeleland North. The selection of provinces is
based on: (i) the highest incidence and prevalence of poverty and food and nutrition insecurity, (ii) accessibility to food trading
corridors, and (iv) existing production clusters, with the highest potential for market potential for smallholder produce aggregation.
The Midlands province provides an overlap between SACP and SIRP targeted areas, in order to provide lesson learning and
synergies between the two projects, as well as an opportunity to fast track SACP implementation at early stage. SACP will adopt
a phased implementation approach, starting with value chains already identified in the SIRP-covered districts.
Food corridors and districts. Within the five provinces, SACP will target key urban-rural agricultural production and food trading
corridors[38], by further increasing the role of smallholder farmers and the private sector. In doing so, this allows for the project’s
geographical coverage to be narrowed down to 18 out of the 60 rural districts[39], covering about 400 rural wards, which also
meet the above-mentioned selection criteria.
Value Chain Clusters. Targeted wards under each district will be organised into production clusters to allow for effective
aggregation and economies of scale in VC development (see PIM at Annex 8 for details of the approach). The clusters combine
wards across district boundaries, based on existing smallholder commodity production areas. The mechanism for the
identification and selection of the SACP-supported clusters is based on Expressions of Interest (EoI) from Value Chain Lead
Enterprises (VCLEs). Based on the EoIs, target areas and tentative implementation clusters are identified. The clusters are
confirmed through viability assessments and community consultations to ensure potential for sustainable and inclusive value
chain development. All SACP activities will thereafter focus on the development of value chains in the target clusters.
During the project design, the agricultural potential of SACP target areas was assessed through field level consultations. Eight
clusters were identified for possible SACP VC support at the initial phase of project implementation[40]. The criteria for cluster pre-
identification included: (a) interest of agribusinesses for private sector-led value chain development; (b) potential number of
farmers involved in the value chains, (c) presence of women or youth led value chains and nutrition sensitive value chains, and
(d) potential for climate smart agriculture.
Target groups.In Zimbabwe, rural households are categorised into four groups (A, B1, B2 and C[41]) according to their access to
land, other productive assets and labour. In accordance with IFAD’s Targeting Policy, SACP will focus on the rural poor who,
while being poor and vulnerable, also have the potential to take advantage of improved access to assets and opportunities for
agricultural production and income generating projects. Specifically, SACP’s target group focus is on Category B1 and Category
B2 farmers, who constitute almost 80 per cent of supported households.[42] Category A farmers (the poorest households),
including PWD, women, child and elderly headed households, will be supported to join the APGs and will have the opportunity to
access employment at APG and rural enterprise operations. At least 50 percent of the SACP target group will be women, and at
least 30 percent youth.
38.
The total direct target group for SACP consists of 78,240 beneficiaries[43]of whom: 
24,000 low-income beneficiaries will be members of 800 Agricultural Production Groups (APGs). They will benefit from
intensive capacity building and financial services from SACP, to develop their livelihoods.
24,000 labourers will benefit from seasonal and full-time employment from APG operations.
15,000 non-APG members beneficiaries, and 15,000 of the APG member beneficiaries will have improved access to water
and road networks in the target areas, through the infrastructure development.
15,240 non-APG members beneficiaries, and 13,000 of the APG members[44], will benefit from the generated supply chain and
employment opportunities.
39.
40.
SACP’s indirect target group is estimated to be 45,000 households, which includes in particular the villagers who live in direct
vicinity of the supported agribusinesses and rural road construction sites but are not immediately part of the SACP value chain
production systems. They will benefit from improved road access to district centres, marketplaces, health, and education, as well
as long term indirect benefits of economic development in the targeted villages including indirect job creation in services and
trade sector.
Targeting Strategy. SACP will implement an inclusive targeting strategy to ensure that SACP benefits a large number of poor
smallholder farmers. Targeting measures will include geographic targeting, direct targeting, community targeting and self-
targeting.  The geographical targeting ensures that poverty prevalence stands at minimum 75 per cent among target groups,
while social targeting mechanisms will ensure adoption of mainstreaming strategies and effective smallholder development. Self-
targeting measures will ensure that project interventions respond to the priorities of the APGs, SMEs, and VCLEs. Community
targeting will be applied for Component 2 for public infrastructure development, while self-targeting will be used for irrigation
schemes.
41.
The risk of elite capturewill be mitigated through a triangulation pertaining to beneficiary targeting, identification and selection
42.
43.
44.
process. The Government’s beneficiary classification system will be used to guide targeting, while identification through local
independent short-term Community Mobilisation Specialist, in consultation with local communities, organized farmer groups and
local authorities, will rebuild confidence in state systems. Other measures to increase transparency and reduce elite capture will
include: (i) increased volume of independent, NGO-based BDS support; (ii) public dissemination events for periodic batches of
successful matching grant proposals; (iii) piloting a digital business plan database for matching grant projects; (iv) the selection
of the evaluation panels to be subject to IFAD’s No Objection and rotation of some of the evaluation panel members; (v)
systematic training provided to the evaluation panels and key project staff on integrity, eligibility and conflict of interest and
corruption and bribery related topics; (vi) enhancing beneficiary access to project information; (vii) adoption of an SACP anti-
corruption plan; and  (viii) a functional SACP grievance redress mechanism.
9/29
Gender targeting. SACP recognizes that women are key to agricultural transformation, but various obstacles and economic
constraints limit their contribution to their households and communities. A gender analysis using the Women’s Empowerment in
Agriculture Index (WEAI) survey will be conducted and the results used to inform strategies for women’s empowerment. Pro-
women value chains will therefore be prioritised as part of the eligibility criteria for matching grant application. Empowering
measures will include: various trainings in business development services, climate smart agriculture (CSA) and Gender Action
Learning System (GALS), among others.
Direct targeting will ensure that the 50 per cent quota (39,120 women) for women participation is met. SACP interventions on
gender equality and women’s empowerment will focus on (i) promoting economic empowerment to enable women to have equal
opportunities to participate in and benefit from profitable activities; (ii) enabling women and men to have equal voice and
influence in rural SACP-related institutions and arrangements; (iii) achieving a more equitable balance in workload and a sharing
of economic and social benefits between women and men through GALs, and (iv) monitoring change in norms and values
around gender equality, culture, sensitivity and contextual analysis. Dedicated PIU staff will be responsible for implementation
and monitoring using gender sensitive indicators and ensuring adequate resource allocation for the achievement of women and
men’s empowerment.
Youth targeting. Youth have limited productive resources, skills, capital and suffer from high unemployment. SACP shall involve
the youth in community-level participatory value-chain development consultations and target value-chain that ensure that
appropriate opportunities are availed to young men and women of all the age groups. SACP will target the youth directly by
identifying skilled and unskilled youth interested or already involved in livestock or irrigated crop production or post-production
activities such as processing, marketing, artisanry or casual labour. The APGs will allocate 30 per cent of membership to
interested youth and will serve as a model for youth mentorship, upskilling and transfer or indigenous knowledge. Youth
employment opportunities will be provided through the links to MSMEs and VCLEs. With a target of 78,240 smallholder farmers,
SACP will provide opportunities for 23,472 young women and men between the ages of 15 and 35. VC analysis will be done to
identify opportunities for youth, and data collection and analysis will be disaggregated by age and gender to ensure that
appropriate opportunities are availed to young men and women). In addition, youth that are interested in being part of the APGs
will benefit from technical assistance on business plan development, leadership skills, climate-smart agriculture and financial
literacy and planning, and technical training related to the specific operations of the enterprise.
45.
Nutrition targeting. SACP will mainstream three specific nutrition related approaches into the value chain activities. The first
approach builds on increased income to be associated with nutrition education and Social and Behaviour Change
Communication (SBCC) activities. The second approach focuses on the supply side and aims at making the selected value
chains nutrition sensitive. The third approach relates to women’s empowerment in ways that improve nutrition. This consists of
different interrelated elements, such as women's use of income for food and non-food expenditures, the ability of women to care
for themselves and their families, and women's energy expenditure.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
46.
The activities of the proposed SACP[45] are organised in three mutually interdependent components as follows: (a) Component 1:
Inclusive Value Chain Development; (b) Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure; and Component 3: Policy and
Institutional Support and Project Coordination.
10/29
Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development
47.
Although the skills level and agricultural sector potential in Zimbabwe are among the highest in Africa, the gaps in smallholder-
based value chain organization result in low agricultural productivity. Challenges persist in commercial smallholder production
systems, and the financial sector is unable to channel urgently required financing for investments by smallholder farmers and
agribusinesses. Component 1 of SACP is designed to address these challenges, through the following sequence of key activities:
(i) Call for VC Lead Enterprise Expressions of Interest; (ii) Identification of SACP Production Clusters within the target districts;
(iii) Mobilization of Agricultural Producer Groups (APGs) and Agribusinesses for VC upgrading; (iv) Technical services to APGs
and Agribusinesses for upgraded production capacity; (v) Business planning and competitive selection of matching grant
recipients; and (vi) APG and Agribusiness investments to upgrade the VCs.
48.
Component 1 activities are organized under three inter-linked sub-components, which are presented hereafter.
49.
50.
51.
52.
Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization. This sub-component’s expected results are: (i) 8 smallholder
production clusters identified, (ii) 800 agricultural producer groups (APGs) mobilized and organized, and (iii) 200 microenterprises
and 40 VC lead enterprises identified and mobilized.
VC Lead Enterprise (VCLE) Identification. A competitive call for EOI for Agribusinesses will be announced at project start-up and
thereafter every six months during the project years 1-4. Through this EOI, SACP will identify potential VC lead enterprises[46]
from provincial and national levels, to invest into agribusiness models with smallholder supply chains in SACP target areas. From
among received Expressions of Interest, a shortlist is made against agreed criteria: (i) technical and financial viability, (ii) gender-
and youth-inclusive poverty reduction potential, (iii) climate change adaptation potential, and (iv) nutritional development potential
among smallholder communities.
Smallholder Cluster Identification. Following the agribusinesses’ expressions of interest, SACP priority commodities will be
selected, and thereafter smallholder clusters will be mobilized. These clusters will enable economies of scale, through significant
aggregation of smallholder production and marketing. Each production cluster will be located within the boundaries of 1-3
districts, and the clusters will be the geographic locations for SACP implementation. The detailed cluster selection criteria are
presented in the PIM in Annex 8.
APG and Microenterprise mobilization. In order to stimulate “Farming as Business” and to develop agriculture and nutrition
sensitive value chains, SACP will hold community consultations in the identified production cluster areas, while devoting
particular attention to equal participation by women, men and youth. Through these community consultations, SACP will request
for APGs and microenterprises’ (ME) Expressions of Interest, whereby the smallholder groups will: (i) propose investments in
APG/ME agriculture operations, and (ii) explain potential linkages to market-oriented VCs and lead enterprises. The APG
members will be small-scale agriculture producers, who meet the SACP targeting criteria. The micro-entrepreneurs will be
individual community members with the capacity to manage small businesses, thus upgrading the VCs at local level.
53.
SACP will promote women participation in APGs, including by setting up women-only APGs and encouraging women to take up
leadership and decision-making roles in APGs. The project will also promote the participation of women-led MEs and lead value
chain agribusinesses as well as linkage of APGs to private sector to increase access of productive resources. SACP will, in
addition, identify women within different parts of the VC and bring them together via a leadership platform so that they inspire
other women and foster collaboration among VC actors.
54.
Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and MEs. The expected results of this sub-component are: (i) 800 APGs
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
received BDS and are able to prepare bankable climate smart business plans, (ii) 200 agribusinesses received BDS and are able
to prepare bankable business plans, which comply with Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) standards, and (iii) 800
APGs implement CSA practices. The technical services will target APGs and Agribusinesses, identified through Sub-
component 1.1. A balanced gender inclusion will be ensured in the targeting of services, and special attention will also be given
to the rural youth.
11/29
Manual Development and Training of Trainers (TOTs). At pre-start-up phase, SACP will develop gender-sensitive manuals and
templates for: (i) APG and Microenterprise Business Planning, in consultation with micro-finance institutions (MFIs), banks and
ESG specialists, and (ii) Climate Smart Agriculture, in consultation with climate change adaptation (CCA) and agricultural
development organizations[47]. The manuals will include options for CCA for each of the prioritised VCs within the clusters. After
SACP start-up, gender-balanced ToTs are organized for the province and district teams to familiarise them with the BDS and
CSA manuals.
Business Development Services (BDS). Following the TOTs, the BDS services for APGs will be implemented at provincial and
district levels by SACP district/province teams, jointly with recruited BDS consultants[48]. The BDS will follow an activity-based
method and business planning templates[49]. During the BDS sessions, the APGs and MEs will complete their business plans.
Amongst these business plans, those with most potential will be selected for Matching Grant financing (refer to C1.3 below). The
APG business plans will also identify public infrastructure needs, for possible investments by Component 2 of SACP. Following
the Matching Grant disbursements, the SACP district/province teams and the recruited BDS consultants will provide additional
services to the APG groups and Microenterprises, including (i) technical support for the project implementation, (ii) monitoring of
the disbursements and utilization of the Matching Grants, and (iii) facilitation of access to markets and financial services.
CSA and Productivity Skills Enhancement. CSA technical assistance, including e-extension solutions (such as Kurima Mari used
in Zimbabwe[50]), will be delivered by the Department of Agriculture and Extension Services’ (Agritex) commodity specialists and
the SACP district/province teams. The service will reach out to all APGs that have expressed their interest to join in project
activities and meet the project targeting criteria. The objective of the CSA trainings is to promote climate smart production models
and increase farm productivity. Topics will include best practices for crop selection, variety selection, commodity production
techniques, climate-smart agriculture solutions, integrated soil fertility management, integrated pest management, food loss and
waste, nutrition sensitive value chains, production standards, labour saving technologies that reduce the time and burden for
women, and national and international certifications. Precision farming will be promoted and access to climate related services
provided within the agriculture extension services. As part of the CSA, communities will be encouraged to sustainably manage
the agricultural productive landscape and maintain the provision of ecosystem services (biomass, water, fibre etc). Services such
as mechanised weeding services, fodder/animal feed production, land preparation, soil rehabilitation and agro-forestry, can
beneficially be delivered by youth and women. The CSA best practices will be included the Business Plans of each APG and
cover also improved technologies for gender and nutrition optimal food crops.
Financial Literacy Services. Local Financial Institutions will be mobilized to provide financial literacy workshops for each APG,
implemented with facilitation by the SACP province/district teams. This service will include support in the opening of bank
accounts for smallholders and for the APGs, and training on basic banking skills and concepts[51].
District extensionist award mechanism. At the end of each project year, for each successfully trained APG, the accountable
district extension officer will receive an award equivalent to 15 per cent of their annual government salary, with the maximum of
150 per cent. The success will be measured by completed Climate Smart Business Plans, which qualified to receive matching
grant financing from SACP.
Gender, Youth, Nutrition and Food Security. The project will adopt the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) approach for
achieving gender transformation. This is a community-led empowerment methodology, which is complementary to a VC
development approach. The approach of the GALS method under SACP is described in more detail in the PIM (Annex 8).
Through technical training offered by the project, women will be empowered to take up roles as producers and market actors
along the value chain, in particular in value addition. Non-technical training such as prevention of gender-based violence, sexual
reproductive health rights, etc., will be offered along with the technical training to encourage women’s participation and
wellbeing.
To ensure that the envisaged increased agricultural production and income from SACP value chain activities lead to improved
nutrition and food security, SACP will mainstream three nutrition related approaches into the VC activities, aimed at increasing
both market availability and demand for diversified and nutritious foods. The first approach will build on increased income to be
associated with nutrition education and Social Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC), which will boost the demand side by
stimulating the consumption of more nutritious and healthy food and contribute to improved dietary diversity of target households,
particularly that of women of child bearing age. SACP will train APGs on nutrition-sensitive value chains and will partner with
Agritex and explore opportunities to utilize the Ministry of Health and Child Care care-group model as a delivery mechanism for
continued nutrition education for its target group.
The second approach will focus on the supply side and will aim at making the selected VCs nutrition sensitive, by ensuring that
investments in crops/animal sourced foods have a nutrition value in addition to being market oriented.  The “Technical support in
climate and nutrition linkages in IFAD’s investments” report identifies commercially viable commodities with climate and nutrition
co-benefits while also providing youth, gender, and environmental considerations of the different value chains[52]. The commodity
lists partly inform VC commodity selection in SACP and will be applied in evaluation of matching grants proposals to ensure high
nutritional impact. Additionally, MEs, applying for matching grants to purchase technologies that preserve or enhance nutritional
value of marketed food, will be highly considered during evaluation of proposals.
63.
Strategies to reduce food loss in SACP will include training on post-harvest loss and waste (Sub-component 1.2), and
opportunities for APGs to apply for matching grants to invest in technologies, which reduce pre- and post-harvest food loss and
waste. Examples include bird scaring technologies to reduce pre-harvest loss of small grains, grain dryers to avoid aflatoxins,
metal silos that minimize loss due to rodents, pests, water, and cold storage facilities for highly perishable agricultural
commodities. These strategies to increase market availability of nutritious food will also be associated with community-based
interventions to promote diversified household food production[53].
12/29
64.
65.
66.
The third approach relates to women’s empowerment in ways that improve nutrition, such as use of income for food and other
nutrition and health-related expenditures, and will be achieved through the GALS methodology. GALS encourages joint decision
making on use of household income, and men and women to reconstruct gender roles and household responsibilities to enable
women to have more time to care for themselves and their families. Matching grants beneficiaries applying to be funded for
labour-saving on-farm and primary processing technologies such as tractors, no-till planters, threshers, dehullers, shellers and
grain cleaning technologies will be highly considered, as these reduce time and energy spent by women doing on-farm work.
SACP will take into account the diversity of the youth (including gender, age, level of education and VC/crop preference) and
undertake VC analysis accordingly to identify tailored approaches to the youth sub-categories. VC analysis and selection will be
done in a participatory manner, actively involving youth and women, culminating in the selection of value chains that are gender
sensitive and suitable for youth interests and capacities. Successful youth inclusion in the SACP project will include: (ii)
opportunities provided for youth to apply for matching grants and (ii) the BDS training of youth, who are part of APGs to equip
them for success in their value chain activities.
Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment. SACP will co-finance, through a competitive selection process,
privately owned and managed investments by smallholders and agribusinesses for the upgrading of VCs. Matching grants (MG)
will be made available in three distinct categories, as detailed in Table 1. In addition, a US$-denominated Line of Credit for
US$ 2.5 million will be established at a selected financial institution to initiate access to commercial bank finance by those SACP
partner VC Lead enterprises, which operate in the export sector.
Table 1: Matching Grant conditions and eligibility in three grant categories
Category 1: APG Climate Smart Co-
Investments
Category 2: Local MSME
Co-investments
Category 3: VC Lead Enterprise co-
investments
IFAD Budget
US$ 16 million
US$ 4.4 million
US$ 2.5 million
Target group
Single commodity APGs and APG
members
Local private sector MSMEs
based in SACP clusters
Registered private sector
agribusinesses in Zimbabwe, with
min. 2 years operations and financial
records
Objectives
Smallholder CC resilience and
commercialization. Achieved through
improved productivity and product
quality, nutrition and food security, pre-
processing and marketing capacities
and reduced food loss and waste
Smallholder CC resilience
and commercialization.
Achieved through improved
productivity and product
quality, nutrition and food
security, pre-processing and
marketing capacities and
reduced food loss and waste
Country level agri-business models
and smallholder-inclusive VCs
upgraded through strengthened VC
Lead Enterprise operations such as
input material and service supply,
logistics and storage, processing,
marketing and sales, farmer training
and supply chain coordination
US$ thresholds
Maximum US$ 25,000 to APGs with 30
members
Maximum US$ 30,000 per
MSME
US$ 30,000 – US$ 75,000 per VC
Lead Enterprise (VC LE) (plus access
to max US$ 150,000 SACP-financed
bank credit)
Aver. US$
US$ 20,000 per APG
US$ 22,000 per MSME
US$ 62,500 per VC LE
Targeted overall
number of
beneficiaries
800 APGs
24,000 smallholder HHs
24,000 seasonal workers
200 MSMEs
40 VCLEs
1,000 worker HHs
1,000 worker HHs
10,000 supplier HHs
16,000 supplier HHs
56,000 individuals
85,200 individuals
Gender and youth
incl.
Min. 50% of overall APG members
women, 30% youth
Min. 25% of beneficiaries
women, 30% youth
Min. 25% of beneficiaries women,
30% youth
Category 1: APG Climate Smart Co-
Investments
13/29
Category 2: Local MSME
Co-investments
Category 3: VC Lead Enterprise co-
investments
CSA and ESG
All APG investments adopt CSA
technology solutions
All MSME investments
adhere to minimum ESG
guidance
All VCLE investments adhere to ESG
standards and norms
Nutrition and food
security
Commodities with proven positive
nutritional impact are preferred
Commodities with proven
positive nutritional impact are
preferred
Commodities with proven positive
nutritional impact are preferred
Counterpart
contribution
Minimum 10 per cent in cash and 10
per cent in kind by APG
Minimum 25 per cent in cash
and 25 per cent in kind by
MSME
Minimum 50 per cent in cash by
VCLE
Total investment
US$ 20.0 million
US$ 8.8 million
US$ 5.0 million
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
The Matching Grant (MG) instrument will enable social and environmental targeting as well as the strengthening of commercially
viable, and sustainable value chains. A total of 24,000 smallholder households, 200 MSMEs and 40 VCLEs will benefit from the
matching grant resources, which will impact the livelihoods of 48,000, 11,000 and 17,000 rural households, respectively. All MGs
will be disbursed in US dollars (US$), through bank transactions, and a financial institution[54] will be engaged to manage these
transactions. In addition, the financial institution will lead on the financial literacy training to Component 1 beneficiaries (refer to
C1.2). Digital payments will be promoted for all end-users of the MG investments, to facilitate smooth transactions. To ensure
overall transparency of the MG mechanism among the target groups, public dissemination events for periodic batches of
successful matching grants will be organized. This will ensure social monitoring of the investments, improve knowledge on SACP
among target communities, and disseminate best practices among VC stakeholders.
The MG proposals will be scored against following weighed criteria: (i) technical feasibility, (ii) financial viability and sustainability,
(iii) benefits to smallholders, (iv) demonstrated poverty reduction impact, (v) nutrition outcomes, (vi) green solutions, (vii)
demonstrated youth employment impact, (viii) women led enterprises and women employment, and (ix) ESG standards. A model
of a scoring template is available in the PIM in Annex 8. For the first and second category, the principal acceptance criteria are
commercialisation and climate change resilience. For the third category, VCLEs, as the principal acceptance criteria, the MG
financing needs to directly involve smallholders in SACP target areas. The scoring and selection are made by established
committees as described below in the procurement section and in the PIM Matching Grant manuals. In particular, these include a
comprehensive package of measures to avoid elite capture in the targeting of MG resources, which is summarized in the SACP
Integrated Project Risk Management framework.
Line of Credit for export sector VC Lead Enterprises. SACP will pilot a US dollar-denominated line of credit of US$ 2.5 million.
This will be established at a selected financial institution, to initiate access to commercial bank finance by those SACP’s partner
VC Lead Enterprises that operate in the export sector and earn a major part of their revenues in foreign currency. This pilot
intervention responds to the following concerns of the GoZ in rural VC development: (a) the need to effectively revitalise the
operations of smallholder-based, export oriented rural value chains, and (b) the need to establish a pilot US$-denominated
commercial borrowing window in a financial market, in which practically no forex liquidity exists and no donor-supported
refinancing options are operational. The relatively small LoC amount in comparison with the Matching Grant facility is due to the
extreme forex volatility in Zimbabwe, and the consequent requirement that all LoC transactions and repayments are made in
United States dollars (US$). Therefore, the enterprises need to earn adequate revenues in US$ to be able to repay their loans.
This limits the LoC target group to export-oriented lead enterprises.
After project start-up, the SACP-financed line of credit will be established in a financially sound commercial/development bank,
through a subsidiary loan agreement to be signed between the bank and the GoZ. The selected bank is expected to use this
refinancing injection as a part of its overall strategy to develop new products and serve new markets in rural areas.
To qualify as borrowers from this US$-denominated line of credit, the VCLEs need to demonstrate that their projected forex
revenues from the VC operations provide an adequate financing base for the repayment of the loans. Before applying for a credit
line-financed loan from the selected partner bank, the Lead Enterprises need to have been selected as Matching Grant
recipients, and thereby they have passed the assessment of SACP’s Technical Assessment Committee to indicate that they meet
the development and impact criteria of the project to qualify for SACP’s smallholder-based VC support.
In its lending operations to SACP’s VCLEs, the partner bank carries the full credit risk and therefore uses its own criteria when
assessing the bankability of the proposed projects, as well as its own terms and practices for interest rates, collaterals, and
repayment and grace periods. The maximum loan size for loans to Lead Enterprises from the SACP credit line is US$150,000,
with the average loan projected at US$100,000. The loan administration requirements for the Harare-based partner bank are
relatively light, as the number of borrowing companies is not expected to exceed 25. Loans from the credit line will be identified in
the bank’s MIS with a special code that facilitates for easy and systematic follow-up and reporting. In the PIM, more details are
provided on the key features and implementation arrangements of the SACP financial support to export oriented VCLEs.
73.
74.
As a part of the SACP design process, following initial inquiries by IFAD/MLAWRR about the interest of banks to partner with
SACP in the Line of Credit implementation, a national banking consultant conducted institutional assessments of five leading
Harare-based commercial/development banks that are active in or have interest to expand to the agri-business finance. These
banks included CBZ Bank Ltd, ZB Bank Ltd, NMB Bank Ltd, Steward Bank Ltd. and Agribank.
14/29
The purpose of the institutional assessment was to evaluate the financial and institutional position and product portfolio of the
financial institutions as well as their readiness to implement the SACP Credit Line for Export Sector VCLEs. The SACP “Potential
Partner Bank Assessment Report” is included in the SACP design document Package. The outcome of this assessment was that
three of the reviewed banks had the required financial strength, technical capabilities and experience to partner with SACP.
These were CBZ Bank, NMB Bank and Agribank. After the effectiveness of SACP, the NPMU will organise a full assessment of
these three banks and their appropriateness to implement the line of credit activity. The SACP Project Delivery Team (PDT) will
provide technical support for the assessment of this financial institution. Based on the results of this assessment, the NPMU will
make a proposal for the selection of the partner bank for the SACP credit line implementation. An IFAD No-Objection is required
for this selection, before the NPMU presents it for final approval by the SACP Steering Committee.
Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure
75.
76.
The objective of Component 2 is to improve irrigation water supply and management, domestic water supply, and local level
feeder roads, to facilitate the commercialisation of smallholder agriculture. The implementation of activities under this component
will encourage private sector investments in SACP areas, promote the production and marketing of large quantities of quality
produce and reduce the time and cost of transport to the markets. Component 2 will invest in public and semi-public
infrastructure. VC infrastructure to be financed by the private sector will be supported under Component 1 of SACP.
The expected results of Component 2 include: (i) prioritised ward-level community infrastructure investments identified through
participatory stakeholder consultations involving men and women; (ii) approximately 1,780 ha equipped with improved gender-
sensitive irrigation systems; (iii) 150 km of roads rehabilitated and climate proofed, which will enhance access to markets and
improve safety of men and women; and (iv) 100 wards with improved water supply and sanitation facilities, to reduce the walking
distances to fetch water and improve the community well-being. Investments in irrigation and multi-purpose community water
supply will contribute to increased year-round production of diverse nutritious foods for household consumption and markets. The
total number of expected beneficiaries for Component 2 is projected to be around 30,000 households.
77.
This component will consist of two sub-components, which are presented below.  
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
Sub-component 2.1: Participatory Ward Level Infrastructure Investment Planning. The SACP-supported cluster
infrastructure investments will be identified through participatory planning process involving women, men and youth beneficiaries.
The planning process will identify priority irrigation, ’last mile’ feeder roads and multiple-purpose water supply investments in
each ward.
The participatory community consultation and planning process will consist of (a) initial visits to wards, to inform communities
about the project and to establish a long list of possible locations for SACP-supported community infrastructure, (b) first dialogue
meetings, toagree on a shortlist of priorities for interventions for the community, and (c) follow-up dialogues, particularly to
establish links of the infrastructure to a lead enterprise intervention in Component 1 and to finalise intervention selection. These
will be followed by call for proposal for infrastructure development, development of Implementation Partnership Agreements and
the actual implementation and handover of the projects (for details of the process, see the PIM).
Sub-component 2.2: Climate proofed infrastructure investments. Sub-component 2.2 will support: (i) small-scale irrigation
development investments, (ii) feeder road rehabilitation; and (iii) community water supply schemes based on gravity or solar
power from protected wells/boreholes, and springs.
Small-scale irrigation schemes. The objective of this intervention is to increase agricultural production through the rehabilitation
and improvement of small-scale irrigation infrastructures for selected value chains. The improvement will be for water use
efficiency and adoption of soil and water conservation measures. Taking into consideration the selected value chains for
Component 1 support, the irrigation systems to be developed (new or modernised) will be selected through a community-based
prioritisation process explained above.
Selection of irrigation schemes will be competitive, following an expression of interest and a call of proposals by the project. An
initial call for proposals will shortlist potential irrigation schemes to be assisted using the following criteria: (i) reliable water
source, (ii) a demonstrated link to a market for the intended produce, with a possible link with lead enterprises and SMEs
supported under Component 1; (iii) the investment encourages youth participation; (iv) the investment benefits women farmers
and the irrigation technologies do not increase the workload of women; (v) demonstrated potential for increasing household
income sustainably; (vi) design to include water supply and sanitation facilities; and (vii) commitment to contribute at least 15 per
cent of investment costs in cash. The shortlisted schemes, new or for modernising, will be assisted to undertake feasibility
studies to be submitted for final selection. The feasibility studies and full proposals need to confirm how each of the criteria
indicated above will be met. The feasibility studies will include the environmental impact analysis (EIA), required for irrigation
schemes, and development of Environmental Management Plans (EMP).
Irrigation schemes will typically have less than 50 participating households, with an average 2 ha or less per household. The
typical average size of irrigation schemes will be less than 100 ha. A total area of 1,780 ha will be developed under this
intervention. The expected number of direct beneficiaries is around 1,000 households. The actual locations of the irrigation
schemes will be demand-driven, taking into account the linkages that will be established between the producer groups and value
chain lead enterprises. The types of irrigation will be determined by the nature of the crops and topography of the areas. This
notwithstanding, it is anticipated that sprinkler, centre pivot and drip irrigation will be the main types of irrigation schemes. The
project will follow the SACP SECAP procedures in the planning and implementation of the schemes. The land holding will be on
communal lands or farmers with offer letters or leases from the government. The focus is on households rather than head of
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
households to prevent women being excluded due to their lack of access to land and other productive assets. SACP will include
women (50 per cent) in the management committees of the irrigation schemes.
15/29
Climate proofed feeder road rehabilitation. The objective of this activity is to provide improved and reliable access to markets
and services while incorporating water harvesting into road drainage structures (for livestock drinking water and small gardens,
wherever feasible).
An integrated approach to support rehabilitation of selected last mile feeder roads will combine the following options: (i) the road
should be linked to an area producing for a VC, selected for SACP support under Component 1, (ii) the investment includes
climate resilient design and construction with improved surfaces and erosion protection works, and (iii) the potential of utilizing
road surface as catchment areas to catch surface runoff for livestock drinking water and irrigation. As a nutrition benefit,
rehabilitation of feeder roads will improve efficiency of transportation of produce to markets (thereby reducing food loss and
increasing household income) and travel by household members to markets to source food or to healthcare facilities.
A total of 150 km of feeder roads will be developed under this intervention. The priority feeder roads will be selected by the
communities, APGs and participating micro and value chain lead enterprises. It is anticipated that the feeder roads will have an
average length of less than five km. Feeder roads do not require a mandatory EIA. However, the infrastructure development will
be screened for any environmental and social risks prior to the approval of the investment.
Multi-purpose community water supply. The primary objective of this intervention is to increase the community’s access to
safe water for multi-purpose utilisation, such as domestic, gardening and livestock use throughout the year. Bringing safe water
closer to households will reduce the amount of time that women travel to fetch water, therefore freeing their time to engage in
more productive enterprises.  To promote the use of the investments in a way that also benefits household nutrition and health,
SACP will deliver nutrition and WASH education and SBCC to its target households.
The selection of households for rooftop and/or open catchment water harvesting should meet the following criteria: (i) adequate
average annual rainfall for the intended purpose of water harvesting, (ii) households meets the poverty criteria for the project,
with special focus to the vulnerable groups: women, elderly headed households, and  people living with disabilities, and (iii)
households invest in roofing suitable for water harvesting and in digging the pond/tank, with consideration given to vulnerable
households who may not afford roofing sheets.
Village-level water supply systems for providing multi-purpose water will be considered for investment under the project. The
water for these projects can be used for domestic and livestock use, and for small nutrition gardens. The water supply systems
should be equipped with technologies that are attractive for shared family work in order to free up women’s time for productive
activities. Women and men will take part in the choice of technology in order to make it attractive for equitable sharing of labour
for fetching water. Gender balanced water point committees will be appointed with equal numbers of women and men in
leadership positions and fully capacitated for efficient O&M.
The management arrangements for the water schemes may include prepaid water payment systems. The installation of solar
energy units, particularly to replace diesel pumping, will be a key investment area. It is anticipated that approximately 100 wards
will be assisted to have improved domestic multipurpose water supply. Water supply investments require EIAs particularly if
ground water is the source of the supply. SACP will support communities with screening of the potential investments for
environmental and social risks and the development of the EMP as required.
Component 3: Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination
91.
Component 3 is divided into two sub-components: 3.1. Policy and Institutional Support and 3.2. Project Coordination.
92.
93.
Sub-Component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support. The purpose of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to support the efforts to
create a conducive policy and institutional environment for private sector-led smallholder agriculture transformation in Zimbabwe.
SACP’s accumulated experience and evidence-based recommendations will be documented by the project. Strategic
partnerships will be initiated with key stakeholders to ensure enabling conditions for smallholder agriculture commercialization.
Specialists will be recruited to develop relevant knowledge products, policy proposals as well as investment opportunity papers
and briefs on new, promising crops and commodities. Based on the accumulated knowledge and information, policy dialogues
and other discussion forums and events will be organised, aiming particularly at the development of action-oriented plans to
support the diversification and commercialisation of smallholder agriculture. The operations of Sub-component 3.1 are organised
at two inter-related levels as described below.
Institutional Support for Policy Implementation. SACP will support the operationalisation of policies and institutional
arrangements relevant to smallholder value chains. In particular, capacity building and TA will be recruited for the strengthening
of the Ministry of Agriculture in the areas of: (i) implementation of agribusiness one-stop-shop approach for full range of
agriculture SME public support services, (ii) operationalization of the horticultural sector policy, to support this key sub-sector with
major opportunities for productivity and smallholder income enhancement; and (iii) support the operationalization of the National
Agriculture Policy Framework 2018-2030 (NAPF), through transformative investment opportunity papers on new, innovative
smallholder-based commodity chains and subsequent action planning and capacity building based on the analysis and
recommendations. In addition, to fully support the clusters, specific capacity building at decentralized level will also be supported
by SACP, in order to ensure that public services, notably for SACP’s infrastructure investments function adequately.
94.
Demand Driven Policy Solutions for Smallholder Value Chain Development. In its initial year, SACP will identify gaps and
demands in the legal and institutional framework for smallholder value chain development. Subsequently, the project will provide
resources to development of appropriate policy and institutional solutions to the issues identified. Based on discussions held
during the design mission, the possible areas of intervention include: (i) contract farming best practices in enterprise-led, climate-
smart value chain development, based on recent experiences in successful sub-sectors including smallholder tobacco, to ensure
significantly wider use of formal contracts between smallholders and VCLEs; (ii) establishment of appropriate and practical
farmer group registration mechanism to enable smallholders’ full participation in commercial and financial transactions, to ensure
that registered groups can fully participate in legally binding financial and trading contracts; and (iii) nutrition sensitive solutions
for the SACP-supported value chains, including actions/policies to reduce food loss and waste.
16/29
95.
Sub-Component 3.2: Project Coordination. The project coordination and management costs will be budgeted under this sub-
component, consisting of financing from both IFAD and the Government. The management will be arranged according to the
Programmatic Approach following successful experiences from elsewhere in the region. The MLAWRR will create a joint
management unit for SACP and SIRP, ensuring cost-effectiveness and higher quality service provision both for the Government
of Zimbabwe and IFAD. The core approaches of the SACP management and institutional arrangements are presented in Chapter
4 below and described in more detail in the PIM.
Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response
96.
Given the recurrent weather extremes in Zimbabwe, in particular droughts, this component has been included to enable IFAD to
respond urgently in its support to smallholder farmers, who are the most impacted. Specifically, this component, which has not
been costed at design, is expected to facilitate and expedite the implementation of level-2 project restructuring, in the event of an
emergency or disaster.
E. Theory of Change
97.
98.
SACP’s investment logic is premised on the Theory of Change (TOC) for SACP, illustrated in Annex 2. The main development
problem that SACP aims to contribute to addressing is: high poverty, climate vulnerability and insufficient nutrition levels among
rural households, due to the unorganized nature of the smallholder sector, structural gender inequality, as well as weak
institutional environment. Three identified underlying causes for this development problem are: (i) limited capacity and investment
by smallholders and value chain agribusinesses; (ii) insufficient infrastructure investment for climate resilient value chain
development, and (iii) limited capacity of rural sector institutions on equitable smallholder commercialization.
SACP provides solutions to each of the underlying problems, including: (i) technical assistance and financial instruments attract
agribusinesses and farmer groups to invest into value chains, (ii) cluster infrastructure investments enable climate resilient and
nutrition sensitive value chain development, and (iii) institutional capacity building strengthens the operationalization of national
agriculture transformation strategy. Specifically, this income pathway is tailored to target low-income smallholders. The provision
of an enabling environment and smart incentives encourage a critical mass of agribusiness firms to locate in SACP target areas.
Once a critical threshold is reached, the agglomeration of agribusinesses and quality primary producers will attract new players
and a positive growth cycle is set in motion. This process is monitored through the SACP logframe output and outcome
indicators, and the results evaluated through the higher level goal/development objectives:  increased smallholder income,
increased sales, empowerment and adoption of climate-resilient practices.
99.
SACP recognizes that the income pathway itself is not sufficient to lead to improved nutrition, and it is in this regard that the
project will incorporate a range of mainstreamed nutrition interventions, aimed at increasing both availability and demand for
diversified and nutritious food. SACP will work to increase the availability of nutritious food at market level by driving smallholder
participation in nutrition sensitive value chains which have a nutrition value in addition to being market and cash oriented. This
will be combined with community-based interventions to promote climate change resilient nutritious food production.
100.
The project results will be evaluated through the project Logframe goal indicators on empowerment and improved nutrition
knowledge and attitudes, as well as the development objective indicator on adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-
resilient technologies and practices.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
101.
Alignment with SDGs. SACP aims to contribute directly to SDG1 (end poverty) and SDG2 (end hunger), through its key targets
of economic and social transformation and increased commercialisation of smallholder agriculture. Further, SACP’s targeting
approach relies largely on very active and beneficial participation of women and girls in all activities, including the actual co-
investments in the SACP groups and clusters (SDG5 on gender and empowerment). The project also directly promotes inclusive
economic growth and employment (SDG8) in the leading marketed crop sectors in the whole implementation area and promotes
sustainable agro-industrialisation in the targeted regions (SDG9). Finally, on CC (SDG13), SACP’s targeted interventions in each
project cluster aim to increase adaptive capacity of smallholders through new, smarter farming methods and at the same time to
generally improve the resilience of households, through the improved household incomes and asset ownership in a “no regrets”
manner.
102.
Alignment with national priorities. SACP is fully in line with the core priorities of the Government in rural and agricultural
development. Its objectives follow the key Government agricultural strategies of rural economic transformation and
commercialisation of smallholder agriculture. Furthermore, SACP is in line with the National Food and Nutrition Security Policy
and Zimbabwe National Nutrition Strategy. The gender parity in SACP is in line with the National Gender Policy of Zimbabwe
(2017). SACP is also in line with GoZ devolution agenda that is aimed at developing rural areas as highlighted in the Constitution
of Zimbabwe (2013) as well as in the IPRSP (2018). The proposed private sector-led approach responds to an explicit request by
the MLAWRR. The SACP efforts to increase climate change resilience reflects the NDC priorities for CC adaptation.
103.
Alignment with IFAD’s policies and corporate priorities. The project is fully in line with the IFAD COSOP’s overall
transformation target and its objectives of reducing poverty and improving incomes along the VCs, through better market access
and climate-smart and more effective production systems. The nutrition-related activities are directly linked to the second
strategic objective of the COSOP, namely “Enhanced market access to nutritious foods”. At the corporate level, SACP
contributes to IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, notably Strategic Objectives 2 and 3 (SO2 and SO3) of enabling inclusive
and sustainable transformation of rural areas through smallholder-led growth and mainstreaming priorities (climate change,
gender, youth and nutrition).
104.
Harmonization and Partnerships. SACP will provide an opportunity to strengthen the overall implementation of the IFAD-
supported ongoing SIRP and to harmonize the approaches in particular in terms of market and VC development and
mainstreaming topics such as nutrition and food security. Further, SACP will benefit from SIRP’s partnership with Harvest Plus
for increased production and consumption of bio-fortified crops.
17/29
105.
It is further expected that SACP will collaborate with the World Food Programme (WFP) in several areas related to resilience,
food security and nutrition. Other possible implementation partners include: (i) International Labour Organization (ILO) on youth
employment, (ii) the Environmental Management Agency (EMA) on compliance with national regulations and the SECAP issues
in SACP implementation, (iii) the Climate Change Management Department (CCMD) on incorporation of climate change
adaptation measures and monitoring their effectiveness, (iv) UNICEF on the delivery of WASH interventions in the SACP project
target districts, (v) International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) on nutrition dense and drought
resistant varieties, Econet Wireless on enabling farmers to access cold chain and market access and (vi) the Ministry of Health
and Child Care on nutrition education through its care group model and on the delivery of health services to boost maternal and
child nutrition. Finally, Wageningen University has provided support for the SACP design as regards the definition of the nutrition
and climate resilience strategy. Further linkages with Wageningen will be explored during implementation.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
106.
The total investment and recurrent cost for the Project is estimated at US$67.4 million including contingencies. The total base
costs are US$ 64.8 million. Price contingencies account for US$2.4 million (4 per cent of the total base costs). Baseline
investment costs are estimated at US$61.8 million representing 95 per cent of baseline cost. The amount of climate finance is
estimated at US$ 14.061 million (adaptation), corresponding to approximately 39 per cent of the IFAD loan. The breakdown of
the costs in US$ by component and financiers is shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
107.
The breakdown of the costs in US$ by expenditure category and financiers, as well as total cost by years are shown in the
following tables.
Table 3: Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Table 4: Project costs by component and year
(Millions of United States dollars)
18/29
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
108.
An IFAD loan will finance US$35.69 million or 52.9 per cent of total project costs. The IFAD loan includes: US$ 30.65 million or
71.6 per cent for Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development for which the total cost is US$ 42.78 million; and
US$5.04 million or 65.1 per cent of Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination for which the total cost is US$
7.74 million.
109.
The OPEC Fund for international development (OFID) will finance US$15 million of Component 2 Climate Proofed Value Chain
Infrastructure, or 89 per cent of this component. The GoZ has formally requested OPEC Fund financing for this project and OFID
has expressed their interest in participating in this operation. OFID will submit the financing proposal for the project to its Board in
2021, following project approval by the IFAD EB. If this co-financing would not materialize, alternative sources of funding would
be identified, notably the bilaterals with infrastructure investment programmes in Zimbabwe. These potential bilateral partners
include the State of Kuwait and Japan, with whom discussions have already been initiated.
110.
The smallholders (Agriculture Producer Group members) will finance US$4.2 million or 6 per cent of the total project costs. The
agribusiness sector will finance US$7.2 million or 11 per cent of the total project costs. Co-financing from the beneficiaries and
the private sector with both take place within the financing activity under the Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC
Investment.
111.
The Government will finance US$4.6 million in the form of shared costs for Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain
Infrastructure and Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination, as well as taxes and duties, comprising 7 per
cent of the total project costs. Component 4 is a placeholder for emergency funds with zero allocation at design.
112.
Given the targeted rural populations, their vulnerability to climate change risks and type of investments being of a public nature,
discussions are currently ongoing with the National Designated Authority in the Ministry of Environment and Water to seek funds
from the Green Climate Fund (GCF), which could potentially imply additional resources of US$35 million for SACP.  If this
financing is secured, the resources will be used to support the scaling-up of activities under Components 1 and 2, such as
improving water use efficiency in irrigation schemes, promoting soil and water conservation and precision farming to improve
resource use efficiencies and eco-system services. Particular attention would be paid to assure that adequate staffing would be
included both in technical areas and in finance for the adequate management and reporting related to this source of funding.
c. Disbursement
113.
MLAWRR will operate designated Accounts (DAs) in a commercial bank acceptable to GOZ for external financing sources from
IFAD and OFID, respectively. Subsequent replenishments based on expenditure incurred as supported with Statement of
Expenditure. MLAWRR also will open two operating bank accounts at a commercial bank to receive and hold the financing
transferred from the Designated accounts for programme costs in local currency. The accounts will be managed by National
Project Coordination Unit (NPMU). Programme grantees under the matching grants facility for value chain investments will be
required to open specific bank accounts for receipt of grant funds and for banking their own matching contribution. 
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
114.
Direct and indirect benefits are foreseen to accrue to around 78,000 households, resulting from the investments in VC
development. In addition, the climate proofed VC infrastructure investments will improve livelihoods and welfare of the wider rural
population in the targeted districts. The quantitative economic analysis focuses on the impact of the matching grants for inclusive
VC investment, at the APG household. This takes the form of estimating the value of incremental production at farm household
level. Individual crop and livestock enterprise models representing the likely household and value chain commodities are
estimated. These enterprise models are combined into illustrative farm models to determine incremental smallholder farming
household production over the 20-year analysis period. These representative households are then aggregated to establish a
project level value of incremental production. This is then combined with incremental project costs to derive the key appraisal
indicators.
19/29
115.
The projected APG household and beneficiary entry into the Project economic analysis over the six-year implementation period
is shown table below.
116.
Financial viability. Four illustrative APG farm models have been developed to examine the financial viability of the MG
investments. Net income cash flows and the net present value indicator are shown in the table below. All farm system types
examined were found financially viable. Incremental returns to incremental labour provide a sound incentive for household
production as well as an argument against outmigration of labour.
117.
Economic viability. The overall SACP project economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 25 per cent. The estimated economic
net present value (ENPV) at a 10 per cent discount rate is US$ 56.5 million. The BCR of 2.4 indicates a return of US$ 2.40 for
every dollar invested. These results indicate that the project is a sound investment yielding a positive rate of return as the EIRR
greater than the hurdle rate (10 per cent) and the ENPV is greater than zero.
118.
Sensitivity analysis. An increase in programme costs by 10 per cent will reduce the EIRR to 23.3 per cent, while a decrease in
overall programme benefits by 20 per cent will result in an EIRR of 21.7 per cent. A one-year delay in benefits reduces the EIRR
to 21.5 per cent and a two-year delay to 18.8 per cent. A combination of a reduction in benefits of 20 per cent and an increase in
costs by 20 per cent reduces the EIRR to 17.8 per cent indicating the investment remains viable in the face of adverse
circumstances of that nature. The switching values show that the programme will remain economically viable if benefits
decreased by 59 per cent, or programme costs increased by 142 per cent. An examination of the response of the project to
drought reveals it remains viable in the face of multiple short and medium drought sequences (EIRRs of 16.9 and 12.0 per cent
respectively). The project would become unviable in the severe longer-term drought (EIRR of 6.3 per cent), but historical trends
and projections do not foresee such a long-term weather shock for Zimbabwe.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
119.
Exit strategy. The SACP exit strategy and its success is closely linked to results achieved at all the sustainability levels
discussed below. The SACP focus on sustainable results and on independent, profitable institutions and private sector-based
partnerships forms the core exit strategy for the project. The SACP exit strategy is presented in more detail, by component, in
Annex 10.
20/29
120.
Sustainability. Sustainability of the SACP benefits and results can be approached at different levels. At the smallholder farmers’
and APG level, SACP will support modernised, CSA-based production systems that are suitable to local agro-ecological zones
and climatic conditions. Environmental efficiency and climatic adaptation will be enhanced in the SACP messages. At the same
time the long-term approach to mentoring and training in business and technical skills is expected to significantly improve
smallholders’ potential to sustain the benefits from SACP interventions even when the project support ends. Capacity building in
nutrition-related subjects and environmentally sound SACP interventions in irrigation, water systems and roads, as well as SACP
policy-oriented work, are all aimed a situation in which SACP-related benefits can be sustainable even after the project ends.
121.
At the group and cooperative level, SACP intervention aim at training them to professionally conduct their business to being fully
independent, financially robust and self-managing partners in the value chain operations. Being successful in this area will be
one of the key factors for sustaining the SACP results and benefits in the period after the project closure.
122.
The SACP chain approach is a rolling process of action-oriented brokering, dialogue and investment facilitation among the key
actors of each VC, to catalyse investments and remove bottlenecks to increase trading and profits, and to make the most of
practical opportunities for growth.In total, the combination of the project impact on farmers, groups/cooperatives, the enterprises
and the whole value chain, as well as the private-sector focus of the project, is expected to ensure favourable results on
sustainability of the SACP benefits.
123.
The infrastructure built with the support of SACP will have three pathways to sustainability, leading towards a successful project
exit. First, the infrastructure is demand driven, prioritising the infrastructure that serves the needs of the community best; second,
the owners and beneficiaries of the infrastructure will contribute at least 15 per cent of the required financing in cash; and third,
the management arrangements for the infrastructure will be competence-driven, with users paying for services. For multi-purpose
water supply, a private or quasi-private entity may run the facilities and users pay for services using a pre-card system.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
124.
The following are among the main risks, rated either high or substantial in the Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM) in Annex 9,
for the successful implementation of SACP, with the proposed mitigation measures.
Main risks
Mitigation measures
Governance. A weak environment for growth and
development in key sectors and reduced willingness of local
and international investors to commit their resources in the
country. High corruption rating and overall lack of
transparency have significantly increased risks for
investments in Zimbabwe, including investments in
agriculture and agro-processing.
Systematic development of rules and procedures for SACP project
activities. This includes in particular the development of
comprehensive procurement rules and investments in procurement-
related staff. A key safeguard against governance risks is the private
sector orientation of all the investments in the key value chain
development component of the project.
Macroeconomic. Instability including risks related to
hyperinflation and currency convertibility will continue to
adversely impact commercialisation of smallholder
agriculture. In recent months, additional economic stress has
been caused by the COVID-19 outbreak.
It is projected that from 2021 onwards, a better macroeconomic
environment will emerge in Zimbabwe. However, the key investment
instruments of SACP, including the matching grant facility, are
developed to function even in an economy, in which many sub-
sectors and services do not function adequately. The assumption at
the same time is that with SACP support, farmers and enterprises will
be better positioned to benefit from economic opportunities, once the
country’s macroeconomic performance improves.
Fragility and Security. With political instability and weak
economy, Zimbabwe has in recent decades experienced
various types of shock. This fragility continues, and clearly
increased the country’s investment risk rating.
The capacity of a development project to safeguard itself and its
operations against these shocks is limited. However, through strong
contractual agreements, private sector orientation and systems,
SACP aims to increase its capacity to buffer against moderate
shocks in its operational environment.
Main risks
21/29
Mitigation measures
Policy Alignment. Earlier, Government policies have in
various respects been poorly aligned with IFAD’s core
policies. This concerns particularly some aspects of land use
rights and the role of private sector in smallholder agriculture
development.
Part of the government’s reform agenda includes commercializing
smallholder agriculture, while addressing the persistent challenges of
climate change, youth unemployment, as well as food insecurity. In
this context, at its core, the National Agriculture Policy Framework
2018-2030 (NAPF), particularly Pillar V, presents the strategy to
commercialise smallholder agriculture.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts. The
climate change risks include increasing rainfall variability,
droughts and intermittent floods. Droughts have occurred in
the recent past leading to crop losses and negatively
impacting livelihoods. Water stress will also increase as a
result of climate change.
Climate change adaptation measures will be promoted through
climate smart agriculture (CSA) investments. The infrastructure
developed under SACP will be climate resilient to improve water use
efficiency and harvest rainwater for productive use.
Implementation arrangements. After 20 years with very
few international projects, many Zimbabwean institutions
lack experience on how to implement them and allocate
adequate systems, staff and resources to implement them.
The management mechanism for matching grants in
particular requires a comprehensive and clear framework to
ensure effective implementation, viability of promoted value
chains, and to avoid elite capture.
The Lead Agency, MLAWRR, is also the implementing agency for
IFAD-supported SIRP. With a Joint Management Unit, SIRP and
SACP will share some of the key senior staff, including financial
management and M&E. The relevant institutions will be supported
through capacity building and SACP resources.
Measures to reduce elite capture for the matching grant operations
include: (i) Increased volume of independent BDS support (NGO or
private sector service provider) to include follow up visits and
investment monitoring for each grant implementer; (ii) utilization of
formal financial institutions for all matching grant financial
transactions, through established bank accounts, and supervision of
these as part of project audits, (iii) systematic training provided to the
evaluation panels and key project-related GOZ staff on integrity,
eligibility and conflict of interest, and corruption and bribery related
topics; (iv) ensure beneficiary access to project information through
public dissemination events for project start-up and periodic batches
of successful matching grant proposals; (v) piloting a digital business
plan database for matching grant projects; (vi) selection of the
evaluation panels to be subject to IFAD’s NO and rotation of some of
the evaluation panel members, and (vii) prior elite capture risk
assessment for key value chains supported by the APG matching
grants.
Funds flow/disbursement arrangements. The current state
of the economy has made the local currency volatile and
introduced challenges in obtaining foreign currency. These
issues can adversely impact the project as exchange
differences lead to losses. Suppliers are also affected. Non-
availability of forex for SACP operations may lead in failure to
effect timely settlements in US$ for locally and externally
sourced procurements.
Zimbabwe’s current forex regime is that both the US$ and ZIM Dollar
are the recognised legal currencies in Zimbabwe. SACP shall
maintain a US$ account at a commercial bank to facilitate timely
settlement of forex invoices. SACP will, to a large extent, use IFAD’s
direct payment method for payments over US$100,000.
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to
climate variability and hazards. Most of the SACP target
beneficiaries depend on rain-fed agriculture for their
livelihoods. This dependency increases their vulnerability to
variable climate. Some of the SACP locations are also water
stressed, which increases the vulnerability of the
ecosystems.
CSA investments will reduce the vulnerability to climate variability.
The capacity building will also increase the knowledge base of the
smallholders to manage the risks. Irrigation and water supply
schemes will contribute to addressing water stress and incidents of
drought.
125.
The project financial Inherent risk is assessed as high but with the proposed mitigation measures; this is foreseen to come down
to substantial. The main foreseen risks for the project include the fund flow arrangements. The current state of the economy has
made the local currency volatile and introduced challenges in obtaining foreign currency. This thus translates to lack of
availability of liquidity to timely meet project operational needs. There is the risk of failure to properly track use of grant proceeds
disbursed to grantees. This will be addressed through guidelines outlined in the PIM for the management of grants.
I. Environment and Social category
126.
The environmental and social categorisation of SACP is B. The project interventions will be in non-sensitive areas and mainly
consist of small-scale farming and infrastructure related investments. The small-scale infrastructure under Component 2 (irrigation
schemes below 100 ha; last mile feeder roads of approximately five-kilometre length and water supply investments) will result in
localised and mostly reversible negative environmental and social impacts. The potential negative impacts such as vegetation
loss, changes in water flows, waste generation, soil loss and land levelling will be minimised through screening and
implementation of site-specific Environmental Management Plan (EMPs) where these are required.
22/29
127.
Investments under the matching grants in Component 1 will be screened for environment and social risks, as part of the selection
criteria.  Any required environmental licences or certification will be a pre-requisite for the approval of matching grants. The
estimated costs for the ESMP implementation are US$ 785,000 calculated as approximately 5 per cent of the infrastructure
development cost. The social risks will be minimised and managed through Gender Action Learning and capacity building
including in nutrition sensitive value chains. Local partners from Government Agencies and NGOs will play a key in the risk
management strategies. A grievance redress mechanism is summarised in section M to address any risks in this regard during
implementation.
J. Climate Risk classification
128.
The climate risk classification for SACP is high. The main climate risks affecting the SACP target beneficiaries are droughts,
floods and increasing temperatures. The five provinces selected for the SACP interventions are less vulnerable to droughts
compared to the southern and eastern part of the country. However, the provinces include agro-climatic zones where periodic
crop failures occur due to mid-seasons dry spells and delayed commencement of rain. The target groups also have low adaptive
capacity exacerbated by the levels of poverty and limited ability to invest in climate change adaptation measures.
129.
The in-depth climate vulnerability analysis conducted for Zimbabwe by the University of Cape Town with financing from the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP 2) recommends various climate change adaptation options, which will
be provided to the smallholder farmers under the SACP. These include ensuring diversified, multi-crop and intercropped
agricultural systems, promoting locally adapted and drought-tolerant varieties and investing in post-harvest processing facilities.
Climate change resilience is one of the criteria for the matching grant investments for the APGs. The capacity of the smallholders
in climate smart agriculture will be developed prior to the investments.
130.
Given the limited resources available and the scale of need for climate change adaptation, further resources will be sought from
the Green Climate Fund or ASAP+ to finance measures such as further investment in climate resilient infrastructure development
and processing facilities for the diversified value chains as well as research and development of locally adapted drought-tolerant
mixed crop and livestock systems.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
131.
MLAWRR will be the Lead Agency of SACP, with Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry as the Responsible Officer.
MLAWRR will establish a Joint Management Unit (JMU) that will include the functions of both the Project Coordination Unit
(PCU) of the SIRP project and the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) of the new SACP. The NPMU will be responsible
for the management of the implementation of SACP. The JMU arrangement is expected to bring synergies and focus to the
implementation of the IFAD country programme and provide broader and deeper expertise to tackle rural development
challenges of Zimbabwe.
132.
A joint Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted for SIRP and SACP, to: (i) provide strategic guidance to programme
implementation, (ii) oversee programme planning, (iii) review the Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) prior to submission to
IFAD, and (iv) review implementation progress and impact. The PSC shall meet twice a year and otherwise when required. The
PSC will be chaired by the PS of MLAWRR and comprise of the representatives of the following public sector
departments/institutions and private sector organisations that are expected to play key roles in the SACP efforts to develop rural
value chains in Zimbabwe: Department of Strategic Policy and Business (DSPPB), Department of Mechanisation and Irrigation
(DOI), and Department of Agricultural Extension Services (Agritex) of MLAWRR; the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development (MOFED); Ministry of Women Affairs, Community and Small and Medium Enterprise Development (MWACSMED);
Ministry of Environment, Tourism and Hospitality (METH); Ministry of Youth, Sports and Recreation (MYSR); and the Chamber of
Commerce. The PSC will also include two senior members of the WUOs and APGs from the provinces, representing SIRP and
SACP beneficiaries. The JMU will act as a secretariat for the PSC meetings.
133.
The JMU staff will be a mix of SIRP staff, officers working for both SIRP and SACP, and specialists, specifically hired or
seconded to manage the new SACP activities. The list of the staff in the National Project Management Unit of SACP is provided
in the PIM, as well as the draft TOR for all SACP officers in the NPCU and for key private service providers. The JMU will be
based in Harare, close to the MLAWRR premises.
134.
In order to smoothly manage the field operations, SACP will establish four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU),
covering Matebeleland North, Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West and Midlands provinces. The
implementation of the two districts of Kwekwe and Chirumanzu in the Midlands province will be the responsibility of Matabeleland
North and Mashonaland West PPIUs, respectively. The list of PPIU officers in the four SACP provinces is provided in the PIM, as
well as their draft terms of references. At the district level, the implementation will be carried out through Agritex extension
network, who form implementation teams in the districts covered by SACP. The district-level field operations will be supported by
SACP-resourced staff from other public institutions and private sector service providers. The SACP budget includes adequate
resources for field staff mobility and good telephone and internet connectivity to facilitate easy outreach to the SACP-supported
communities and to improve the chances of reaching the SACP implementation targets in an effective manner.
23/29
135.
Component 1 implementation arrangements and workflow consists of the following key phases: (1) SACP calls for Expressions of
Interest (EoI); (2) Agribusinesses and APGs submit their EoIs; (3) SACP national EoI shortlists eligible VC Lead Enterprise
candidates; (4) APGs and microenterprises receive comprehensive training packages; (5) VC LEs, Microenterprises and APGs
submit their Full Investment Proposals; (6) MG Technical Assessment Committees (TACs) evaluate the proposals received and
make MG recommendations; for smaller APG and MSME grants, the approval of grants is made by the Provincial TACs; (7) For
Lead Enterprise Category, IFAD No Objection is required, followed by the National Level Investment Committee’s final decision
on these large grants; (8) Grant-financed project implementation, reporting and M&E; and (9) establishment and implementation
of the Credit Line for VC Lead Enterprise support.
136.
Agritex will be the main implementing partner of the Component 2. An interdepartmental team made up of Agritex, District
Development Fund (DDF) and Rural District Council (RDC) and the SACP Social Inclusion Mobilisation Specialist, will identify
and screen eligible beneficiaries and interventions, prepare studies and designs, and monitor implementation in each ward
following the process outlined above for the selection and implementation of community investments. The team will be assisted
by one Technical Assistance Engineer recruited at each provincial SACP Unit, and with one Engineer at NPMU. The Agritex,
RDC and DDF district staff will lead the implementation of the community consultation activities, and Agritex, Department of
Irrigation (DoI) and Department of Mechanisation (DoM) at provincial level will support, monitor, and follow up the
implementation.
137.
Specific interventions in each ward will be identified through community dialogues led by the RDC and Agritex, with participation
of all members of the inter-departmental team. The inter-departmental team, in consultation with gender-balanced beneficiary
households and community-based organisations and with local consultants, will assess the feasibility of prioritized proposals and
select the ones for implementation. The technical feasibility studies under Component 2 will be undertaken by the department
with the necessary competence for the selected activity. The DoI will undertake irrigation feasibility studies, and DDF will
undertake the feasibility assessment for roads and water supply systems. In the screening for environmental and social risks,
EIAs and EMPs will be elaborated with the support of the Environmental Management Agency officers.
138.
Implementation responsibility for Sub-component 3.1 activities is with the National PMU. To achieve successful and sustainable
results, adequate resources are provided by SACP to recruit high quality local and international experts to support the conduct
the required studies and to assist in the facilitation of the related workshops, discussion forums and other events.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
Financial Management
1.  SACP Financial Management (FM) System. The financial management assessment for the project at design foresees a high
inherent risk, mitigated with SACP actions to “substantial”. The financial environment within which the project will operate
poses spill over effects that affect funds flow as well as the currency challenges especially to local currency transaction that
will be incurred by the project. The lead implementing agency, MLWARR has prior experience in the implementation of
projects financed by IFAD. The GoZ will externally recruit a Chief Accountant and second a Financial Accountant at the
National PMU, both with appropriate qualifications and experience, to solely focus on the programme-related financial
management tasks. IFAD will provide comprehensive training to the programme finance team on the IFAD’s financial
management requirements and disbursement procedures at programme start-up as well as provide on-going coaching during
supervision missions.
2.  Flow of Funds. MLAWRR will operate designated Accounts (DAs) in a commercial bank acceptable to GoZ for external
financing sources from IFAD and OPEC Fund, respectively. This being a mitigation measure adopted by various development
actors in the country to guarantee availability. The bank accounts will be managed by the NPMU which will be charged with
the preparation of all disbursement requests and justifications. Programme expenditures in foreign currency will be paid from
the US$ designated account to mitigate the risks of procurement delays from lack of foreign currency. MLAWRR also will open
two operating bank accounts at a commercial bank to receive and hold the financing transferred from the Designated accounts
from which programme costs in local currency shall be met. The replenishment of the Designated Account will be done in
accordance with the disbursement rules and procedures of the IFAD. SACP will use standard IFAD disbursement methods
including direct payment method for bigger payments (over US$ 100,000) and the replenishment method using the designated
account.
3.  GOZ will fund taxes and duties on programme expenditures through tax waivers on imported goods and services. The
government will maintain separate dollar account to provide for funds to cover for taxes. Transfers of these funds to the project
operating account meet the taxes will be done on a quarterly basis in the foreign currency to mitigate potential currency
mismatch risks. Other GoZ contributions shall be in form of salaries to seconded staff and provision of office space.
4.  Programme grantees under the matching grants facility for value chain investments will be required to open specific bank
accounts for receipt of grant funds and for banking their own matching contribution. Matching grants assessed and fully
meeting set criteria for disbursement will be expensed at the point of disbursement and will be included in the withdrawal
application at that point.
5.  Accounting and Reporting. The SACP NPMU will be the financial management and reporting hub, responsible for posting,
reconciling, and reporting on programme finances. The accounting of SACP will be done through an off-the shelf accounting
software to be procured at the onset of the programme and installed at the NPMU with customisation to generate financial
reports for GoZ and for IFAD to disclose use of funds by component, sub-component, activity, cost category and each of the
funding sources, and will incorporate budgetary control at activity level. IFAD will continuously review the Grants Module of the
Public Financial Management System (PFMS) during implementation to determine its readiness for SACP accounting. The
accounting software will be customised to generate required financial statements and other reports, including the “smart
SOEs”. SACP’s financial reporting will be in accordance with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) -
accrual basis adopted for all GoZ donor-financed programmes. The expenditure to be recognised and documented to IFAD
will only be those which have already been paid out. Any accrued expenditure at the close of the reporting period should be
processed and paid subsequently in line with payments processing procedures. Audited financial statements will clearly
describe in notes to the financial statements any accrued expenditure.
24/29
6.  The NPMU will prepare and submit to IFAD annual audited financial statements, and separate half yearly interim financial
reports in accordance with IFAD guidelines.
7.  Internal control function. The Internal Audit Office of MLAWRR will undertake SACP’s internal audit at least once per
annum, as the NPMU will be a part of MLAWRR. The unit is adequately resourced with suitably qualified personnel. This will
form part of the normal internal control mechanism within the project and the review reports will be shared with IFAD during
missions.
139.
External audits for the project will be performed by independent private firms during the initial years of implementation in line with
guidelines spelt out in the IFAD Handbook on Financial Report and Auditing for IFAD funded projects. IFAD will continuously
perform reviews together with the Office of the Auditor General of Zimbabwe to assess its readiness in staffing capacities to
conduct audits for IFAD funded projects. The audit will provide an opinion on the financial statements as well as ensure a review
of the internal control framework of the project for which a management letter will always be issued together with the audited
financial statements.
Procurement
140.
PRM Assessment. At its design phase, the project scores an inherent medium procurement risk of 2.02 (from substantive of only
0.02). The weaknesses of the Zimbabwe procurement system lie mainly at the procurement planning and contract administration
and management stages. They can be addresses through the specific and targeted corrective measures stipulated in the PRM
and PIM. The revisions are susceptible to improve the risk from a high-end medium to a low-end medium risk.
141.
Procurement Regulations. Procurement will be conducted in accordance with the Statutory Instrument (SI) 5 of 2018 “The
Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Asset” CAP. 22:23. The SI provisions do not comprehensively address processes
related to consulting and non-consulting services. Therefore, IFAD’s Standard Bidding Documents and Procurement Handbook
shall be used in lieu of national systems. The execution of the first procurement plan activities will only start following the
publication of the General Procurement Notice. As far as applicable and to ensure smooth implementation throughout the
project’s lifetime, similar activities will be packaged together following IFAD’s guidance on the matter. Similarly, the project will
seek framework agreements for routine and iterative purchases (works and services). Thresholds for the selection of the
procurement modality under each commodity shall be those set out by IFAD. The thresholds contained in SI 49 of 2020 will not
prevail. Procurement oversight review will be established in accordance with the score obtained in the Procurement Risk Matrix.
Revisions related to the PP, including any new procurement arrangements, are subject to IFAD’s prior approval. The Borrower
will ensure the PP budgets under each respective activity are updated accordingly and reflect the prevailing market situation. The
estimated budgets, as approved by IFAD, will constitute a basis for determining the commercial reasonableness of the actual
cost.
142.
A Call for Participation will be issued once, in the newspapers, during the first year (2021) and twice-a-year thereafter, for each of
the three matching grant categories (APG, MSME and Lead Enterprise). The selection of the beneficiaries under each category
will follow a 2-stage procedure and is subject to IFAD’s No Objection. The evaluations will be conducted by the Technical
Assessment Committees (TAC) and the results will be subject to IFAD’s no-objection. Furthermore, the assignment of TAC
members will be subject to IFAD’s no-objection, with rotation of some TAC members. SACP will provide training for all panel
members regarding the selection of MG, with focus on smallholder inclusive value chain development, eligibility criteria of SACP
MG mechanism, and integrity principles, conflict of interest, and anti-corruption measures. For each matching grant category, the
PIM details the applicable micro-purchasing mechanism, and a simplified guideline will be developed for the beneficiary use.  The
PIM will include the applicable budget procurement threshold (under each category), above which the procurement activity is
subject to the Technical Assessment Committee approval, supported by the Procurement Officer (member of this same
committee).  A procurement guidance note will be developed to assist the beneficiary in conducting their respective purchases.
The beneficiaries will elaborate a business plan including a micro-procurement plan which will be reviewed and approved by the
TAC.
143.
For the smooth implementation of their respective activities, matching grants will require the support of financial institutions,
including also financial literacy training. In this line, limited national competition will be conducted among those interested
commercial banks which have branches in the designated districts and provinces.
144.
The project will foster the use of frameworks agreements under mini competition for civil works throughout the project, targeting
national companies operating in the selected provinces.  Goods, works, and consulting services will be procured through the
appropriate competitive modality according to the established thresholds. Consultancies and non-consulting services, specifically
the recruitment of individual consultants, will be conducted using IFAD’s procurement procedures given the fact these respective
processes are not specifically covered under the country’s statutory instruments.
145.
Contract Management of civil works and consulting services. Similarly to SIRP and to ensure consistency among projects in
terms of managing and monitoring contracts, Red Book provisions for civil works contracts will prevail. Small civil works contracts
of relatively low complexity can be managed through the Green Book provisions. Contract execution of consulting services will
follow the White Book provisions. All concluded contracts will be mandatorily introduced on IFAD Client Portal (ICP) on ad hoc
basis by at least two persons from the project team.
146.
Institutional Arrangements. Procurement activities will be carried out by the NPMU within the MLAWRR and four Provincial
PIUs. The MLAWRR will include one Procurement Officer and one Procurement Assistant and the Provincial PMUs one
Procurement Assistant, each on a full-time basis. For Component 2, all procurement activities will be centralised at the NPMU
level. MLAWRR with the support of the districts will elaborate all technical documents necessary to prepare the solicitation
document management. Procurement will be managed by the NPMU, and the contracts will be awarded and issued by NPMU. 
The management of the technical part of the contract will be assigned to the Districts or DOI as case may be and a project
manager will be appointed for each contract. Reception of works, services and goods will be certified by the requesting unit.
Necessary procurement training will be undertaken at the project’s start-up stage.
25/29
147.
Governance Aspects and Anti-corruption Measures. The Transparency Corruption Perception Index for Zimbabwe scores 24
points (2019), which, although high, has remained relatively stable since 2015. Strengthened efforts are required to ensure that
IFAD’s procurement principles are observed throughout the project lifetime. Therefore, strict compliance with IFAD’s “Revised
Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its activities and operations”[55] will be required. Similarly, the project will ensure
strict adherence IFAD’s policy related to preventing Harassment, Sexual Harassment and Discrimination.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
Planning
148.
The logframe of SACP (Annex 1) will guide the development of work plans and budgets for the project. Planning and budgeting
will be integrated in the GoZ processes and cycles and will be based on Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs). These,
together with the logframe’s quantified results-based indicators and SACP’s MIS database, will provide the primary basis for
monitoring the SACP progress.
149.
At the project start-up, the NPMU will update the Logical Framework and based on that, develop the first AWPB. Thereafter, the
PMU will prepare each year a consolidated AWPB based on the principles of results-based planning. Subsequent AWPB
processes will offer the opportunities to the NPMU to reflect on lessons from the implementation experience of the previous
years, and to propose activities and expenditures required to achieve the intended project outcomes. The Project will have the
possibility of revising the AWPB at any time of the year, and any proposed adjustments will require approvals by both the GoZ
and IFAD.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
150.
SACP will develop a robust M&E system in compliance with IFAD and the GoZ requirements. The SACP M&E system will (i)
collect, analyse and update information on project outputs, outcomes and impact; (ii) support NPMU and the Steering Committee
in planning and making informed decisions on SACP strategies and actions; (iii) maintain and strengthen strategic partnerships
with stakeholders; and (iv) create opportunities for learning and sharing results. The system will be participatory, gender sensitive
and results-oriented while enabling the integration of physical and financial progress reporting. In addition, the system will enable
the analysis of climate change vulnerability among the beneficiaries. It will incorporate in-depth baseline (including WEAI), mid-
line and completion surveys, as well as qualitative thematic studies as relevant. To ensure quality and to allow IFAD to aggregate
results at corporate level, the baseline, mid-line and completion surveys will align to the IFAD guidelines for the measurement of
Core Indicators at Outcome level (the COI guidelines). The baseline survey will include context-specific needs assessments of
the concrete barriers to smallholder-driven agricultural sector transformation and address pressing information needs for
implementation planning. Data on all people-centred indicators will be collected and analysed disaggregated by age and gender.
151.
Relevant indicators have been specified in the SACP logframe and, to the extent possible, quantified. The indicators relate to the
different levels (output, outcome and impact) and include IFAD Core Indicators (CIs) as well as project specific indicators. At
start-up, the SACP will develop a glossary of all the indicators, explaining the meaning of each indicator (including Cis and project
specific indicators). The approach is based on the Theory of Change of SACP (Annex 2 of the PDR), and demonstrates the
logical links between the results at their different levels, thereby enableing the meaningful analysis of whether the project is on-
track towards its planned results even in the first years of implementation when higher-level results are not yet expected. Even if
the project, has for ease of measurement, specific Development Objective level indicators, such as ‘Rural producers’
organization reporting an increase in sales’ as well as ‘Households reporting adaptation of environmental sustainable and
climate-resilient technologies and practices’, which are measured separately, these indicators will come together gradually as
from the MTR and will be monitored in an integral manner during the project completion and impact assessments.
152.
The Programme will set up a Management Information System (MIS) to facilitate the storage, use and analysis of data. Geo-
referenced data will be systematically collected on all the indicators related to relevant locations and/or areas. SACP will promote
digitalization of the M&E system with portable electronic devices so as to speed up data entry, cleaning, and reporting as well as
making management decisions and disseminating the results rapidly at different levels. Furthermore, a digital business plan
database will be piloted for the Matching Grant projects.
153.
The programme’s M&E plan will be refined as part of the first implementation support mission scheduled to take place within the
first six months of the programme approval. It will comprise: i) setting up a Management Information System (MIS) to facilitate
storage, analysis and use of data; ii) providing clear details on the reporting requirements from different stakeholders; iii)
developing standard reporting formats and agreeing on the timeline and modality of reporting from the different implementing
partners.
154.
Data collection, verification and use will be a joint task by all implementing partners, however, the primary responsibility will lie
with the M&E Unit within the JMU. The M&E unit will be composed of a senior M&E officer, and a KM officer. Strong synergies
will be developed between KM and M&E, thereby ensuring that KM products are based on solid M&E evidence and that the
understanding and presentation of M&E data is enhanced by the development of knowledge products. The M&E unit will benefit
of capacity building activities such as PRIME. In Zimbabwe, the SIRP project has benefitted from M&E capacity building grant
PRIME. This support has proven effective, including in particular: (i) helping establish the questionnaires and MIS databases, (ii)
building the capacity of the M&E staff, and (iii) creation of regional M&E specialist network, and (iv) linking M&E and KM
mechanisms. Synergies with other grant-funded IFAD activities such as AVANTI will also be leveraged as appropriate.
26/29
Learning and knowledge management
155.
The programme’s KM activities will be guided by a robust KM strategy and plan, to improve learning, KM and communication
practices within the project. After the project start-up, SACP will, with support from technical IFAD experts, develop an effective
SACP Knowledge Management (KM) Strategy. Lessons learnt in implementation will be actively shared between provinces,
clusters and districts. Semi-annual review meetings with national and provincial staff and implementing partners will be organised
by NPMU to discuss progress towards results in relation to each semi-annual progress report, the format of which will explicitly
include a focus on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc. Study tours, exchange visits and learning routes will
be organised for lateral knowledge transfer. An effective downward and upward flow of information about project progress to
beneficiaries and implementing partners in the field is of utmost relevance in fostering ownership and participation.
156.
The KM Strategy will have a strong focus on documenting best practices as well as positive and negative lessons from SACP
implementation experience, supported by reliable evidence and analysis. The programme KM plan will promote the key
innovations and be aligned to the policy engagement activities of the project. In line with the key areas highlighted for policy
engagement, innovation and scaling up, knowledge activities will place a particular focus on the topics mentioned under Sub-
component 3.1. and required resources for studies and reviews and VC and policy workshops and events are provided therein. In
addition, and again in line with the policy engagement agenda, KM activities will pay attention to: (i) contract farming, and (ii)
mainstreaming themes, in particular nutrition sensitive value chains and economic empowerment of women. The wider adoption
of SACP’s documented best practices will be an important measure of its success in knowledge management, especially as
SACP is expected to represent a start for a programming approach in smallholder-based VC development, with other
investments of the same type to follow with funding from key international financiers.
b. Innovation and scaling up
157.
The core of the approach of SACP, private company-led transformation of smallholder agriculture, is not as such an innovation in
Zimbabwe. Numerous operations of this nature were earlier operational and doing well in this country. The critically important
challenge is to revive this approach to rural development and link smallholders to various value chains with opportunities of
substantially higher income generation and improved nutrition levels than is the case today. With the programming approach,
success in SACP can lead to follow-on projects with IFAD funding. Furthermore, if the experiences and results from SACP
implementation are positive, they are likely to influence the project designs of the larger international financiers, too, when their
lending to Zimbabwe resumes.  
158.
Within the above overall approach, SACP aims to introduce new, innovative and smart agricultural methods to practically all short
or long value chains it will support. At the same time resources will be made available to new, innovative practices to food
consumption on the farms, to improve the health and nutrition status of the SACP target group.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
159.
The main modalities for gathering information on smallholders’ priorities and needs will be the community consultations, as part
of the APG and microenterprise mobilisation under Component 1. Meetings will be organised through the local traditional
leadership and notices about meetings will be posted in public places encouraging participation of youth, women, men, and
people living with disabilities. Meetings will be organised at venues and times that allow women and people living with disabilities
to participate. The consultations will take the form of townhall meetings in each community where the project objectives and
principles of participation will be explained in local languages and feedback obtained from the communities including their
expectations from their participation in the project. Separate breakaway sessions will be organised for women and youth in order
to allow them to participate freely. The consultations will be minuted and records kept both at community and project levels.
Subsequently, the monitoring of project services delivery will be conducted through quarterly reports from the APGs in each
cluster that will be formed. The project log-frame includes indicators on the satisfaction of beneficiaries with project services, as
well as on the degree to which beneficiaries are able to influence decisions. The project M&E system will regularly collect data on
both of these indicators.
160.
Priorities for Component 2 will be gathered through community consultations at the ward level as part of the participatory
infrastructure investment planning. At least two dialogues will be organised in each community to inform the stakeholders about
the project, discuss the priority infrastructure and select specific investments based on an agreed criterion. Records of the
dialogues will be kept at ward and project level.
161.
The feedback and reports from the APGs, MEs and infrastructure oversight committees will be utilised by the District and
Provincial Project Implementation teams to review the progress being made in SACP-supported activities. The feedback will
inform the bi-annual reviews and project implementation planning process at the provincial and central levels and enable the
adaptive management and decision making by the teams.
162.
The screened and selected investments will be publicly disclosed, and originators of unsuccessful proposals informed with
reasons provided by the Technical Assessment and Investment Committees. Capacities of the APG committees, community-
based organisations and oversight committees will be strengthened through the training by the project teams particularly in social
inclusion and implementation monitoring.
27/29
b. Grievance redress.
163.
SACP grievance redress processes will build on the existing structures at Ward, District and Provincial level. Under Component
1, any grievances will be registered and resolved through the APG committee. Any grievances that cannot be addressed will be
reported to the Ward Development Committees (WaDCos). WaDCos, as the central planning authorities, who oversee and
coordinate development plans, will be the first port of call for registering and resolving any grievances related to the Component 2
project activities. Any grievances that cannot be resolved at this level will be reported to the Rural District Councils, which will
have representation in the project implementation. Beyond the District Councils, grievances will be addressed through Provincial
Councils.
164.
The project teams, at the national and provincial levels, will provide information on the grievance redress mechanism available
and messages regarding the zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) as well as the policy on preventing fraud and
corruption. At the district and ward level the consultation processes will provide information on the zero tolerance, prevention,
and reporting of any incidence. The information on the policies will be made available through all SACP contracts and on project
documents such as leaflets and matching grants proposal templates. Transparency will be promoted through the call for
proposals for both components and the technical assessment and investment committees that will be established.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion Plans
165.
Supervision. SACP will be directly supervised by IFAD with annual supervision and implementation support missions, followed
initially by shorter follow-up missions as needed, organised with the participation of the GoZ. Continuous implementation support
will be provided to the project, as required, by staff from IFAD’s technical divisions. The supervision and implementation support
will be particularly intense during the 18 first months of implementation to assure the strategic approach and the correct set up of
financial management, procurement and M&E. Supervision will be used as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons
jointly, and to reflect on ways to improve the SACP implementation and impact. The focus of these missions will be on: (i)
development impact based on progress measured against agreed indicators; (ii) joint identification of implementation challenges
and solutions with implementers and beneficiaries, and agreement on actions to achieve project objectives; and (iii) ensuring
compliance with loan covenants, procurement and efficient use of project funds.
166.
Mid-term Review (MTR). As SACP is a six-year project, an MTR will be undertaken towards the end of third year of SACP
implementation. The MTR will be jointly organised by the GoZ and IFAD in close collaboration with the other stakeholders.
167.
Project Completion Report (PCR). At the end of project implementation period, the GoZ in collaboration with IFAD will
undertake a project completion review exercise, in order to report on the results and impact achieved. The PCR would need to be
finalised before the project closing date, which will be six months after the completion date. As part of the completion activities, a
Beneficiary Impact Assessment will be undertaken, and findings used to inform the PCR. The lessons documented in the impact
assessment and PCR will be used by both IFAD and the GoZ to improve the quality of the future project designs and
implementation.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans
168.
A draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM) has been prepared. In addition, a draft AWPB and a draft procurement plan, for the
first 18 months of project implementation, have been prepared, as part of the SACP design process. These documents aim to
ensure that the project implementation starts as scheduled, without unnecessary delays during the first project year. The Joint
Management Unit with SIRP, with its experience and lessons learned and the shared professionals within the JMU with hands-on
project planning and implementation experience, is expected to speed up the project start-up. The comprehensive guidelines and
detailed procedures agreed for the first calls for APGs and agri-enterprises to participate in the SACP activities also aim at a fast
and smooth start of the SACP implementation immediately after the project effectiveness.
Footnotes
[1] IMF (2020)
28/29
[2] One beneficiary represents five persons which is the average size of the household in Zimbabwe
[3] World Bank: “Climate-Smart Agriculture in Zimbabwe”, 2019.
[4]http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/ZWE.pdf
[5] As per the Zimbabwe Poverty Report 2017.
[6] For further analysis, see for instance: GoZ and the World Bank: “Zimbabwe Public Expenditure Review”, 2019.
[7] 2019 World Bank Doing Business Report.
[8] For further analysis, refer to: GoZ and the World Bank: “Zimbabwe Public Expenditure Review”, 2019.
[9]https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/02/26/pr2072-zimbabwe-imf-executive-board-concludes-2020-article-iv-consultation
[10] https://data.humdata.org/dataset/inform-covid-19-risk-index-version-0-1-2
[11] In spite of the arrears, the World Bank and African Development Bank have non-lending programmes in Zimbabwe focusing on
technical assistance, capacity building and post-Idai recovery.
[12] Scoones, I., Mahenehene, J., Marongwe, N., Mavedzenge, B., Murimbarimba, F., & Sukume, C. (2010). Zimbabwe's land reform:
myths & realities.
[13] Zimbabwe National Agriculture Policy Framework 2018-2030.
[14] The 2020 National Budget Statement. Minister of Finance and Economic Development, Zimbabwe, November 2019.
[15] Zimbabwe National Agriculture Policy Framework, 2018-2030.
[16] http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/GII
[17] FAO (2017) Zimbabwe Agriculture Gender Assessment Report
[18] According to ZIMSTAT Poverty, Income, Consumption and Expenditure Survey Report of 2011/12, about 85% of the
economically active persons do not have permanent paid jobs.
[19] ZIMSTAT (2019). Labour Force Child Labour Survey report.
[20]https://www.globalhungerindex.org/pdf/en/2019/Zimbabwe.pdf
[21]https://www.dandc.eu/en/article/due-malnourishment-many-poor-children-zimbabwe-suffer-stunted-growth
[22] Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (2015 ZDHS)
[23] Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) (2019)
[24] Zimbabwe environmental 2. Outlook https://www.ema.co.zw/agency/state-of-the-environment-report
[25] Ibid
[26] CIAT/World bank, 2019
[27] Benitez, P., Boehlert, B., Davies, R. and van Seventer, D. (2018). Assessment of the Potential Impacts of Climate Variability and
Shocks on Zimbabwe’s Agricultural Sector.  World Bank Report.
[28] USAID. (2019). Southern Africa – Tropical Cyclone Idai – Fact Sheet #9 FY2019, April 25, 2019. Available at https://
www.usaid.gov/cyclone-idai/fy19/fs9 [Accessed August 2019]
[29] Zimbabwe environmental 2. Outlook https://www.ema.co.zw/agency/state-of-the-environment-report
[30] ZIMSTAT, 2019
[31] IFAD: Zimbabwe: Country Strategic Opportunities Programme: 2020-2026, p. 7.
[32] See: (i) World Bank Public Expenditure Review with Focus on Agriculture Sector, Zimbabwe, 2019, (ii) IMF Staff Monitored
Programme, 2019
[33] ITC Trademap, 2020: in 2018, tobacco exports represented 80% of Zimbabwe agriculture sector exports.
[34] https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/rarp_commercialising_smallholder_farming.pdf
[35] http://www.zagp.org.zw/Content/Uploads/ZAGP_Profile.pdf
[36] www.greenenterprize.org
[37] Experience recorded in stakeholder meeting with IFAD SIRP project and NGOs including Practical Action, ADRA (Adventist
Development and Relief Agency), CIMMIT and SNV.
29/29
[38] The corridors are (i) Beitbridge- Masvingo-Harare; (ii) Beitbridge-Bulawayo-Victoria Falls; (iii) Beitbridge-Masvingo-Forbes; (iv)
Harare-Chirundu; (v) Harare-Nyamapanda; and (vi) Plumtree-Byo-Harare-Forbes Border.
[39] SACP Districts in target provinces are as follows. Matebeleland North Province: Hwange; Binga, Tsholotsho and Lupane districts;
Mashonaland West Province: Chegutu, Mhondoro-Ngezi, Zvimba, and Sanyati districts; Mashonaland Central Province:  Rushinga, Mt
Darwin, Muzarabani, and Shamva districts, Mashonaland East Province: Goromonzi, Murehwa, Mutoko, Uzumba Maramba-Pfungwe
(UMP) districts; Midlands Province: Kwekwe, Chirumanzu districts.
[40] The initially identified eight clusters cover the following wards and crops/livestock activities: Cluster 1 covers wards in Rushinga,
Mt Darwin, Muzarabani and Shamva and value chains include sesame and traditional grains; Cluster 2 covers wards in Rushinga, Mt
Darwin, Muzarabani and Shamva and include sheep and goats; Cluster 3 covers wards in Goromonzi, Murehwa, Mutoko, UMP and
include a variety of horticulture crops; Cluster 4 covers wards in Goromonzi, Murehwa, Mutoko, UMP and focuses on small livestock;
Cluster 5 covers wards in Chegutu, Mhondoro Ngezi, Zvimba, Sanyati and Chrumanzu and the focuses on maize and citrus; Cluster 6
covers wards in Chegutu, Mhondoro Ngezi, Zvimba, Sanyati and Chirumanzu and includes poultry and piggery; Cluster 7 covers
wards in Hwange, Binga, Lupane, Nkayi and Kwekwe districts and focuses on traditional grains; and Cluster 8 covers wards in
Hwange, Binga, Lupane, Nkayi and Kwekwe districts and focuses on beef and goats value chains.
[41] Category A – chronically poor and unable; Category B1 – chronically poor, but able; Category B2 – transiently poor and Category
C – self-sufficient. (refer to PIM for further details on the definitions of each Category).
[42] The distribution of SACP beneficiary households (HHs) as per poverty categories is as follows: (a) Category A: 10,940 HHs; (b)
Category B1: 16,400 HHs; (c) Category B2: 40,000 HHs; and (d) Category C: 10,900 HHs.
[43] One beneficiary represents five persons, which is the average size of the household in Zimbabwe. 
[44] The total outreach for MSMEs is 11,200 beneficiary households and the outreach for Lead Value Chain Enterprises is 17,040
beneficiary households making a total of 28,240 beneficiary households. However, 13,000 MSMEs/LVCE suppliers are from the
APGs and double counting is eliminated to make a total outreach of 15, 240 non-APG members beneficiary households.
[45]More detailed descriptions of SACP activities and the implementation arrangements are provided in Annex 8: Project
Implementation Manual (PIM).
[46] As background analysis, the interest of private sector to participate in SACP activities was confirmed by a survey made with 22
agribusinesses during the design mission. It was found that in Zimbabwe, the agribusiness sector remains diversified and has high
recovery potential. The trading statistics confirm that agriculture production including for export are picking up after the slump of last
decade. See details in the PIM.
[47] See draft Table of Contents for each manual in the attached PIM
[48] The BDS consultants will be either from NGOs or the private sector. The recruitment of these is subject to IFAD’s no-objection.
[49] Topics will include group/business management, operational planning, financial management (FM), procurement and marketing.
[50]https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=zw.co.kurimamari&hl=en
[51] These will include concepts such as “saving for a Purpose”, borrowing, interest rates, collateral, bank transactions, payments, and
use of mobile and digital banking.
[52] The study is financed by Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme, Phase II (ASAP 2) and implemented in collaboration
with Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation (WCDI)
[53] Community-based interventions to promote diversified household food production will include community green gardens, small
livestock, forestry products for household consumption, and others that will be identified during implementation.
[54] The design mission assessed the physical presence of financial institutions in target areas and identified potential partner banks.
The assessment is available in the design package.
[55] https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40189363/fraudpolicy_eb86_e.pdf/e2ae80aa-e423-4d7c-a582-c01c1917b427
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Logical Framework
1/5
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
MIS
Monthly
PCU
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Household members
0
200000
391200
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
MIS
Monthly
PCU
Women-headed households
15000
30000
Households
0
40000
78240
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
MIS
Monthly
PCU
Females
Young
Total number of persons receiving services
0
0
20000
39120
10000
23472
40000
78240
Project Goal 
Increased household incomes
Smallholder income level in target districts
BL/MLS/ELS 3 years
NPMU
US$ HH average in target districts / year (%
increase)
US$ Project beneficiary / year (% increase)
US$ Women headed HH (% increase)
US$ APG member / year (% increase)
5
15
15
25
20
50
50
100
Development Objective 
Increased smallholder participation in climate
smart, market oriented value chains
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in sales
AOS/ELS
Annual
NPMU
Number of Rural POs
0
400
720
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and
climate-resilient technologies and practices
AOS/ELS
Annual
NPMU
Households
0
15000
30000
The number of
woman-headed HH
targeted is lower
than the number of
women targeted
because the project
will also directly
target women in
men-headed
households
Improved macro-
economic
conditions; Baseline
of US$483 to be
confirmed by
survey.
Baseline values
through baseline
survey
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/5
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Percentage of households satisfied with project supported services
AOS/ELS
Annual
NPMU
Households
0
80
80
Outcome 
Component 1 - Outcome: Inclusive Value
Chain Development
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal
partnerships/agreements or contracts with public or private entities
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
Number of POs
Number of bankable business plans completed
# Groups
# MSMEs
# VC lead enterprises
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Women-headed households
Households
2.2.1 New jobs created
New jobs
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
400
720
400
125
30
800
200
40
4000
12000
10000
30000
1000
2000
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
AOS/ELS
Annual
NPMU
1.2.5 Households reporting using rural financial services
Households
COI survey
MTR and
Endline
NPMU
1.2.9 Households with improved nutrition Knowledge Attitudes and Practices
(KAP)
COI survey
MTR and
Endline
NPMU
Women-headed households
Households (number)
4500
9000
9000
18000
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in empowerment
COI survey
MTR and
Endline
PCU
Young
Total persons
0
0
Baseline values
through baseline
survey (CIs 2.2.3 &
1.2.4); GoZ will
engage external
BDS service
providers; Interest of
private sector to
participate; Grant
activated; Baseline
by survey (CI 1.2.9);
WEIA index to be
determined at
baseline and end-
line survey (IE 2.1).
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Component 1 - Outputs
3/5
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Females
2.1.3 Rural producers’ organizations supported
Rural POs supported
0
0
650
800
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
1.1.4 Persons trained in production practices and/or technologies
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
Total number of persons trained by the
project
Women trained in crop
Young people trained in crop
Women trained in livestock
Young people trained in livestock
Women trained in fishery
Young people trained in fishery
Total persons trained in crop
Total persons trained in livestock
Total persons trained in fishery
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of land
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12000
24000
3600
1800
1800
900
600
300
7200
3600
3600
1800
1200
600
7200
14400
3600
1200
7200
2400
12000
24000
AOS/ELS
Annual
NPMU
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business management MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
Females
Young
Persons trained in IGAs or BM (total)
APG matching grants disbursed
# young group members
0
0
0
0
7500
12250
3750
6125
15000
24500
3000
6000
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
GoZ will engage
external BDS
service providers
(CI 1.1.4); GoZ will
engage external
CSA service
providers (CI 3.1.4);
APGs completed
viable business
plans; Interest of
private sector to
participate
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/5
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
# Groups
# Group members
# female group members
MSME and Lead Enterprise matching grants disbursed
# MSMEs with female lead
# MSMEs with youth lead
# VC lead enterprises with female lead
# MSMEs
# VC lead enterprises
0
0
0
0
0
400
800
12000
24000
6000
12000
40
30
10
125
30
70
50
15
200
40
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
Households
Women-headed households
0
0
9000
18000
4500
9000
Outcome 
Component 2 - Outcome: Climate Proofed
Value Chain Infrastructure
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to markets, processing
and storage facilities
AOS/ELS
Annual
NPMU
Roads completed
(CI 2.2.6).
Households reporting improved physical
access to markets
12000
30000
Number of communities reporting a significant reduction in the time spent for
collecting water
BL/MLS/ELS 3 years
NPMU
Communities
0
50
100
Output 
Component 2 - Outputs
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
Hectares of land
2.1.5 Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded
Length of roads
0
0
900
1780
50
150
MIS
Quarterly
NPMU
Villagers mobilized
(CI 1.1.2);
Constructors
available (CI 2.1.5)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
3. Institutional Support and Project
Coordination
5/5
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies proposed to
policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment
MIS
Monthly
PCU
Issues identified
Number
0
6
12
Percentage of households reporting they can influence decision-making of local
authorities and project-supported service providers
AOS/ELS
Quarterly
NPMU
Households
Women-headed households
Youth headed households
0
0
0
40
40
40
75
75
75
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2: SACP Theory of Change 
Results 
Outcomes 
Goal: Increased household incomes, empowerment of women and 
men, and improved nutrition through sustainable transformation of 
the smallholder farming sector 
Development Objective: Increased equitable smallholder 
participation in market-oriented, climate-smart and nutrition 
sensitive value chains  
1. Skills and Investment 
by women and men for 
market oriented and 
nutrition sensitive 
smallholder value chains 
2. Climate resilient 
Infrastructure to support 
smallholder sector growth 
and development  
3. Institutions and policies 
to enable sustainable and 
equitable commercial 
smallholder agriculture 
Rural development dialogue 
and policies for 
commercialization of 
smallholder sector for 
equitable poverty reduction 
SACP Solutions 
Mechanism 
Targeted technical assistance 
for rural women, men and 
youth on climate smart 
agriculture, business 
planning, financial literacy 
and nutrition skills 
SACP interventions and 
partnerships sustainably 
strengthen the smallholder 
clusters and institutional 
capacities 
Financing instruments for 
climate smart farmer  
group investments,  
inclusive enterprise 
development and to 
introduce a sustainable 
agri-finance mechanism 
Cluster Infrastructure to 
enable climate resilient, 
nutrition sensitive value chain 
development to cater for the 
needs of women and men 
Underlying 
causes  
Limited and inequitable 
awareness, skills and 
investment by smallholder 
households and 
agribusinesses 
Insufficient infrastructure 
investment for climate 
resilient value chain 
development, to produce 
sufficient nutrition levels 
Limited capacities and 
exposure on equitable 
smallholder 
commercialization by rural 
sector institutions  
Development 
problem 
High poverty, climate vulnerability and insufficient nutrition levels among rural households, 
due to scattered and unorganized nature of the smallholder sector, structural gender 
inequality, as well as weak institutional environment 
1 
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
A.  Main assumptions  
Project duration. The duration of the SACP implementation is six years with an 
intended project start in July 2021. 
Prices and costs. Costs have been collected as of June 2020. Costs are entered in 
US dollars with inflation adjustments. Data were collected by the consultants in the field 
and via partners and other IFAD projects. The Project costs are presented in USD. 
Inflation. The local inflation is not estimated as costing are in USD.1 The forecasts 
of the IMF and the World Bank for the next period estimate continuous moderate level of 
inflation. Foreign inflation is set at 2 per cent per annum over the Project period, based 
on the Manufactures Unit Value Index of 15 large economies (MUV15). 
Table 1.1 Inflation rates (local and foreign) 
Foreign inflation 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Contingencies, taxes and duties. The parameters assumed for the expenditure 
categories as listed in Table 1.2).2 3 
Table 1.2: Physical contingencies, foreign exchange and taxes/duties 
Expenditure accounts 
Works 
Goods, services and inputs 
Equipment and materials 
Consultancies – TA – International 
Consultancies – TA – National 
Trainings and workshops 
Grants and subsidies 
Salaries and allowances 
Other operating costs 
Physical 
contingencies 
Foreign 
exchange 
Duties/taxes 
15% 
5% 
10% 
- 
- 
10% 
- 
- 
10% 
10% 
20% 
65% 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5% 
10% 
10% 
20% 
- 
15% 
10% 
- 
- 
10% 
The Government of Zimbabwe finances the taxes on all goods and services 
purchased under the project. 
B.  Component costs 
Total component cost. The total investment and recurrent cost for the Project is 
estimated at USD 67.43 million including contingencies. The total base costs are 
USD 64.82 million. Price contingencies account for USD 2.39 million (4 per cent of the 
total base costs). Baseline investment costs are estimated at USD 61.79 million 
1 Zimbabwe is experiencing an economic and fiscal crisis. Macroeconomic stability remains a challenge: the economy 
contracted sharply in 2019, amplified by climate shocks that have crippled agriculture and electricity generation. The 
newly introduced ZWL$ has lost most of its value; inflation is very high; and international reserves are very low (IMF 
Feb 2020). At the time of the project design the annual inflation as of May (year-on-year) was estimated at 786% 
(Bloomberg, 16 June 2020). Because of these factors, the project costing as well financial and economic analysis has 
been undertaken in USD. 
2 The categories applied a consistent with the Standardised Category Descriptions for Loan Grant Allocation Table 
(Schedule 2) in Financing Agreements, IC/FOD/02/2013, dated 29 August 2013. 
3 These values are varied according to specific requirements as needed. Refer to detailed cost tables. 
1 
representing 95 per cent of baseline cost. The breakdown of the costs by component is 
shown in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3 – Components Project Cost Summary 
Component costs. The Project costs comprise three components as follows. 
Component 1 Inclusive Value Chain Development is estimated at USD 40.55 million or 
63 per cent of the base costs. This component comprises: Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster 
Identification and VC Mobilization USD 0.07 million or <1 per cent of base costs; Sub-
Component 1.2 Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses USD 4.08 million or 
6 per cent of base costs; and, Sub-component 1.3: Matching Grants for Inclusive VC 
Investment USD 36.41 million or 56 per cent of base costs. Component 2 Climate 
Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure is estimated at USD 16.9 million or 26 per cent of 
base costs. Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination is estimated at 
USD 7.38 million or 11 per cent of base costs. This component comprises: Sub-
component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support USD 2.40 million or 4 per cent of base 
costs; and Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination USD 4.98 million or 8 per cent of 
base costs. Further breakdown is shown in Table 1.3 above. Component 4 (Contingency 
Emergency Response), which is not costed, has been included to enable IFAD to respond 
urgently in its support to smallholder farmers, who are the most impacted.  
C.  Financing plan 
Component cost by financier. An IFAD loan will finance USD 35.69 million or 
52.9 per cent of total project costs. The IFAD loan includes: USD 30.65 million or 
71.6 per cent for Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development for which the total 
cost is USD 42.78 million; and, USD 5.04 million or 65.1 per cent of Component 3: 
Institutional Support and Project Coordination for which the total cost is USD 7.74 
million. The amount of climate finance is estimated at US$14.06 million (adaptation), 
corresponding to approximately 13 per cent of the IFAD loan. 
The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) will finance USD 15 million of 
Component 2 Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure or 88.7 per cent of that 
component. 
  The smallholders (Agriculture Producer Group members) will finance USD 
4.20 million or 6.2 per cent of the total project costs. The agribusiness sector will finance 
USD 7.23 million or 10.7 per cent of the total project costs. Co-financing from the 
2 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (US$ Million)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 1. Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 0.060.000.074-2. Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 4.08-4.08-63. Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment 36.41-36.41-56Subtotal Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 40.550.0040.55-63B. Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 16.740.1616.90126C. Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 1. Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support 1.730.672.402842. Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination 3.801.174.98248Subtotal Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 5.531.857.382511D. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response -----Total BASELINE COSTS 62.822.0064.823100Physical Contingencies 0.210.000.21--Price Contingencies 2.320.072.3934Total PROJECT COSTS 65.362.0767.433104 
beneficiaries and the private sector with both take place within the financing activity 
under the Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment. 
  The Government will finance USD 4.61 million in the form of shared costs for 
Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Institutional Support and Project Coordination, as well as taxes and duties comprising 
2.3 per cent of the total project costs. The SACP financing plan is shown in Table 1.4 
Table 1.4 – Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
  The SACP financing plan by components and financiers is shown in Table 1.5. 
3 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Disbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDSmallholdersAgribusinessGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Works --13,96188.0----1,90812.015,86923.52. Grants & Subsidies 24,04467.8--4,20411.97,22720.4--35,47652.63. Goods, Services & Inputs 1,01041.3------1,43758.72,4473.64. Equipment and Materials 1,06466.924015.1----28718.01,5912.45. Consultancies 1585.0------315.017-6. Training and Workshops 4,23468.367610.9----1,28720.86,1989.27. Recurrent Costs 2,70384.11223.8----38912.13,2144.88. Credit 2,617100.0--------2,6173.9Total PROJECT COSTS 35,68752.915,00022.24,2046.27,22710.75,3117.967,428100.0 
Table 1.5 – SACP Components by Financiers 
4 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Components by Financiers (US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDSmallholdersAgribusinessGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 1. Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 6688.8------811.2740.12. Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 3,82185.0------67415.04,4956.73. Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment 26,75970.0--4,20411.07,22718.917-38,20856.7Subtotal Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 30,64671.6--4,2049.87,22716.97001.642,77763.4B. Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure --15,00088.7----1,90811.316,90725.1C. Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 1. Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support 63725.0------1,91175.02,5483.82. Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination 4,40484.8------79215.25,1967.7Subtotal Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 5,04165.1------2,70334.97,74411.5D. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response ------------Total PROJECT COSTS 35,68752.915,00022.24,2046.27,22710.75,3117.967,428100.0 
D.  Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 1: 
Components Project Cost Summary 
Table 2: 
Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
Table 3: 
Expenditure Accounts by Components – Totals including Contingencies (USD Million) 
Table 4: 
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD Million) 
Table 5: 
Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs (USD Million) 
Table 6: 
Components by Financiers (USD Million) 
Table 7: 
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
Table 8: 
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
Table 9: 
Allocation of Loan Proceed (Loan Agreement Schedule 2) 
5 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 1:  Components Project Cost Summary 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 2:  Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
6 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (US$ Million)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 1. Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 0.060.000.074-2. Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 4.08-4.08-63. Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment 36.41-36.41-56Subtotal Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 40.550.0040.55-63B. Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 16.740.1616.90126C. Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 1. Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support 1.730.672.402842. Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination 3.801.174.98248Subtotal Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 5.531.857.382511D. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response -----Total BASELINE COSTS 62.822.0064.823100Physical Contingencies 0.210.000.21--Price Contingencies 2.320.072.3934Total PROJECT COSTS 65.362.0767.433104 
7 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project %% TotalExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary (US$ Million)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Works 15.87-15.87-24B. Goods, Services & Inputs 1.390.922.31404C. Equipment and Materials 0.120.220.34651D. Vehicles 0.420.821.24662E. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance National Technical Assistance 0.02-0.02--F. Training and Workshops 5.72-5.72-9G. Grants and Subsidies 33.80-33.80-52H. Credit 2.50-2.50-4Total Investment Costs 59.821.9761.79395II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 2.16-2.16-3B. Operating costs 0.830.040.8741Total Recurrent Costs 3.000.043.0315Total BASELINE COSTS 62.822.0064.823100Physical Contingencies 0.210.000.21--Price Contingencies 2.320.072.3934Total PROJECT COSTS 65.362.0767.433104 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 3:  Expenditure Accounts by Components – Totals including Contingencies (USD million) 
8 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Component 3: InstitutionalExpenditure Accounts by Components Component 1: Inclusive Value ChainSupport and Project - Totals Including Contingencies DevelopmentCoordination(US$ Million)Sub-componentSub-componentSub-componentComponent 2:Sub-componentComponent1.1: Cluster1.2: Technical1.3:Climate3.1: Policy4:IdentificationServices forFinancing forProofed ValueandSub-componentContingencyand VCAPGs andInclusive VCChainInstitutional3.2: ProjectEmergencyMobilizationAgribusinessesInvestmentInfrastructureSupportCoordinationResponseTotal I. Investment Costs A. Works ---15.87---15.87B. Goods, Services & Inputs ----1.780.66-2.45C. Equipment and Materials -----0.34-0.34D. Vehicles ---0.24-1.01-1.25E. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance National Technical Assistance 0.02------0.02F. Training and Workshops -4.500.120.680.760.15-6.20G. Grants and Subsidies --35.48----35.48H. Credit --2.62----2.62Total Investment Costs 0.024.5038.2116.782.552.16-64.21II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances -----2.28-2.28B. Operating costs 0.06--0.12-0.75-0.93Total Recurrent Costs 0.06--0.12-3.04-3.21Total PROJECT COSTS 0.074.5038.2116.912.555.20-67.43  Taxes 0.010.670.02-0.380.48-1.57Foreign Exchange 0.00--0.160.711.20-2.07 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 4:  Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD million) 
9 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ Million) Totals Including Contingencies20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalA. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 1. Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 0.04-0.04---0.072. Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 0.601.081.141.110.56-4.503. Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment 4.929.779.969.623.94-38.21Subtotal Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 5.5510.8411.1410.744.50-42.78B. Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 0.471.087.236.881.240.0216.91C. Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 1. Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support 0.400.410.420.430.440.452.552. Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination 2.130.630.670.630.640.495.20Subtotal Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 2.541.051.091.061.070.947.74D. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response -------Total PROJECT COSTS 8.5512.9719.4618.676.810.9667.43 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 5:  Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs (USD million) 
10 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs (US$ Million) Totals Including Contingencies20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalA. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 1. Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization Investment Costs 0.01-0.01---0.02Recurrent Costs 0.03-0.03---0.06Subtotal Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 0.04-0.04---0.072. Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses Investment Costs 0.601.081.141.110.56-4.503. Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment Investment Costs 4.929.779.969.623.94-38.21Subtotal Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 5.5510.8411.1410.744.50-42.78B. Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure Investment Costs 0.451.067.216.861.21-16.78Recurrent Costs 0.020.020.020.020.020.020.12Subtotal Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 0.471.087.236.881.240.0216.91C. Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 1. Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support Investment Costs 0.400.410.420.430.440.452.552. Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination Investment Costs 1.600.110.140.110.100.112.16Recurrent Costs 0.530.520.540.520.530.393.04Subtotal Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination 2.130.630.670.630.640.495.20Subtotal Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 2.541.051.091.061.070.947.74D. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Total PROJECT COSTS 8.5512.9719.4618.676.810.9667.43Total Investment Costs 7.9712.4318.8718.136.260.5564.21Total Recurrent Costs 0.580.540.590.540.550.413.21 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 6:  Components by Financiers (USD ’000) 
11 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Components by Financiers (US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDSmallholdersAgribusinessGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 1. Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 6688.8------811.2740.12. Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 3,82185.0------67415.04,4956.73. Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment 26,75970.0--4,20411.07,22718.917-38,20856.7Subtotal Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 30,64671.6--4,2049.87,22716.97001.642,77763.4B. Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure --15,00088.7----1,90811.316,90725.1C. Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 1. Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Support 63725.0------1,91175.02,5483.82. Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination 4,40484.8------79215.25,1967.7Subtotal Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination 5,04165.1------2,70334.97,74411.5D. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response ------------Total PROJECT COSTS 35,68752.915,00022.24,2046.27,22710.75,3117.967,428100.0 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 7:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
Table 8:  Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
12 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Disbursement Accounts by Financiers(US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDSmallholdersAgribusinessGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Works --13,96188.0----1,90812.015,86923.52. Grants & Subsidies 24,04467.8--4,20411.97,22720.4--35,47652.63. Goods, Services & Inputs 1,01041.3------1,43758.72,4473.64. Equipment and Materials 1,06466.924015.1----28718.01,5912.45. Consultancies 1585.0------315.017-6. Training and Workshops 4,23468.367610.9----1,28720.86,1989.27. Recurrent Costs 2,70384.11223.8----38912.13,2144.88. Credit 2,617100.0--------2,6173.9Total PROJECT COSTS 35,68752.915,00022.24,2046.27,22710.75,3117.967,428100.0Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDSmallholdersAgribusinessGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Works --13,96188.0----1,90812.015,86923.5B. Goods, Services & Inputs 1,01041.3------1,43758.72,4473.6C. Equipment and Materials 28885.0------5115.03390.5D. Vehicles 77662.024019.2----23618.91,2521.9E. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance National Technical Assistance 1585.0------315.017-F. Training and Workshops 4,23468.367610.9----1,28720.86,1989.2G. Grants and Subsidies 24,04467.8--4,20411.97,22720.4--35,47652.6H. Credit 2,617100.0--------2,6173.9Total Investment Costs 32,98451.414,87723.24,2046.57,22711.34,9227.764,21495.2II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 1,97686.5------30813.52,2853.4B. Operating costs 72678.212213.2----818.79301.4Total Recurrent Costs 2,70384.11223.8----38912.13,2144.8Total PROJECT COSTS 35,68752.915,00022.24,2046.27,22710.75,3117.967,428100.0 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 9:  Allocation of Loan Proceed (Loan Agreement Schedule 2) 
13 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Allocation of Loan Proceeds Suggested AllocationIFAD Loan of Loan ProceedsLoan Amounts(US$ '000) LoanDisbursementTotal Project CostAverage Disbursement %UnallocatedAllocatedAmount%TotalLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalTotalLocalForeignTotalLocalForeign1. Works --15,86915,869-----------2. Equipment and Materials 958671,5915401,0516731851,06410617899581528053. Consultancies 13851717-8585-1511-1313-4. Grants and Subsidies 21,6406835,47635,476-6868-24,0442,4042,404-21,64021,640-5. Recurrent Costs 2,432843,2143,1744084841002,70327026642,4322,396366. Training and Workshops 3,811686,1986,198-6868-4,234423423-3,8113,811-7. Goods, Services and Inputs 909412,4471,4689794120731,01010130719092696408. Credit 2,3551002,6172,617-100100-2,617262262-2,3552,355-Unallocated 3,569--------------Total 35,6875367,42865,3582,070---35,6873,5693,40416532,11830,6361,482 _________________________________Loan amounts financed by IFAD Loan 
E.  Appendix 1.2 Detailed Cost Tables 
Table 1: 
Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 
Table 2: 
Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 
Table 3: 
Matching Grants for Inclusive VC Investment 
Table 4: 
Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 
Table 5: 
Institutional and Policy Support 
Table 6: 
Project Co-ordination 
Table 7: 
Contingency Emergency Response 
14 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 1. Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 
15 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 1. Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization /a UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesCostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total I. Investment Costs A. Mobilisation (preparations) 1. Community Mobilization Consultant Specialist Preparation Days day5-5---103002-2---3Specialist Training Days day12-12---243004-4---7Specialist DSA day12-12---243004-4---7Total Investment Costs 9-9---17II. Recurrent Costs A. Mobilisation Preparations 1. Provincial Workshop Participant and Venue Costs Travels day160-160---320254-4---8DSA day400-400---8002510-10---20Full Board at Government Training Centre day400-400---800208-8---16Workshop venue day20-20---401503-3---6Total Recurrent Costs 25-25---50Total 34-34---67 _________________________________\a Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development / Sub-component 1.1 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 2. Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses 
16 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 2. Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses /a UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesCostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total I. Investment Costs A. 1.2.1 Business Development Services 1. 1.2.1.1 Lead Enterprise Proposal Preparation Workshop Item 1: BDS Specialist Preparation Days days11331--185006221--9Item 2: BDS Specialist Training Days days4884--245002442--12Item 3: Venue for Training Days days4884--241,0004884--24Subtotal 1.2.1.1 Lead Enterprise Proposal Preparation Workshop 1214147--452. 1.2.1.2 MSME Business Development Services Item 1: BDS Specialist Preparation Days days60-----6030018-----18Item 2: BDS Specialist Training Days days300600600600300-2,4003009018018018090-720Item 3: BDS Specialist DSA cost days300600600600300-2,400752345454523-180Subtotal 1.2.1.2 MSME Business Development Services 131225225225113-9183. 1.2.1.3 APG BDS TOT and Coaching Item 1: BDS Specialist Preparation Days days30-30---603009-9---18Item 2: BDS Specialist Training Days days30-30---603009-9---18Item 3: BDS Specialist Coaching Days days6001,2001,2001,200600-4,800300180360360360180-1,440Item 4: BDS Specialist DSA Cost days6001,2001,2001,200600-4,800754590909045-360Subtotal 1.2.1.3 APG BDS TOT and Coaching 243450468450225-1,8364. 1.2.1.4 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs Item 1: Travels days80-80---160252-2---4Item 2: DSA days240-240---480102-2---5Item 3: Full Board at Government Training Centre days240-240---480205-5---10Item 4: Venue at Government Training Centre days10-10---20501-1---1Subtotal 1.2.1.4 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs 10-10---19Subtotal 1.2.1 Business Development Services 395689716682338-2,818B. 1.2.2 CSA Productivity Enhancement 1. 1.2.2.1 CSA TOT and Coaching Item 1: Agritex Specialist Preparation Days days10-10---20751-1---2Item 2: Agritex Specialist Training Days days10-10---20751-1---2Item 3: Agritex Specialist Coaching Days days200400400400200-1,600751530303015-120Item 4: Agritex Specialist DSA Cost days210400410400200-1,620751630313015-122Subtotal 1.2.2.1 CSA TOT and Coaching 3260626030-2452. 1.2.2.2 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs Item 1: Travels days80-80---160252-2---4Item 2: DSA days240-240---480102-2---5Item 3: Full Board at Government Training Centre days240-240---480205-5---10Item 4: Venue at Government Training Centre days10-10---20501-1---1Subtotal 1.2.2.2 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs 10-10---193. 1.2.2.3 Extensionist Awards per APG success Item 1: Award per extensionist number100200200200100-8002502550505025-200Subtotal 1.2.2 CSA Productivity Enhancement 6711012211055-464 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 2. Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses (Continued) 
17 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 2. Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses /a UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesCostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total I. Investment Costs C. 1.2.3 Improved Nutrition and Food Security 1. 1.2.3.1 Gender/Youth/Nutrition Training Costs Item 1: GYN Specialist Preparation Days days10101010--403003333--12Item 2: GYN Specialist Training Days days200400400400200-1,6003006012012012060-480Item 3: GYN Specialist DSA cost days200400400400200-1,600751530303015-120Subtotal 1.2.3.1 Gender/Youth/Nutrition Training Costs 7815315315375-6122. 1.2.3.2 Financial Literacy Training Costs Item 1: FL Specialist Preparation Days days35552-207500000-2Item 2: FL Specialist Training Days days150300300300150-1,200751123232311-90Item 3: FL Specialist DSA cost days150300300300150-1,200751123232311-90Subtotal 1.2.3.2 Financial Literacy Training Costs 2345454523-182Subtotal 1.2.3 Improved Nutrition and Food Security 10119819819898-794Total 5629971,037990490-4,076 _________________________________\a Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development  / Sub-component 1.2 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 3. Financing for Inclusive VC Investment 
18 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 3. Financing for Inclusive VC Investment /a Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total I. Investment Costs A. APG Matching Grants /b Matching grant selection call costs call48884-321,00048884-32APG Matching Grants grant100200200200100-80020,0002,0004,0004,0004,0002,000-16,000APG Matching Grants - Cash Contribution /c lumpsum250500500500250-2,000APG Matching Grants - In-Kind Contribution /d lumpsum250500500500250-2,000Subtotal APG Matching Grants 2,5045,0085,0085,0082,504-20,032B. MSME Matching Grants /e Matching grant selection call costs call44441-171,00044441-17MSME Matching Grants grant2550505025-20022,0005501,1001,1001,100550-4,400MSME Matching Grants - Cash Contribution /f lumpsum275550550550275-2,200MSME Matching Grants - In-Kind Contribution /g lumpsum275550550550275-2,200Subtotal MSME Matching Grants 1,1042,2042,2042,2041,101-8,817C. Lead Enterprise Financing /h Matching grant selection call costs call1222--78,0008161616--56Lead Enterprise Matching Grants grant10101010--4062,500625625625625--2,500LE Cash Contribution - Matching Grant /i lumpsum625625625625--2,500Lead Enterprise Credit Line loan-10105--25100,000-1,0001,000500--2,500Subtotal Lead Enterprise Financing 1,2582,2662,2661,766--7,556Total 4,8669,4789,4788,9783,605-36,405 _________________________________\a Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development / Sub-component 1.3\b Threshold: Max. USD 20,000 (average) to APGs with 25-30 members. Purpose: Smallholder resilience and and commercialization\c 10% in cash contribution by beneficaries.\d 10% in-kind contribution by beneficaries.\e Threshold: USD 30,000/MSME. Purpose: VC upgrading at local level.\f 25% cash contribution by MSME.\g 25% in-kind contribution by MSME.\h Threshold: Max USD 75,000. Purpose: Upgraded business models and VC smallholders.\i 50% cash contribution by enterprise. 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 4. Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 
19 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 4. Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure /a Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total I. Investment Costs A. Participatory Cluster Infrastructure Investment Planning /b 1. Vehicles 4WD Twincabs no4-----460,000240-----2402. Workshops Initial ward vists no450-----450250113-----113First dialogue meetings no-200250---450250-5063---113Followup dialogues no200250900---1,3502505063225---338Preparation of proposals no17523050---455250445813---114Subtotal Workshops 206170300---676Subtotal Participatory Cluster Infrastructure Investment Planning 446170300---916B. Climate Proofed Infrastructure Investments /c 1. Smallscale irrigation Design ha-9001,100---2,000250-225275---500Construction ha-100800863--1,7635,000-5004,0004,315--8,815Construction supervision ha-100800863--1,763250-25200216--441Subtotal Smallscale irrigation -7504,4754,531--9,7562. Climate proofed road rehabilitation Design kms-505050--150750-383838--113Construction kms--505050-15023,535--1,1771,1771,177-3,530Construction supervision kms--505050-150750--383838-113Subtotal Climate proofed road rehabilitation -381,2521,2521,214-3,7553. Multi-purpose community water supply Design each-5050---1002,050-103103---205Construction each--5050--10020,500--1,0251,025--2,050Construction supervision each--5050--1001,025--5151--103Subtotal Multi-purpose community water supply -1031,1791,076--2,358Subtotal Climate Proofed Infrastructure Investments -8906,9066,8591,214-15,869Total Investment Costs 4461,0607,2066,8591,214-16,785II. Recurrent Costs A. Vehicle Operation and maintenance lumpsum191919191919115Total Recurrent Costs 191919191919115Total 4651,0797,2256,8781,2331916,900 _________________________________\a Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure\b Sub-Component 2.1: Participatory Cluster Infrastructure Investment Planning\c Sub-Component 2.2: Climate Proofed Infrastructure Investments 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 5. Institutional and Policy Support 
20 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 5. Institutional and Policy Support /a UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesCostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total I. Investment Costs A. National and VC Policy Development Research, documentation and publications /b lump sum140140140140140140840Workshops, dialogue, events, study tours /c lump sum606060606060360Subtotal National and VC Policy Development 2002002002002002001,200B. Support to Thematic VC Issues Research, documentation and publications /d lump sum140140140140140140840Workshops, dialogue, events, study tours /e lump sum606060606060360Subtotal Support to Thematic VC Issues 2002002002002002001,200Total 4004004004004004002,400 _________________________________\a Component 3: Institutional and Policy Support Coordination / Sub-component 3.1\b The annual lumpsums consist of local and international TA for research and VC studies and of publication/circulation of key research findings to support Government overall VC and agricultural policy making and SACP implementation.\c Meetings, seminars, workshops and other events such as study tours for key stakeholders to facilitate the debate on, and subsequent passage and operationalisation of key national policies and legislation supporting rural VC development.\d Local & international TA for research & studies on key thematic issues (See PDR) related to SACP implementation & of publication of key findings to support the Project implementation and private sector-led VC dev't in the country.\e Meetings, seminars, workshops and other events such as study tours for key stakeholders to facilitate the SACP-initiated debate on key themes and issues affecting the performance and development of rural VC operations. 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 6. Project Co-ordination 
21 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 6. Project Co-ordination /a Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total I. Investment Costs A. Project Management Unit 1. Vehicles 4WD Twincabs no2-----290,000180-----180Minibus no1-----190,00090-----90Subtotal Vehicles 270-----2702. Equipment and materials Laptops and desk screens no13-----132,53033-----33Network storage /b no1-----12,0002-----2Mobile phones no14-----146339-----9Office refurbishment no1-----15,1755-----5Office equipment no1-----19,2009-----9Photocopier/printer no1-----12,0702-----2Subtotal Equipment and materials 60-----60Subtotal Project Management Unit 330-----330B. Provincial Offices 1. Vehicles 4WD Twincabs no4-----490,000360-----360Motorcycles no8-----89,30074-----74Subtotal Vehicles 434-----4342. Equipment and materials Laptops /c no24-----241,84044-----44External hard drives no24-----241504-----4Mobile phones no28-----2863318-----18Office refurbishment no4-----45,17521-----21Office equipment no4-----49,20037-----37Photocopier/printer no4-----42,0708-----8Subtotal Equipment and materials 131-----131Subtotal Provincial Offices 566-----566C. District Offices 1. Vehicles Motorcycles no32-----329,300298-----298 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 6. Project Co-ordination (Continued) 
22 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 6. Project Co-ordination /a Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total2. Equipment and materials Laptops /d no32-----321,84059-----59External hard drives no32-----321505-----5Mobile phones no32-----3263320-----20Office equipment no4-----49,20037-----37Photocopier/printer no4-----42,0708-----8Subtotal Equipment and materials 129-----129Subtotal District Offices 427-----427D. Accounting Systems Accounting sotware lumpsum10-----10E. Workshops Startup workshop lumpsum20-----20IFAD Financial Management Workshop workshop-111--33,500-444--11ABWP Workshops lumpsum2020202020-100Subtotal Workshops 4024242420-131F. Manuals Manual development lumpsum40-----40Manual validation and updating lumpsum1010----20Subtotal Manuals 5010----60G. M&E Systems /e Establish MIS System /f lumpsum25-----25Server/iCloud costs lumpsum55555530Subtotal M&E Systems 305555555H. Studies and Surveys /g Value Chain Analysis study2222211110,000202020202010110WEAI and Nutrition Baseline Survey /h survey1-----140,00040-----40Socio economic baseline survey survey1-----140,00040-----40Annual outcome survey /i survey-1-11-320,000-20-2020-60Mid Term and End-line Surveys /j survey--1--1250,000--50--50100Annual statutory audits /k audit-11111515,000-151515151575Subtotal Studies and Surveys 1005585555575425I. Training for M&E and KM lumpsum10-----10J. KM Products and Communication KM products and communication activities /l lumpsum15151515151590K. M&E Equipment Digital camera (professional) no5-----51,0005-----5Total Investment Costs 1,5821091299995952,108 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 6. Project Co-ordination (Continued) 
23 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 6. Project Co-ordination /a Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalII. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries 1. National PMU National Project Coordinator /m pers-month151212121212754,000604848484848300Accountant pers-month131212121212732,400312929292929175Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor pers-month13121212126673,500464242424221235Senior CSA Advisor pers-month13121212126673,500464242424221235Senior Infrastructure Specialist pers-month12121212126665727777733850% Senior Social Inclusion Specialist pers-month121212121266628633333219M&E and Planning Specialist pers-month121212---362,400292929---86M&E and Planning Specialist (seconded) pers-month--612121242572--37772450% KM and Comms Specialist pers-month1512121212127528643333321Procurement Officer pers-month12121212126662,400292929292914158Financial Accountant (Officer) pers-month121212121266621033333114Assistant VC and AgB Specialist (Officer) pers-month12121212126662103333311450% Office Secretary pers-month12121212126661031111117Procurement Clerk pers-month--61212636103--11114Driver / Office Assistant pers-month121212121266617122222111Subtotal National PMU 2632402452202201531,3412. Provincial PMU Senior VC and AgB Specialist / Prov. Coord pers-month484848484824264572272727272714151CSA Specialist pers-month4848484848242643671818181818997Infrastructure Officer pers-month4848484848242642101010101010555M&E and Planning Officer pers-month4848484848242642101010101010555Social Inclusion Officer pers-month4848484848242642101010101010555Junior Procurement Officer pers-month4848484848242642101010101010555Driver / Office Assistant pers-month48484848482426417188888445Subtotal Provincial PMU 949494949447515Subtotal Salaries 3563343383133132001,855 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 6. Project Co-ordination (Continued) 
24 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 6. Project Co-ordination /a Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26TotalB. Per Diem In-Country Travel PMU pers-day100100100100100505507588888441Provincial and District pers-day3503503503503501751,92575262626262613144Subtotal Per Diem In-Country Travel 343434343417186C. District Extension Officer Allowance lumpsum202020202020120D. Vehicle Operation and Maintenance /n PMU vehicles lumpsum232323232323138Provincial vehicles lumpsum373737373737222District vehicles lumpsum252525252525152Subtotal Vehicle Operation and Maintenance 858585858585511E. Airtime Allocation Airtime allocation - PMU pers-year141414141477727644444221Airtime allocation - Districts pers-year28282828281415427688888443Airtime allocation - Provinces pers-year28282828281415427688888443Subtotal Airtime Allocation 191919191910106F. Office Operating Costs /o PMU lumpsum55555530Provincial lumpsum10101010101060Subtotal Office Operating Costs 15151515151590Total Recurrent Costs 5305075114874873472,868Total 2,1126166405855824424,976 _________________________________\a Component 3: Institutional and Policy Support Coordination / Sub-component 3.2\b With remote access and redundancy\c Including docking stations\d Including docking stations\e Monitoring and evaluation; Management Information System\f Contract for the establishment of M&E/MIS and KM systems and strategies.\g Baseline survey ,  includes Women Agricultural Economic Index (WEAI), Socioeconomic survey, Value chain analysis for new crops.\h Womens Economic and Agriculture Index\i Annual outcome survey\j Contracted by IFAD\k Engagement of external audit firm\l Includes policy briefings, website, webinars, printing etc\m Director\n Including insurance\o Includes: insurance, cleaning, security and supplies. 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 7. Contingency Emergency Response 
25 
Republic of Zimbabwe Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project Table 7. Contingency Emergency Response UnitDetailed Costs QuantitiesCostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/26Total20/21 I. Investment Costs A. Contingency emergency response lumpsum--------Total -------- 
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
EFA Summary Page 1  
Table A: Incremental Farm Family Benefits by Farm Models (USD) 
Year / Indicator 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 + 
IRR (%) 
NPV (USD) @ 10% \1 
Small 
Grains / 
Goat Farm 
Maize / 
Horticulture 
Farm 
Sesame / 
Poultry Farm 
Irrigated 
Crops / Goat 
Farm 
-1,183 
-219 
-74 
415 
577 
505 
634 
679 
700 
554 
24.7 
2,145 
-1,506 
184 
218 
465 
575 
49 
659 
688 
637 
720 
26.5 
2,650 
-1,532 
-424 
-1 
304 
700 
628 
700 
700 
328 
700 
20.7 
2,072 
-1,630 
285 
514 
76 
1,353 
1,434 
1,639 
1,759 
777 
1,529 
42.7 
6,950 
\1 Assumed as the opportunity cost of capital for the producer 
Table B: Project Cost and Log Frame Indicators 
Total Project Costs (USD m): 67.87 
IFAD loan: (USD m): 35.69 
Target outreach population \1 
Cost per SACP Outreach\3 
People:  
391,200 \2 
91 USD / 
persons 
Households: 
78,240 \2 
456 USD / 
HH 
Components / Outputs and Cost (USD M) 
Selected Outputs and Indicators 
1. Inclusive Value Chain Development 
Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization 
0.07 
800 
Technical 
Agribusinesses 
Services 
for 
APGs 
and 
2.24 
20,000 
Matching Grants for Inclusive VC Investment 
39.51 
700 
2. Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 
Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 
16.9 
1,000 
3. Institutional Support and Project Coordination 
Policy and Institutional Support / Proj Co-ord 
Project Coordination 
1.74 
4.88 
Number  of 
organizations supported 
rural  producers’ 
Number  of  persons  trained  in 
production 
and/or 
technologies 
practices 
APG  group  matching  grants 
disbursed 
Number  of  kilometres  of  roads 
constructed, 
or 
upgraded 
rehabilitated 
Number 
knowledge products completed 
policy-relevant 
of 
\1 See Main report section: Target groups and targeting strategy.  
\2 Total number of HH based on outreach through APG, MSME and VC Lead Enterprise investments is estimated 
at 48,000, 11,200 and 17,040 respectively 
\3 Assumes 5 persons per household. 
\3 IFAD loan (USD 36.687 million) / Outreach 
1 As per IFAD PMD Operational Instruction: Revised Guidance on Logframes and EFA Guidelines Volumes 
I and II. 
1 
Table C: Selected Financial Analysis Assumptions 
Parameters 
Selected 
Outputs 
Hybrid maize 
Sesame 
Tomatoes 
Goat 
Eggs 
Av. Yield \1 kg/ha 
Price (USD) 
Selected Inputs  
Price (USD/kg) 
3,000 
600 
0.39 / kg  Compound D 
0.39 / kg  Ammonium nitrate 
15,000 
0.50 /kg  Maize hybrid seed 
35 kg LW 
0.83 / kg LW 
Tomato seed 
0.70 / kg 
0.39 / kg 
2.00 / kg 
150 / kg 
250 eggs/hen/yr 
0.08 / egg 
Hired labour 
3 / per-day 
\1 With Project Full development - rounded 
Table D: APG Household, Beneficiaries and Phasing 
PY 1 
PY 2 
PY 3 
PY 4 
PY 5 
PY 6 
APG Total Households \1 
  Incremental 
  Cumulative 
 1,200  
 6,000  
 12,000  
 3,600  
 1,200  
 -    
 1,200  
 7,200  
 19,200  
 22,800  
 24,000  
 24,000  
APG Households participating \2 
  Incremental 
  Cumulative 
 900  
 900  
APG Beneficiaries participating \3 
 4,500  
 9,000  
 2,700  
 900  
 -    
 5,400  
 14,400  
 17,100  
 18,000  
 18,000  
  Incremental 
  Cumulative 
 4,500  
 22,500  
 45,000  
 13,500  
 4,500  
 -    
 4,500  
 27,000  
 72,000  
 85,500  
 90,000  
 90,000  
\1 Refer to Main Report / Project Description / Target Groups and Targeting Strategy. The figures above refer to 
the investments targeted at the Agricultural Producer Groups through matching grants Sub-Component 3.1  
\2 75% adoption rate economic modelling 
\3 Assuming 5 persons per household. 
Table E: Key Economic Analysis Assumptions 
Parameter 
Value  Remarks 
Standard 
conversion 
factor 
Shadow wage 
rate factor 
(SWRF) 
Financial 
opportunity cost 
of capital 
1.0 
Project costs are estimated in USD and converted using the Costab 
software to economic terms using the SERF. All financial costs are 
converted into economic costs through the elimination of subsidies, 
duties and taxes 
95%  Applied to unskilled wage rates to reflect the relative abundance of 
unskilled labour, though in some locations at sometimes of year this 
may undervalue unskilled labour due to the temporary migration of 
labour to other parts of Zimbabwe or abroad. 
10%  Equivalent to the current average deposit rate commercial banks 
Social rate of 
discount 
10% 
The discount rate for the economic analysis is the estimate of the social 
discount  rate  (SDR)  or  rate  of  time  preference.  For  the  purposes  of 
this  analysis  this  is  taken  as  10%.  In  normal  circumstance  this  is 
assumed to: i) reflect the public nature of the investment; ii) account 
for scarcity of resources; and iii) ensure good use of public funds.  
Deriving an SDR based on the average of the long-term public bond 
rates  and  long-term  deposit  rates  is  impractical  due  to  the  current 
economic crisis.  
2 
Parameter 
Value  Remarks 
The Government does not currently have a working national currency 
and is there is no bond market. Zimbabwe has no current credit rating. 
The over night lending rate  by  the  Reserve Bank  is  35%  and  Y-O-Y 
inflation is 737% (as of 5/08/20) 
The rate of 10% was applied as it is consistent with the most recent 
IFAD appraisal in Zimbabwe the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization 
Programme.  
Project life 
20 
Twenty 20 years is been assumed or the project life in line with the 
investment lifecycle and IFAD Guidelines. 
Note domestic inflation at the time of the mission  
Table F: Project Economic Cash Flow (USD thousands) 
Selected 
years 
Incremental 
benefits \1 
Invest Costs 
Recurrent 
Costs 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10… 
15… 
20 
 (2,083) 
 7,355  
 (3,123) 
 12,196  
 (294) 
 18,391  
 3,848  
 17,480  
 10,047  
 5,829  
 15,884  
 17,973  
 18,989  
 21,491  
 21,561  
 19,283  
 22,547  
 155  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 569  
 520  
 559  
 455  
 455  
 455  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
Adjustments 
and Post SACP 
\2 
 (937) 
Total 
incremental 
costs 
 6,987  
Net incremental 
benefits 
 (9,070) 
 (11,155) 
 (9,875) 
 15,124  
 (11,276) 
 (4,685) 
 (9,369) 
 (2,811) 
 (937) 
 -    
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 8,031  
 9,581  
 5,347  
 609  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
ENPV @ 10% USD million 
EIRR 
BCR 
Switching value benefits 
Switching value costs 
 4,700  
 15,275  
 16,614  
 17,630  
 20,131  
 20,202  
 17,924  
 21,188  
56.49 
25.0 
2.42 
(59%) 
142 
\1 Source: Appendix 4 Table 15: Overall SACP – Incremental Economic Budget 
\2 Provision to avoid double counting of APG matching grant, MSME/Lead enterprise recurrent costs and post 
SACP infrastructure recurrent costs. 
3 
Table H: SACP Sensitivity Analysis 
Scenario 
Base Case 
 ∆% to Base Case 
Project 
Costs       
Incr’l 
Benefits 
Benefits 
delayed 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
- 40% 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 10% 
- 20% 
1 year 
Base 
Case 
Base Case 
2 years 
Base 
case 
- 20% 
3 years 
1 year 
2 years 
3 years 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
2 years 
Switching Values \2 
Link to Risk Matrix Issues 
EIRR \1 
ENPV  
(USD ‘000)\2 
25.0 
56,492 
Increase in the cost of inputs. 
Reduced producer prices / demand. 
Infrastructure investments are not 
directed to areas of highest production 
potential. 
Technical coordination by the 
implementing agencies and service 
providers is not responsive to the group 
level needs. 
Combinations of the above 
Ineffective inter-institutional 
cooperation & dialogue on development 
issues means financing is not disbursed 
in a timely manner to support field 
implementation. 
Insufficient cohesion within farmer 
groups affect their success potential  
Ineffective coordination between 
provinces, districts, villages and supply 
chain enterprises undermining 
implementation progress 
Grants diverted for other purposes 
Climate-change and disaster impacts. 
External shocks to macro economy. 
 23.3%  
 21.7%  
 21.0%  
 52,509  
 48,525  
 37,227  
 16.0%  
 17,962  
 21.4%  
 17.8%  
 21.5%  
 42,876  
 29,260  
 47,735  
 18.8%  
 39,774  
 16.8%  
 32,537  
 16.6%  
 26,238  
 14.7%  
 19,869  
 13.1%  
 14,080  
 13.5%  
 15,886  
Benefits 
Costs 
(59%) 
142% 
\1 Hurdle rate 10 per cent. 
\2 Rounded. 
\3 Per cent change in cost and/or benefit streams to obtain an ENPV of USD 0, i.e., economic viability threshold.  
Note on Currency 
Zimbabwe is experiencing an economic and fiscal crisis. Macroeconomic stability remains a 
challenge: the economy contracted sharply in 2019, amplified by climate shocks that have crippled 
agriculture and electricity generation. The newly introduced ZWL$ has lost most of its value; 
inflation is very high; and international reserves are very low (IMF Feb 2020). At the time of the 
project design the annual inflation as of May (year-on-year) was estimated at 786% (Bloomberg, 
16 June 2020). Because of these factors, the project costing as well financial and economic 
analysis has been undertaken in USD. 
4 
I.   FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 2 
A.  Objective and Methodology 
The objective of the financial analysis is to assess the viability of the move into 
commercialisation at the farm household. Profitability at this level underpins the supply 
chain and farmer group development sought by the Project. The approach is guided by 
the development objective that seeks to increase smallholder participation in market-
oriented and climate-smart value chains. The approach developed provides insights into 
the Project Goal indicator that monitors the impact of household income. 
The methodology employed establishes individual gross margin enterprise budgets 
for field and horticulture crops (e.g. maize, small grains, groundnut, tomatoes) as well 
as representative livestock models (in this case goats and poultry). These enterprise 
budgets provide the basic building blocks of the household farming businesses and are 
combined according generalised cropping patterns to form farm budgets. The farm 
models presented describe the total cropping picture and how the introduction or 
expansion into value chain commodities affects household income and labour 
productivity. 
At the level of the farm, other characteristics of the household are included to 
provide an overall representation of operations and profitability. These other factors can 
include financing (the SACP matching grant), on-farm use, household consumption, 
household labour availability, farm level investment and operating expenses. 
All enterprise and farm models are formulated to project for 20 years the situation 
with current technology (without project) and new technology (with project). The 
financial and economic analysis is thus formulated on an incremental basis (being the 
difference between the with project (WP) situation to the without project (WoP)3. In this 
way, the difference between the two scenarios, the incremental net benefit, is the basis 
of the appraisal4. This approach is applied both for the financial analysis from the 
perspective of the household and in aggregated form for the economic analysis from the 
perspective of society (see next section).  
The remainder of this section presents the assumptions and the results of the 
individual enterprise and farm budgets. Farm budgets are developed for four generalised 
types of smallholder farming household targeted in the Project area. These four types 
are5: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Small grains – Goat Farm Model 
Maize – Horticulture Farm Model 
Sesame – Poultry Farm Model 
Irrigated crops – Goat Farm Model 
The generalised cropping patterns assumed for these four farm types is provided 
below. In some cases, new enterprises are introduced such as tomatoes, sugar, snap 
peas and eggs.  It is recognised that likelihood of the uptake of the new crops is a 
2 The Annex was prepared remotely as part of a virtual mission to Zimbabwe in May and June 2020. 
3 The descriptions below “Without Project” is synonymous with “Existing technology”, while “With 
Project” is synonymous with “New technology”. 
4 The methodology is guided by: Gittinger, J.P (1982), Economic Analysis of Agricultural Projects, 
Second Edition, EDI World Bank, and (IFAD (2015) Economic and Financial Analysis of Rural Investment 
Projects. 
5 These four illustrative models were identified in conjunction with Agritex and SACP local consultants. 
Each are designed to include a commodity that will place the household on the path to 
commercialisation. 
5 
function of input availability, the market conditions prevalent at the time of 
implementation and the success of the execution of SACP activities listed under 
Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development. The adoption rates assumed are the 
PDT’s best estimate of the likely uptake and are tested in the sensitivity analysis through 
the scenario that examines delays in the benefit stream. 
The changes in crops and cropping area as well as the productivity changes 
described below are facilitated by the transition from existing to new technologies. 
Further specific details of the SACP theory of change, the SACP investment costs as well 
as agronomy and technology changes are described in separate annexes. 
B.  Crop Production Models 
  Gross margins. Each model presents revenues based on projected yields and 
prices, together with operating expenses are defined in terms of inputs and labour. 
Labour is defined in terms of month, based on the cropping calendar activities and 
gender.6 The income (gross margin) is reported before and after the valuation of family 
labour costs.7 Family labour is costed at USD 2 per person day. 
The prices of the inputs to, and outputs from these models are provided in 
Appendix 1. It is recognised that cropping patterns vary considerably from year to year 
depending on market conditions. The models developed are meant to indicate average 
conditions as well as be reflective of typical returns for rainfed and irrigated crops. 
  The yield and input assumptions for the production models indicated in the 
cropping patterns above are provided in Appendix 2. Changes in values for the 20-year 
projection period are indicated. 
  The investment in market linkage infrastructure results in a range of benefits at the 
farm level which are factored into this financial and consequently the economic analysis. 
The benefits include decline in transportation costs, increased availability of inputs and 
services, decline of losses and improved access to markets. The incremental use of 
inputs and tractor services and improved market channels and prices assumed in these 
models are largely owed to improvements in rural roads. 
  Maize (intercropped with cowpeas) The key characteristics of this production 
model are presented in Table 1. The current production level with local varieties is 
assumed at 1,000 kg per hectare. With the SACP interventions these yields are expected 
to increase to 3,000 per hectare over 5 years, an increase of 200 per cent. This is the 
result of hybrid seed as well as improved inputs and practices. The gross margin before 
and after labour costs is projected to increase substantially. Details of the operating 
inputs and financial results are shown in Appendix 2 Tables 1 and 2 respectively.  
6 Labour budgets for each crop were specified in conjunction with the local consultants. The budgets 
suggested are consistent with the project design team’s experiences elsewhere.  
7 The models presented are based on best estimates of the consulting team in conjunction with local 
Zimbabwe Agritex and industry specialists. The models should be considered as an illustrative and the 
basis for further development. 
6 
Table 1: Maize (Cowpea Intercropped) Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield – maize 
Post harvest yield – cowpea 
Revenue (combined) 
Operating costs 
Unit 
kg/ha 
kg/ha 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
Gross margin – before labour 
USD/ha 
Gross margin – after labour 
USD/ha 
Source: SACP Design Team 
\1 Full development with CSA techniques 
Without 
With \1 
% change 
1,000 
100 
426 
282 
144 
6 
3,000 
250 
1,140 
602 
538 
474 
200 
150 
168 
115 
274 
- 
  Small Grains (pumpkin intercropped)   The key characteristics of this 
production model are presented in Table 2. The current production levels with local small 
grain varieties is assumed at 200 kg per hectare. With the SACP interventions these 
yields are expected to increase to 350 per hectare over 5 years, an increase of 75 per 
cent. The current production levels with local pumpkin varieties is assumed at 2,500 kg 
and 5,000 kg per hectare without and with project respectively. An increase of 100 per 
cent. These increases are the result of improved seed, agro-chemicals and practices. 
Gross margin before and after labour costs is projected to increase by 101 and 125 per 
cent respectively. Details of the operating inputs and financial results are shown in 
Appendix 2 Tables 3 and 4, respectively. 
Table 2: Small (Pumpkin intercropped) Grains Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post  harvest  yield  –  small 
grains 
Unit 
kg/ha 
Without 
With \1 
% change 
200 
350 
75% 
Post harvest yield - pumpkins 
kg/ha 
2,500 
Revenue 
Operating costs 
Gross margin – before labour 
Gross margin – after labour 
Source: SACP Design Team 
\1 At Year 5 with CSA techniques 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
903 
186 
717 
595 
5,000 
1,787 
346 
1,441 
1,339 
100% 
98% 
86% 
101% 
125% 
  Groundnuts/Bambarra Nut8 The key characteristics of this production model are 
presented in Table 3. With the SACP interventions these yields are expected to increase 
from 500 to 1,000 kg per hectare over 5 years, an increase of over 100 per cent. This is 
the result of improved seed, inputs and practices. Gross margin before and after labour 
costs is projected to increase substantially. Details of the operating inputs and financial 
results are shown in Appendix 2 Tables 5 and 6, respectively. 
8 Bambarra nut (Vigna subterranean) is a member of the family Fabaceae. The plant originated in West 
Africa. Vigna subterranea ripens its pods underground, much like the peanut. They can be eaten fresh 
or boiled after drying. They are often cropped instead of or with groundnuts. 
7 
Table 3: Groundnuts/Bambarra Nut Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield 
Revenue 
Operating costs 
Unit 
kg/ha 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
Gross margin – before labour  
USD/ha 
Gross margin – after labour 
USD/ha 
Source: SACP Design Team 
\1 Year 5 with CSA techniques 
Without 
With\1 
% change 
500 
600 
267 
333 
225 
1,000 
1,200 
396 
804 
708 
100% 
100% 
48% 
141% 
215% 
  Sesame. The key features of this production model are presented in Table 4. It is 
not presently grown but is identified as one of the potential cash crop that can also 
contribute to food security and nutrition security.  With the SACP interventions yields 
around 600 kg per hectare by Year 5 are expected. The project will be promoting high 
yielding seed, inputs and practices. Gross margin before and after labour costs are 
projected USD 431 and USD 271, respectively. Details of the operating inputs and 
financial results are shown in Appendix 2 Tables 7 and 8, respectively. 
Table 4: Sesame Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield 
Revenue 
Operating costs 
Unit 
kg/ha 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
Gross margin – before labour  
USD/ha 
Gross margin – after labour 
USD/ha 
Source: SACP Design Team 
\1 At Year 5 with CSA techniques 
Without 
With\1 
% change 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
600 
720 
289 
431 
271 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
  Tomatoes. The key features of this production model are presented in Table 5. 
Tomatoes are included as a high potential domestic crop. With the SACP investment 
these yields are expected 20,000 kg per hectare at full development. This is the result of 
high yielding seeds, agro-chemicals inputs, good cultivation practices and irrigation. 
Gross margins before and after labour costs are estimated at USD 6,185 and USD 6,075, 
respectively. Details of the operating inputs and financial results are shown in Appendix 2 
Tables 9 and 10, respectively. 
Table 5: Tomatoes Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield 
Revenue 
Operating costs 
Unit 
kg/ha 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
Gross margin – before labour  
USD/ha 
Gross margin – after labour 
USD/ha 
Source: SACP Design Team 
\1 full development 
Without 
With\1 
% change 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
20,000 
8,000 
1,816 
6,185 
6,075 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
8 
  Sugar Snap Peas. The key features of this production model are presented in 
Table 6. This crop is included as an example of a high value export crop. With the SACP 
interventions yields of 7,000 kg per hectare at full development. Gross margin after 
labour costs is estimated at around USD 5,990 per hectare. Details of the operating 
inputs and financial results are shown in Appendix 2 Tables 11 and 12, respectively. 
Table 6: Sugar Snap Peas Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield 
Revenue 
Operating costs 
Unit 
kg/ha 
USD/ha 
USD/ha 
Gross margin – before labour  
USD/ha 
Gross margin – after labour 
USD/ha 
Source: SACP Design Team 
\1 At full development 
Without 
With\1 
% change 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7,000 
9,100 
1,736 
7,364 
5,990 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
C.  Livestock Production Models 
  Goat meat production A representative household goat meat production model 
has been developed. The production model is shown in Appendix 2 Table 13. An initial 
herd assumption combined with the representative production parameters generates a 
stock growth model. This model is used to define the annual projected: (i) herd 
composition; (ii) the sale weights; and (iii) the feed requirements. The stock growth 
model is initiated with a household herd of 4 females, 2 bucks and 6 kids (0 to 1 years 
old). By the tenth year of the project the herd is projected to compose 12 females, zero 
bucks 9 and 21 kids. The projected annual sale weights and corresponding net income 
results are show in Appendix 2 Tables 13 and 13. The sale weights are projected to rise 
from the WoP circumstances of 116 kg LW per household per annum to 487 kg LW per 
household per annum in the WP scenario. Net income before and after labour indicates 
significant increases (Table 7), however it should be noted that this increase is gradual over 10 
years. 
Table 7: Goat enterprise activity model – yield and net income 
Parameter 
Unit 
Without 
With \1 
% change 
Yield – Live sale weights 
kg liveweight 
Revenue 
Operating costs \2 
Net income – before labour 
Net income – after labour 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
\1 At full development – Without = Without project, With = With project 
\2 Livestock feed supplied by farm 
116 
196 
20 
216 
168 
487 
924 
68 
992 
608 
319% 
370% 
240% 
359% 
261% 
  Poultry layer model. The illustrative household layer models projects the revenue 
and costs of establishment and operation of a 40 hen layer flock using point-of-lay birds. 
Simple housing is assumed, and half of the feed requirements are sourced from the 
9 The purchase of cross-breed bucks by the group substitutes for the local bucks. 
9 
farm. The projected annual egg sales corresponding net income results are show in Table 
8. 
Table 8: Poultry layer activity model – yield and net income 
Parameter 
Unit 
Without 
With \1 
% change 
Yield – eggs 
Revenue 
Operating costs 
Net income – before labour 
Net income – after labour 
eggs/year 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
\1 At full development – Without = Without project, With = With project 
At Year 5. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10,000 
1,000 
633 
327 
127 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
D.  Farm Models – Assumptions 
  The enterprise budgets described above together with the other field crops outlined 
are combined to form illustrative household farm models by applying the cropping 
patterns presented above in Appendix 3 Tables 1,4,7 and 10. At the farm level further 
additions and adjustments are made to complete the farm household configurations for 
financial analysis. Key farm budget assumptions common to all household models are 
described in Table 10.  
  Family Labour. For the purposes of the financial analysis the family labour is 
costed at a rate of USD 2 per person day, the value at market rate. In the case of the 
financial sustainability analysis, farm level family labour is not entered as a cost; instead 
the “wages” for the family become a part of the net benefit.10  
  Thus, as SACP increases the net benefit, it also in effect increases the family's 
income or "wages" for its labour. A key input therefore at the farm level is to define the 
household labour availability. In order to facilitate this analysis (in the absence of survey 
information) it is assumed that there are on average five persons per farming household. 
Of these the working adult equivalent is 1.5 persons for both men and women. Using this 
logic and a assumptions on the number of working days per month and the availability of 
both men and women a monthly availability for both male and female labour is defined – 
refer to Table 9.11 
10 This approach is consistent with the IFAD EFA guidelines where it is noted that “family labour is not a 
production cost (there is no financial transaction)”. See: IFAD’S Internal Guidelines - Economic and 
Financial Analysis of Rural Investment Projects Volume 2: Minimum requirements and practical 
examples. Rome 2019. Section II, Financial Analysis, Farm Models page 17. 
11 Labour availability assumptions based on discussions the local consultants 
10 
Table 9: Household Labour Availability 
Days/month 
Non-working 
Working days 
Jan   Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun 
Jul 
Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec 
31 
15 
16 
28 
15 
13 
31 
30 
31 
30 
31 
31 
30 
31 
8 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
8 
23 
24 
25 
24 
25 
25 
24 
23 
30 
10 
20 
31 
15 
16 
Female availability 
60%  60%  60%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  60%  60%  60% 
Male availability 
40%  40%  40%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  40%  40%  40% 
Female person days/month 
Male person days/month 
Source: SACP Design Team 
14 
10 
12 
8 
21 
14 
18 
18 
19 
19 
18 
18 
19 
19 
19 
19 
18 
18 
21 
14 
18 
12 
14 
10 
  The per hectare/per activity labour requirements combined with the pattern 
assumed at the household level will determine the labour requirements for any particular 
crop or activity. The farm labour requirement is the aggregation of all the individual 
requirements. This requirement is compared to the availability (shown in the table 
above) and where requirements are in excess of resources available, the missing labour 
is assumed to be hired. 
  Indicators The financial analysis develops the financial internal rate of return 
(FIRR) and the financial net present value (FNPV) at 10 per cent discount rate. The 
purpose of the financial sustainability analysis is to verify a positive after financing 
cashflow in the years up to full, with Project development. In addition, the sustainability 
analysis examines the With Project returns to family labour. A positive after financing 
cashflow and increased returns to family labour are strong signals that a farming 
household would likely invest in the technology and management changes. 
Table 10: Key Farm Budget Assumptions 
Parameter 
On farm use 
Financing 
Description 
Where appropriate enterprise inputs that can be sourced from enterprise 
outputs are included, e.g. own production is used for seed supplies 
Seasonal and longer credit markets effectively do not exist in Zimbabwe 
(see Main Report), hence formal credit channels for smallholder farmers do 
not exist. Financing of initial investments is through the SACP matching 
grant and own contributions. 
Labour requirements  Labour requirements (by gender and month) for each farming activity are 
Labour availability 
estimated and compared to the household labour availability. Where 
additional labour is required it is assumed that labour would be hired at 
market rates.  
The household labour availability by month and gender is estimated. 
Households are assumed to have 1.5 male and 1.5 female able-bodied 
persons available for farm work. Availability is assumed to vary according to 
month and gender, with male availability between 40 and 50%, while female 
availability is between 50 to 60%.   On average males are assumed to be 
available 14.9 days per month while the figure for women is 17.6 person 
days per month. Refer to Table 9 above. 
Cost of hired labour  Demand for labour is first served by family labour. Where family labour is 
insufficient hired labour at USD 3 per day is purchased.  
Value of urban 
unskilled labour 
USD 4 per day. Used to compare with the return for day of family labour 
Source: SACP Design Team 
11 
  Investment packages. For the purposes of the illustrative modelling typical 
investment elements have been formulated to reflect the likely expenditures to facilitate 
the transformation to commercialisation. Typical household level investment items for 
the four household models developed are shown in Table 11. The investment packages 
assumed for the four illustrative models are range from USD 1,300 to 1,800 per 
household.12 
Table 11: Typical household investments 
Description of example investments 
Applicable to 
Conservation agricultural equipment, e.g. magoye tyne ripper (USD 25), 
jab planters (USD 76, knapsack sprayers (USD 30), hand threshing 
machine (USD 500); post-harvest handling and storage (sesame); solar 
water / well pump, distribution and storage; solar panels (USD 260) 
Small Grains – Goat 
Maize – Horticulture  
Sesame – Poultry 
Irrigated crops – Goat  
Livestock related investments: housing and handling facilities (USD 1,000), 
dosing equipment (USD 60); veterinary kits (USD 100); injection 
equipment (USD 60) 
Small Grains – Goat 
Irrigated crops – Goat 
Caging/laying box with drip system (USD 320 / 100 birds); water source 
development, distribution and storage; grain mill 
Sesame – Poultry 
Drip irrigation facility, bucket system (USD 500); secateurs, driers, knap 
sacs (USD 200); solar powered pumps (USD 410); grading and packing 
equipment  
Irrigated crops – Goat 
Maize – Horticulture  
Source: SACP Design Team 
  Matching Grant For the purposes of the modelling it is assumed that the 
household will develop a proposal to access the maximum matching grant. If the 
maximum household grant is USD 83313 a proposal of USD 1,042 would equate to: 
  SACP Matching Grant: USD 833 
  Cash contribution by the household of 10% of the proposal: USD 104 
  An in-kind contribution by the household of 10% of the proposal: USD 104 
  The grant above is entered into the model as a source of finance in the first year of 
the with project scenario. The cash and in-kind contribution (the later in monetary value) 
are entering as costs to the business in the first year. An investment package of around 
the maximum amount is included for each farm model. 
  Household Food and Nutrition Security The modeling incorporates the 
objective of ensuring household food and nutritional security by including a 
representation of both the existing (without SACP) and new (with SACP) foods and their 
annual consumption. The new diet is targeted at achieving household food and 
nutritional security. If the crop is grown by the household their own consumption is 
prioritised over sale. If there is insufficient or no home production the household 
purchases the required amount to reach the recommended requirement. Detailed of the 
commodities and rates for a 5-person household are shown in Table 12. In this way the 
financial results are net of household food security requirements.   
12 Refer to individual household financial models in Appendix 3 for details, illustrative investment 
packages range in value from USD 1,300 to 1,800 per HH. 
13 Maximum matching grant USD 25,000 per APG group of 30 farm households = USD 533/APG 
household. 
12 
Table 12: Household food and nutrition requirements 
Description 
kgs / year / HH of 5 persons 
Without SACP 
With SACP 
Maize 
Sorghum / Pearl millet 
Cowpeas 
Groundnut / Bambarra nut 
Pumpkin 
Green leafy vegetables (e.g. kale) 
Citrus 
Source: SACP Design Team 
98 
98 
14 
3 
33 
469 
126 
115 
115 
110 
20 
328 
660 
450 
E.  Small Grains - Goat Household Model 
  This model examines the profitability of moving from a low yielding mixed farm to 
a regime that incorporates climate smart agricultural (CSA) practices under which ultra 
short maturity, drought and heat tolerant open pollinated varieties (OPV) and hybrid 
varieties are grown.  The cropping pattern changes from WOP to WP and the transition to 
the CSA technology are provided in Table 13. The main physical outputs for this 
household model are shown in Table 14. Full details of the production and inputs 
schedule as well as the financial modeling are provided in Appendix 3 Tables 1 and 2, 
respectively. 
Table 13: Small Grains - Goat Household Cropping Pattern 
Cropping intensity 
Existing Technology 
  Maize OPV (with cowpea) 
Small Grains (with pumpkin) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Communal grazing 
Sub-total Existing Technology 
New Technology 
  Maize Hybrid (with cowpea) 
Small Grains (with pumpkin) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Forage legume - dryland 
Communal grazing 
Sub-total New Technology 
Total Cropped Area 
Source: SACP Design Team 
Unit 
WOP 
% 
167 
WP 
167 
Incr 
- 
0.50 
0.75 
0.25 
1.00 
2.50 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.25 
0.75 
0.25 
0.25 
1.00 
2.50 
2.50 
2.50 
-0.50 
-0.75 
-0.25 
-1.00 
-2.50 
0.25 
0.75 
0.25 
0.25 
1.00 
2.50 
- 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
13 
Table 14: Small Grains - Goat Household Model Production Summary 
Key features at full development 
1.5 hectare farm and access to communal grazing 
Unit 
Without 
With  
Maize production 
Sorghum / Pearl Millet production 
Cowpeas production 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
Groundnut / Bambarra nut production 
kgs/year 
Pumpkin production 
Goat sales  
kgs/year 
kg LW/year 
500 (OPV) 
750 (Hybrid) 
150 
50 
125 
1,875 
116 
263 
63 
250 
3,750 
487 
  The financial analysis14 indicates a FIRR of 24.7 per cent and a FNPV of USD 2,145 
at 10 per cent discount rate. These criteria indicate a profitable investment.  
  The financial sustainability of this illustrative model is indicated by a positive annual 
cashflow after financing in the years to full development in the With Project scenario 
(PY5) as shown in Table 15. 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP by Year 5 are estimated at 
USD 1,263. The returns per family day of labour WP are projected to rise to USD 8 per 
person day or around twice the urban unskilled daily wage rate.  
14 With family labour costed at market rates. 
14 
Table 15: Small Grains - Goat Household Model Initial WP Cashflow After Financing 
15 
F.  Maize - Horticulture Farm Household Model  
  This model examines the profitability of moving to a mixed dryland / irrigation 
operation. The irrigation would focus on tomatoes and sugar snap peas for the domestic 
and export markets respectively. The dryland cropping would incorporate CSA techniques 
and practices. The cropping pattern changes from WOP to WP and the transition to the 
CSA technology are provided in Table 16. The main physical outputs for this household 
model are shown in Table 17. Full details of the production and inputs schedule as well as 
the financial modeling are provided in Appendix 3 Tables 3 and 4, respectively. 
Table 16: Maize - Horticulture Farm Household Cropping Pattern 
Unit 
WOP 
WP 
Incr 
Cropping intensity 
Existing Technology 
  Maize OPV (with cowpea) 
Small Grains (with pumpkin) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Sub-total Existing Technology 
New Technology 
  Maize Hybrid (with cowpea) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Tomato 
Sugar Snap Peas 
Sub-total New Technology 
Total Cropped Area 
Source: SACP Design Team 
% 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
100 
100 
- 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
1.50 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1.50 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.75 
0.25 
0.25 
0.25 
1.50 
1.50 
-0.75 
-0.50 
-0.25 
-1.50 
0.75 
0.25 
0.25 
0.25 
1.50 
- 
Table 17: Maize - Horticulture Farm Household Model Production Summary 
Key features at full development 
1.5 hectare farm 
Maize production (hybrid) 
Groundnut production 
Sugar snap peas 
Tomato production 
Unit 
Without 
With  
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
750 (OPV) 
2,250 (Hybrid) 
125 
- 
- 
250 
1,000 
3,000 
  The financial analysis indicates a FIRR of 26.5 per cent and a FNPV of USD 2,650 at 
10 per cent discount rate. These criteria indicate a profitable investment.  
  The financial sustainability of this illustrative model is indicated by a positive annual 
cashflow after financing in the years to full development in the With Project scenario 
(PY5) as shown in Table 18. 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP by Year 5 are estimated at USD 
1,055. The returns per day of labour WP are projected to rise to USD 5 per person day or 
around 1.3 times the urban unskilled daily wage rate.  
16 
Table 18: Maize - Horticulture Household Model Initial WP Cashflow After Financing 
17 
G.  Sesame – Poultry Farm Household Model  
  This model examines the profitability of moving from a maize dominated model to 
a regime focusing on CSA practices for the dryland cropping, the introduction of sesame 
and the development of a poultry layer enterprise. The cropping pattern changes from 
WOP to WP are provided in Table 19. The main physical outputs for this household model 
are shown in Table 20. Detailed production and inputs schedule, as well as the financial 
budget for the Sesame - Poultry Farm Household, are provided in Appendix 3 Tables 5 
and 6. 
Table 19: Sesame - Poultry Farm Household Cropping Pattern 
Unit 
WOP 
WP 
Incr 
Cropping intensity 
Existing Technology 
  Maize OPV (with cowpea) 
Small Grains (with pumpkin) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Sub-total Existing Technology 
New Technology 
  Maize Hybrid (with cowpea) 
Small Grains (with pumpkin) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Sesame 
Sub-total New Technology 
Total Cropped Area 
Source: SACP Design Team 
% 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
97 
97 
- 
1.00 
0.30 
0.25 
1.55 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1.55 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.50 
0.30 
0.25 
0.50 
1.55 
1.55 
-1.00 
-0.30 
-0.25 
-1.55 
0.50 
0.30 
0.25 
0.50 
1.55 
- 
Table 20: Sesame - Poultry Farm Household Model Production Summary 
Key features at full development  
1.6 hectare farm 
Sesame production 
Maize production 
Small grains 
Pumpkin 
Egg production 
Unit 
Without 
With 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
eggs/year 
- 
300 
1,000 OPV 
1,500 Hybrid 
60 
750 
- 
105 
1,500 
10,000 
  The financial analysis15 indicates a FIRR of 20.7 per cent and a FNPV of USD 2,072 
at 10 per cent discount rate. These criteria indicate a profitable investment.  
  The financial sustainability of this illustrative model is indicated by a positive annual 
cashflow after financing in the years to full development in the With Project scenario 
(PY5) as shown in Table 21. 
15 With family labour costed at market rates. 
18 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP by Year 5 are estimated at 
USD 1,286. The returns per family day of labour WP are projected to rise to USD 7 per 
person day or around 1.75 the urban unskilled daily wage rate.  
Table 21: Sesame - Poultry Farm Household Model Initial WP Cashflow After Financing 
19 
H.  Irrigated Crops - Goat Farm Household Model  
  This model examines the profitability of moving from a mixed dryland cropping and 
livestock model to a regime with CSA on rainfed crops and irrigation for a cash crop 
(tomatoes) and fodder to support intensification of goat production. The cropping pattern 
changes from WOP to WP are provided in Table 22. The main physical outputs for this 
household model are shown in  
  Table 23. Full details of the production and inputs schedule as well as the financial 
modeling are provided in Appendix 3 Tables 7 and 8, respectively. 
Table 22: Irrigated Crops - Goat Farm Household Cropping Pattern 
Unit 
WOP 
WP 
Incr 
Cropping intensity 
Existing Technology 
  Maize OPV (with cowpea) 
Small Grains (with pumpkin) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Communal grazing 
Sub-total Existing Technology 
New Technology 
  Maize Hybrid (with cowpea) 
  Groundnut/Bambarra 
Tomato 
Communal grazing 
Forage legume - irrigated 
Sub-total New Technology 
Total Cropped Area 
% 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
ha 
167 
167 
- 
0.50 
0.75 
0.25 
1.00 
2.50 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2.50 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.50 
0.25 
0.15 
1.00 
0.60 
2.50 
2.50 
-0.50 
-0.75 
-0.25 
-1.00 
-2.50 
0.50 
0.25 
0.15 
1.00 
0.60 
2.50 
- 
Table 23: Irrigated Crops - Goat Household Farm Production Summary 
Key features at full development 
1.5 hectare farm 
Maize production 
Cowpea producton 
Tomato production 
Forage legume production 
Goat  
Unit 
Without 
With 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kg LW/year 
500 OPV 
1,500 Hybrid 
50 
- 
- 
116 
125 
3,000 
7,200 
487 
  The financial analysis indicates a FIRR of 42.7 per cent and a FNPV of USD 6,950 at 
10 per cent discount rate. These criteria indicate a profitable investment.  
  The financial sustainability of this illustrative model is indicated by a positive annual 
cashflow after financing in the years to full development in the With Project scenario 
(PY5) as shown in Table 24 
20 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP by Year 5 are estimated at 
USD 2,372. The returns per family day of labour WP are projected to rise to USD 15 per 
person day or around 4 times the urban unskilled daily wage rate.  
Table 24: Irrigated Crops - Goat Farm Household Model Initial WP Cashflow After 
Financing 
21 
II. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
A.  Objective and Methodology 
  The objective of the economic analysis is to evaluate the expected contribution of 
the proposed project to the economic development of the project provinces and the 
economy at large. The purpose of such an analysis is to determine whether the economic 
benefits sufficiently justify the use of the project resources.  
  For the purposes of the economic analysis the smallholder APG member agriculture 
output forms the focus of the benefit modelling. The four farm model types described in 
financial analysis are converted to economic models and combined with the estimate of 
the number of farms of each model type to form an aggregated incremental economic 
benefit model. The analysis recognises that indirect benefits will also arise to those 
persons dependent exclusively on agricultural labour. Indirect benefits are foreseen in 
employment generation arising in enhanced agricultural production and processing as 
well as decreasing the pressure on natural resources through a shift towards more 
intensive CSA based farming on irrigated and rainfed lands. These benefits as well as 
those arising from enhancing nutritional outcomes are recognised but do not form part of 
the quantitative modelling16. The incremental economic costs are the provided by the 
Costab analysis of the SACP investment and recurrent costs converted to economic 
terms. 
  Approach The valuation of the incremental production at household level forms 
the basis of the benefit valuation framework17. Individual crop production enterprise 
models representing the likely field and cash crop combinations are established. In the 
manner described in the financial analysis, crop enterprise models are combined to 
estimate incremental smallholder farming household production and cashflow. These 
representative households are then aggregated to establish a project level value of 
incremental production. This is then combined with incremental project costs to derive 
the key appraisal indicators. 
  Target population and participation. The primary target of the core 
investments is the smallholder farming population the four SACP provinces. These 
provinces cover some of the poorest regions of Zimbabwe. In total, SACP will support the 
operations of approximately 800 agricultural producer groups (APG). The average 
smallholder membership per APG is estimated at 30 households, with the total target of 
reaching 120,000 individuals.  The SACP support to the improvement of community 
infrastructure in and around the SACP areas is expected to benefit many thousands of 
rural households. Additional indirect beneficiaries are expected through the investments 
in such services as agricultural demonstrations, manual, policy work and presentations in 
radio, internet and other media. 
  The derivations of farming household and beneficiaries driving the economic 
analysis is shown below in Table 25. 
  The theory of change describing the nature and the logic of the interventions is 
included in the Main Report and Annex 2. The process and the mechanisms involved to 
engage and support the participating households are presented in Annex 6 ABWP and 
Annex 8 Project Implementation Manual. 
16 A note on non-quantified benefits is provide below. 
17 Achieved through the application of a Without and With project analytical framework. 
22 
  The 24,000 target households are split evenly across the four illustrative model 
types in the absence of any other rationale.  
Table 25: APG Household Participation Assumptions 
PY 1 
PY 2 
PY 3 
PY 4 
PY 5 
PY 6 
Target APG Households by Farm Type 
Small grains - Goat 
 750  
 1,500  
 1,500  
 1,500  
Maize - Horticulture 
 750  
 1,500  
 1,500  
 1,500  
Sesame – Poultry 
 750  
 1,500  
 1,500  
 1,500  
Irrigated Crops - Goat 
 750  
 1,500  
 1,500  
 1,500  
 750  
 750  
 750  
 750  
- 
- 
- 
- 
Total – incremental 
 3,000  
 6,000  
 6,000  
 6,000  
 3,000  
 -    
Total – cumulative 
 3,000  
 9,000  
 15,000  
 21,000  
 24,000  
 24,000  
APG Household by Farm Type Adjusted for Adoption Rate \1 
Small grains - Goat 
 563  
 1,125  
 1,125  
 1,125  
Maize - Horticulture 
 563  
 1,125  
 1,125  
 1,125  
Sesame – Poultry 
 563  
 1,125  
 1,125  
 1,125  
Irrigated Crops - Goat  
 563  
 1,125  
 1,125  
 1,125  
 563  
 563  
 563  
 563  
- 
- 
- 
- 
Total – incremental 
 2,250  
 4,500  
 4,500  
 4,500  
 2,250  
 -    
Total – cumulative 
 2,250  
 6,750  
 11,250  
 15,750  
 18,000  
 18,000  
APG Beneficiaries by farm type 
Small grains - Goat 
 2,813  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 2,813  
Maize - Horticulture 
 2,813  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 2,813  
Sesame – Poultry 
 2,813  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 2,813  
Irrigated Crops - Goat 
 2,813  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 5,625  
 2,813  
- 
- 
- 
- 
Total – incremental 
 11,250  
 22,500  
 22,500  
 22,500  
 11,250  
 -    
Total – cumulative 
 11,250  
 33,750  
 56,250  
 78,750  
 90,000  
 90,000  
\1 Assumes 75% adoption rate 
Source: Consultant’s estimates 
  Aggregation The household farm type phasing and quantities shown in the table 
above are the basis of the aggregation of the respective farm models described earlier 
into the discounted cashflow that forms the economic cost benefit analysis (CBA) model. 
When a farm is recruited into the CBA in, for example project year (PY) 2, that farm’s 
twenty-year projection enters the model in PY 2. Similarly, farms recruited in the PY 3 
have their twenty-year projection commencing in the CBA in PY 3. In this way all the 
farms of one type of illustrative model form a sub-project for that model type. When all 
the farm type sub-projects are aggregated a project perspective is derived. 
  The distributions of farm numbers and areas together with the resulting 
aggregations in physical and economic terms for each farm type and the overall project 
are presented in Appendix 4 Farm Model Aggregations. 
B.  Cost Benefit Analysis 
  Main Assumptions. The key parameters underpinning the economic analysis are 
presented below18. 
18 The analysis employs the function available in both Costab and Farmod to generate economic costs 
and benefits respectively. 
23 
Parameter 
Value  Remarks 
Currency 
Standard 
conversion factor 
1 
Given  the  current  economic  situation  the  EFA  is  undertaken  in 
USD 
As commonly applied in recent projects designs in Zimbabwe. As 
appropriate all prices are adjusted using the SCF in lieu of specific 
adjustment factors. 
Value added tax 
14% 
Included  in  project  costs  and  eliminated  as  appropriate  for 
conversion to economic costs. 
Shadow  wage  rate 
factor (SWRF) 
95% 
Social 
Discount 
Rate 
of 
10% 
Applied to unskilled wage rates to reflect the relative abundance 
of  unskilled  labour,  though  in  some  locations  at  sometimes  of 
year this may undervalue unskilled labour due to the temporary 
migration of labour to other parts of Zimbabwe or abroad. 
The discount rate for the economic analysis is the estimate of the 
social  discount  rate  (SDR)  or  rate  of  time  preference.  For  the 
purposes  of  this  analysis  this  is  taken  as  10%.  In  normal 
circumstance  this is assumed to: i)  reflect  the  public nature of 
the  investment;  ii)  account  for  scarcity  of  resources;  and  iii) 
ensure good use of public funds.  
Deriving an SDR based on the average of the long-term public 
bond rates and long-term deposit rates is impractical due to the 
current economic crisis.  
The  Government  does  not  currently  have  a  working  national 
currency  and  is  there  is  no  bond  market.  Zimbabwe  has  no 
current credit rating. The over night lending rate by the Reserve 
Bank is 35% and Y-O-Y inflation is 737% (as of 5/08/20) 
The  rate  of  10%  was  applied  as  it  is  consistent  with  the  most 
recent  IFAD  appraisal  in  Zimbabwe  the  Smallholder  Irrigation 
Revitalization Programme. 
Project life 
20 
Twenty 20 years has been assumed or the project life in line with 
the investment lifecycle. 
Cost base 
2020 
Projections are made in July 2020 price terms. 
Traded goods 
Non-tradable 
goods 
Externalities  
To  approximate  the  opportunity  costs  to  the  country,  the 
valuation  of  tradable  inputs  and  outputs  in  economic  analysis 
relies on border rather than on domestic market prices. For all 
tradable outputs and inputs, border prices have been calculated 
by adding or deducting the corresponding export taxes or import 
duties and applying the SCF.  
Market prices were used as shadow prices for non-tradable goods 
and services as there are no major indications that a significant 
market-distortion  (i.e.  monopoly,  rationing  policies,  etc.)  is 
affecting these goods. 
In  lieu  of  specific  impact  information  the  impact  of  negative 
externalities  have  not  been  included.  The  sensitivity  analysis 
goes  some  way  to  investigation  the  impact  of  additional 
environmental  costs.  EIAs  will  be  under  conducted  for  all 
irrigation and ground water abstraction related activities. 
Source: SACP Design Team 
  Quantified Benefits – Incremental Production. The quantified benefits assume 
a phased introduction of the beneficiary household farm models. The assumed uptake in 
incremental and cumulative terms across the farm types is shown in Table 25. 
24 
  The adoption rate assumed is 75 per cent. This rate is justified due to the nature of 
the interventions under Component 1 in both producer group mentoring to facilitate 
participation as well as the need to adopt specific CSA practices. In addition, the vagaries 
of the weather and markets can also cause lack of adoption / drop-out. Given this 
adoption rate the expected number of direct beneficiaries is reduced from the target of 
120,000 to around 90,000. The project’s economic incremental benefits are derived 
through the aggregation of the individual household benefits in economic terms as 
described above. 
  The economic incremental benefits include an allowance for the project benefits 
extended to the broader outreach target. While the 24,000 households represent the 
direct Component 1 APG target group, there are 54,000 households who will also receive 
benefits through other Component 1 and Component 2 activities. It is envisaged that this 
will be in the form of benefits from rural infrastructure development19 and growth 
employment opportunities. In addition to these elements, growth in the agri-business 
supply chains is also considered to as a real possibility. For example, the investments in 
lead enterprises may expand the supply chains to additional growers in the outreach 
community beyond the APG households. 
  As a proxy for this range of indirect benefits it is assumed that the 54,000 
households will receive benefits at 25 per cent that of the APG household benefits 
phased in the same manner.  
  Increment economic costs. The costs are based on the full SACP project costing. 
Costs have been adjusted to economic terms with taxes, duties and price contingencies 
removed and the SCF applied. The double counting of the APG investment costs (namely 
the grant, household in-kind and cash contributions identified in the project costs as well 
as the farm models) is avoided by deducting that amount from the project costs.  
  The project incremental cash flow includes allowances for: (a) the annual post-
project recurrent costs to maintain the SACP value chain infrastructure, assumed at 
5 per cent of investment costs per annum; (b) the ongoing recurrent costs related to the 
MSME and Lead Enterprise investments assumed at 5 per cent of initial investment. 
  Note that the farm models assume that the operations are their own responsibility. 
None of the costs that are defined in the cost tables are elements in the farm models.  
 Economic Viability Three indicators have been used to assess the overall 
performance of the project. These are: (i) the economic internal rate of return (EIRR); 
(ii) the economic net present value (ENPV) and the benefit cost ratio (BCR). These were 
estimated using cash flow of the incremental benefit and cost streams as outlined above 
(refer to Appendix 5 for a summary discounted cash flow). The overall SACP project EIRR 
is 25 per cent. The estimated ENPV at a 10 per cent discount rate is USD 56.5 million. 
The BCR of 2.42 indicates a return of USD 2.42 for every dollar invested. These results 
indicate that the project is a sound investment yielding a positive rate of return as the 
EIRR greater than the hurdle rate (10 per cent) and the ENPV is greater than zero20. 
  These returns described above are further supported by the additional non-
quantified benefits derived from the establishment and/or improvement to rural access, 
market linkages across the value chains as well as the development of agricultural 
extension services and household improvements. The later will be through the 
19 Refer to Appendix 6 for an overview of the benefits arising from rural roads. 
20 A social discount rate of 10% is assumed consistent with current IFAD practice. 
25 
investments in gender, youth and nutrition training. The conclusion of this analysis is 
therefore is that the investment in the Project is viable from an economic perspective. 
Risks and Sensitivity The main identified risks that may affect the economic outcome 
of the Project area are outlined in Table 26. A sensitivity analysis has been conducted to 
assess the potential impact of these risks resulting: in reduced benefits; increased costs; 
delayed benefits and combinations thereof (see Table 27). This analysis reveals that 
except in the worst-case combinations the project remains viable. 
  An increase in programme costs by 10 per cent will reduce the EIRR to 23.3 per 
cent, while a decrease in overall programme benefits by 20 per cent will result in an 
EIRR of 21.7 per cent. A one-year delay in benefits reduces the EIRR to 21.5 per cent 
and a two-year delay to 18.8 per cent. A combination of a reduction in benefits of 20 per 
cent and an increase in costs by 20 per cent reduces the EIRR to 17.8 per cent indicating 
the investment remains viable in the face of adverse circumstances of that nature.  
The switching values show that the programme remains economically viable if benefits 
decreased by 59 per cent, or programme costs increased by 142 per cent.  
26 
  Table 27 below provides an overview of the various scenarios of the sensitivity 
analysis and confirms the economic viability of the Project except in the most adverse of 
circumstances. Based on these results it is fair to conclude that the economic benefits 
justify the use of the project resources. 
In additional to the sensitivity analysis in Table 27 two other sensitivity tests were 
conducted on specific input variables. The first of these examined the impact if only 
80 per cent of the expected yield increment on the field and horticulture crops was 
realised. In this instance the EIRR drops to 19.7 per cent.  
  The second specific sensitivity considers an adoption rate lower than the 75 per 
cent assumption in the base case. Thus, a 50 per cent adoption rate is considered. In 
this instance the EIRR drops to 17.8 per cent and the ENPV remains positive. It is thus 
fair to conclude that the project could bear a substantial reduction in the expected 
number of targeted households adopting. 
Table 26: Overview of Main Project Risks affecting Project Economic Outcome 
Likelihood/ 
severity 
Potential impact reflected 
in sensitivity analysis 
Reduced 
benefits 
Increased 
costs 
Delayed 
benefits 
Risk 
category 
Risk 
External shocks to macro economy. 
Economy 
and  Market 
Risks 
Increase cost of inputs. 
Reduced producer prices. 
Reduced demand. 
Changes  to  provincial  and  district  administrative 
systems  
Insufficient  cohesion  within  farmer  groups  affect 
their success potential  
Ineffective coordination between provinces, districts 
and  supply  chain  related  enterprises  undermining 
implementation progress 
Unsustainable  use  of  Project-financed  civil  works 
and inadequate capacity for on-going maintenance. 
Institutional 
M/H 
L/H 
L/H 
L/H 
M/H 
M 
M 
Elite  capture/  disadvantaged  groups  not  able  to 
participate effectively 
L/M 
Market 
Lack of technical capacity to respond to the identified 
needs 
Lower market prices for commodities 
Financial service providers not interested to invest in 
Project targeted initiatives 
M 
M 
M 
Policy 
Farmers  not  treated  as  clients  by  government 
agencies and supply chain entities 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Climate  change  adaptation  does  not  underpin 
agricultural and rural development policies at district 
levels 
Poor  business  environment  does  not  provide 
incentive for supply chain investments. 
M 
X 
Others 
Natural calamities including flood and drought lower 
output of farm production. 
Damages  to  civil  works  built  caused  by  natural 
disasters, like floods and land sliding. 
H 
M 
XX 
X 
X 
XX 
X 
Source: SACP Design Team 
27 
Table 27 SACP Sensitivity Analysis 
Scenario 
Base Case 
 ∆% to Base Case 
Project 
Costs       
Incr’l 
Benefits 
Benefits 
delayed 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
- 40% 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 10% 
- 20% 
1 year 
Base 
Case 
Base Case 
2 years 
Base 
case 
- 20% 
3 years 
1 year 
2 years 
3 years 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
2 years 
Switching Values \2 
Link to Risk Matrix Issues 
EIRR \1 
ENPV  
(USD ‘000)\2 
25.0 
56,492 
Increase in the cost of inputs. 
Reduced producer prices / demand. 
Infrastructure investments are not 
directed to areas of highest production 
potential. 
Technical coordination by the 
implementing agencies and service 
providers is not responsive to the group 
level needs. 
Combinations of the above 
Ineffective inter-institutional 
cooperation & dialogue on development 
issues means financing is not disbursed 
in a timely manner to support field 
implementation. 
Insufficient cohesion within farmer 
groups affect their success potential  
Ineffective coordination between 
provinces, districts, villages and supply 
chain enterprises undermining 
implementation progress 
Grants diverted for other purposes 
Climate-change and disaster impacts. 
External shocks to macro economy. 
 23.3%  
 21.7%  
 21.0%  
 52,509  
 48,525  
 37,227  
 16.0%  
 17,962  
 21.4%  
 17.8%  
 21.5%  
 42,876  
 29,260  
 47,735  
 18.8%  
 39,774  
 16.8%  
 32,537  
 16.6%  
 26,238  
 14.7%  
 19,869  
 13.1%  
 14,080  
 13.5%  
 15,886  
Benefits 
Costs 
(59%) 
142% 
Source: SACP economic model 
\1 Hurdle rate 10 per cent. 
\2 Discounted at 10 per cent, results rounded. 
\2 Per cent change in cost and/or benefit streams to obtain an ENPV of USD 0, i.e., economic viability threshold.  
List of Appendices 
Appendix 1  
Appendix 2  
Appendix 3  
Appendix 4  
Appendix 5  
Financial and Economic Prices 
Crop and Livestock Production Models 
Illustrative Farm Models 
Farm Model Aggregations 
SACP Economic Model Discounted Cashflow 
28 
III.  APPENDIX 1 – FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC PRICES 
Appendix 1 Table 1: Financial and Economic Prices 
29 
Financial and Economic Prices (Continued) 
30 
Financial and Economic Prices (Continued) 
31 
Financial and Economic Prices (Continued) 
Prices and other outputs contained herewith from FARMOD: Version 4.02 
Developed under the leadership of the World Bank with cooperation of the FAO and IFAD 
32 
IV. APPENDIX 2 – CROP AND LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION MODELS 
Page 
Appendix 2 Table 2: Maize (with cowpea) - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 1: Maize (with Cowpea) - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 8: Sesame Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 9: Tomato Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 7: Sesame Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 6: Groundnuts/Bambarra Nut Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 5: Groundnuts/Bambarra Nut Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
34 
35 
Appendix 2 Table 3: Small Grains (with pumpkins) Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs  36 
Appendix 2 Table 4: Small Grains (with pumpkins) Gross Margin - Financial Budget  37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
46 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
Appendix 2 Table 10: Tomato Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 16: Layer Model – Production and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 14: Goat Model – Production and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 11: Sugar Snap Pea - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 12: Sugar Snap Pea - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 17: Layer Model - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 15: Goat Model - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 13: Goat Model – Herd Projection 
Notes on Appendix 2 Tables 
1.  The production models are presented in the form of a gross margin analysis with separate 
tables for the production/inputs and financial budgets 
2.  Figures shaded in yellow are quoted in the text. 
3.  All modelling is undertaken over a 20-year projection period. 
4.  Gross margin models are presented showing the existing/new technology scenarios and the 
incremental changes. 
5.  For the presentational simplicity only the first 5 years of the Farm Model Without and With 
Project projections are displayed. 
6.  The farm model cropping pattern tables (Appendix 3) present how the crops are included in 
the analysis.  
7.  All Appendix 1 tables are available in the project file in Excel format.  
33 
Appendix 2 Table 1: Maize (with Cowpea) - Yields and Inputs 
34 
Appendix 2 Table 2: Maize (with cowpea) - Financial Budget 
35 
Appendix 2 Table 3: Small Grains (with pumpkins) Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
36 
Appendix 2 Table 4: Small Grains (with pumpkins) Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
37 
Appendix 2 Table 5: Groundnuts/Bambarra Nut Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
38 
Appendix 2 Table 6: Groundnuts/Bambarra Nut Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
39 
Appendix 2 Table 7: Sesame Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
40 
Appendix 2 Table 8: Sesame Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
41 
Appendix 2 Table 9: Tomato Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
42 
Appendix 2 Table 10: Tomato Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
43 
Appendix 2 Table 11: Sugar Snap Pea - Yields and Inputs 
44 
Sugar Snap Pea - Yields and Inputs (Cont’d) 
45 
Appendix 2 Table 12: Sugar Snap Pea - Financial Budget 
46 
Sugar Snap Pea - Financial Budget (Continued) 
47 
Appendix 2 Table 13: Goat Model – Herd Projection 
48 
PRODUCTION PARAMETERS WITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNIT112345678910Production parameters Age at first kidding/maturitymonths1510101010101010101010Kidding intervalmonths108888888888Kidding percentage (fertility rate)%70%70%75%75%80%80%85%85%85%90%90%Twinning percentage%30%35%40%40%45%45%50%50%50%50%50%Number of kiddings per yeartimes1.21.51.51.51.51.51.51.51.51.51.5Mortality of adults%5%4%4%4%3%3%3%3%3%3%3%Mortality of male kids%15%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%Mortality of female kids%15%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%10%Off-take rate females <1yr%30%30%30%30%30%30%30%30%30%30%30%Off-take rate females >1yr%20%10%10%20%20%25%25%25%25%25%25%Off-take rate males <1yr%60%85%85%85%85%85%85%90%90%90%90%Off-take rate males >1yr%60%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%100%Body weight of male kg LW4045455050555560656565Body weight of female kg LW3540455050555555555555Body weight of kidkg LW2025252525252525252525Sex ratio (% of does)ratio0.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.500.50Culling of does from 2nd years+% 20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%Fiber production per goatkg23333333333Skin production per goatkg45555566676Stock growth modelF7-8yrshead00000000000F6-7yrshead00000010000F5-6yrshead00010100011F4-5yrshead00111011111F 3-4yrshead01110111122F 2-3yrshead11111112233F 1-2yrshead12112233445Kid 0-1yrhead6245781012141721M1-2yrshead11000000000M2-3yrshead10-0-0-0-0-0-0-000M3-4yrshead00-000000000M4-5yrshead00-00-0-0-0-0-0-0-0M5-6yrshead0000-0000000M6-7yrshead0000-00-0-0-0-0-0M7-8yrshead000000-00000Number of does2334566791012Number of bucks21-000000-00-0Total stock10781012141720232734YIELDS AND INPUTSWITHOUT PROJECTITEMS UNITPRICE112345678910Main production output (yields)Animal sales - femalehead00011122233Animal sales - malehead11-000000-00-0Animal sales - kidshead3133456781013Animal sales - totalhead43345689111316Sale weightsAnimal sales - femalekg LW14131542487888102120144170Animal sales - malekg LW4865-06691115-00-0Animal sales - kidskg LW5431647696120143183212250317Animal sales - totalkg LW11610979124150208242299332394487Feed requirementsDoes weightkg LW70126151212240314351407480574680Kids weightkg LW12055112132167209248305354417528Bucks weightkg LW8065-06691115-00-0Total weightkg LW2702462633504135326107278339911,209Daily DM requirement at % DM/kg LWkg2.5%767910131518212530Annual requirementkg2,4642,2402,4003,1903,7704,8505,5706,6307,6009,04011,030Conversion to maize grain equiv.      factor>kg2.59909009601,2801,5101,9402,2302,6503,0403,6204,410WITH PROJECTWITH PROJECT 
Appendix 2 Table 14: Goat Model – Production and Inputs 
49 
Appendix 2 Table 15: Goat Model - Financial Budget 
50 
Appendix 2 Table 16: Layer Model – Production and Inputs 
51 
Appendix 2 Table 17: Layer Model - Financial Budget 
52 
V.  APPENDIX 3 – ILLUSTRATIVE FARM MODELS 
Appendix 3 Table 1: Small grains - Goat Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 2: Small grains - Goat Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
Appendix 3 Table 3: Maize - Horticulture Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 4: Maize - Horticulture Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
Appendix 3 Table 5: Sesame - Poultry Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 6: Sesame - Poultry Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
Appendix 3 Table 7: Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 8: Irrigated Crops - Goat Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
Page 
54 
57 
59 
63 
65 
68 
70 
74 
Notes on Appendix 3 Tables 
1.  All modelling is undertaken over a 20-year projection period. 
2.  For the presentational simplicity only the first 10 years of the Farm Model Without and With Project projections are displayed. 
3.  All Appendix 3 tables are available in the project file in Excel format.  
53 
Appendix 3 Table 1: Small grains - Goat Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
Small grains - Goat Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
54 
55 
Small grains - Goat Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
56 
Appendix 3 Table 2: Small grains - Goat Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
57 
Small grains - Goat Farm Model - Aggregated Financial Budget (Continued) 
58 
Appendix 3 Table 3: Maize - Horticulture Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
59 
Maize - Horticulture Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
60 
Maize - Horticulture Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
61 
Maize - Horticulture Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
62 
Appendix 3 Table 4: Maize - Horticulture Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
63 
Maize - Horticulture Farm Model - Aggregated Financial Budget (Continued) 
64 
Appendix 3 Table 5: Sesame - Poultry Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
65 
Sesame - Poultry Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
66 
Sesame - Poultry Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
67 
Appendix 3 Table 6: Sesame - Poultry Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
68 
Sesame - Poultry Farm Model - Aggregated Financial Budget (Continued) 
69 
Appendix 3 Table 7: Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Model – Detailed Production & Inputs 
70 
Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
71 
Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
72 
Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
73 
Appendix 3 Table 8: Irrigated Crops - Goat Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget 
74 
Irrigated Crops - Goat Farm Model – Aggregated Financial Budget (Continued) 
75 
VI. APPENDIX 4 – FARM MODEL AGGEGRATIONS 
Appendix 4 Table 1: Aggregated Small Grains - Goat Farm Models – Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 2: Aggregated Small Grains - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 3: Aggregated Small Grains - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 4: Aggregated Maize - Horticulture Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 5: Aggregated Maize - Horticulture Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 6: Aggregated Sesame - Poultry Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 7: Aggregated Sesame - Poultry Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 8: Aggregated Sesame - Poultry Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 9: Aggregated Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 10: Aggregated Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 11: Aggregated Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 12: Overall SACP – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 13: Overall SACP – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 14: Overall SACP – Incremental Economic Budget 
Page 
77 
78 
79 
80 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
89 
94 
Notes on Appendix 4 Tables 
1.  All figures are presented on an incremental basis, i.e. with project minus without project  
2.  Figures shaded in yellow are quoted in the text. 
3.  All modelling is undertaken over a 20-year projection period 
4.  All Appendix 4 tables are available in the project file in Excel format.  
76 
Appendix 4 Table 1: Aggregated Small Grains - Goat Farm Models – Farm Distributions 
77 
Appendix 4 Table 2: Aggregated Small Grains - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
78 
Appendix 4 Table 3: Aggregated Small Grains - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
79 
Appendix 4 Table 4: Aggregated Maize - Horticulture Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
80 
81 
Appendix 4 Table 5: Aggregated Maize - Horticulture Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
82 
Appendix 4 Table 6: Aggregated Sesame - Poultry Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
83 
Appendix 4 Table 7: Aggregated Sesame - Poultry Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
84 
Appendix 4 Table 8: Aggregated Sesame - Poultry Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
85 
Appendix 4 Table 9: Aggregated Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
86 
Appendix 4 Table 10: Aggregated Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
87 
Appendix 4 Table 11: Aggregated Irrigated crops - Goat Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
88 
Appendix 4 Table 12: Overall SACP – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 13: Overall SACP – Incremental Production and Inputs 
89 
90 
Overall SACP – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
91 
Overall SACP – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
92 
Overall SACP – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
93 
Appendix 4 Table 14: Overall SACP – Incremental Economic Budget 
94 
VII. APPENDIX 5 – SACP ECONOMIC DISCOUNTED CASHFLOW 
Cost Benefit Analysis - Cashflows and Indicators 
USD thousands 
Selected 
years 
Incremental 
benefits \1 
Invest Costs 
Recurrent 
Costs 
Adjustments 
and Post SACP 
\2 
Total 
incremental 
costs 
Net incremental 
benefits 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
 (2,083) 
 7,355  
 (3,123) 
 12,196  
 (294) 
 18,391  
 3,848  
 17,480  
 10,047  
 5,829  
 15,884  
 155  
 17,973  
 18,989  
 21,491  
 21,561  
 20,983  
 21,511  
 19,392  
 19,044  
 19,283  
 18,044  
 19,134  
 20,361  
 21,386  
 22,547  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 569  
 520  
 559  
 455  
 455  
 455  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 (937) 
 (4,685) 
 (9,369) 
 6,987  
 8,031  
 9,581  
 (9,070) 
 (11,155) 
 (9,875) 
 (2,811) 
 15,124  
 (11,276) 
 (937) 
 -    
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 5,347  
 609  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
 1,359  
ENPV @ 10% USD million 
EIRR 
BCR 
Switching value benefits 
Switching value costs 
 4,700  
 15,275  
 16,614  
 17,630  
 20,131  
 20,202  
 19,624  
 20,152  
 18,033  
 17,685  
 17,924  
 16,685  
 17,775  
 19,002  
 20,027  
 21,188  
56.49 
25.0 
2.42 
(59%) 
142 
\1 Source: Appendix 4 Table 15: Overall SACP – Incremental Economic Budget plus non-APG benefits @ 25% of 
APG benefits. 
\2 Provision to avoid double counting of APG matching grant, MSME/Lead enterprise recurrent costs and post 
SACP infrastructure recurrent costs. 
95 
VIII. 
APPENDIX 6 – OVERVIEW OF RURAL ROAD BENEFITS 
Benefits 
Resulting from 
Changed patterns of 
production/increased area 
Increased agricultural 
productivity 
Introduction/expansion of higher value crops which 
become financially viable due to improved market access 
and reduced losses 
Increased availability and reduced cost of inputs. 
Increased access to support services, including extension. 
Increased marketed output 
Better access to markets due to improved accessibility 
throughout the year. 
Increased producer prices 
(i) Reduced transport costs; and (ii) higher quality of 
produce due to timely transportation and reduced losses 
during transport. 
Reduced losses (on-farm before 
transport and during transport) 
Reduced transport time and accessibility throughout the 
year. 
Increased profits for vehicle 
operators 
Reduction in vehicle operation and maintenance costs. 
Time savings. 
Opportunities for increased business (volumes 
transported). 
Social benefits 
Increased access to health and other social services, and 
information. 
96 
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5: SACP SECAP 
1.  Introduction 
The Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note details 
the analysis of the social and environmental and climate change risks and opportunities of 
SACP.  The  Note  outlines  the  contextual  background  and  recommends  risk management 
and  opportunities  maximisation.  The  Review  Note  has  been  produced  mainly  using 
literature  review  of  national  strategies  and  surveys  conducted.  The  environment  and 
climate  change  analysis  also  drew  on  the  national  commitments  and  targets  from  the 
multilateral  conventions.  Primary  data  was  collected  during  discussions  with  national 
officers. However, no site visits to potential intervention areas were conducted due to the 
remote nature of the design. Therefore, some ground truthing will be required during the 
initial phases of implementation. However, the engagement will be continued throughout 
the  project  life  cycle  particularly  through  the  business  plan  development  and  APG 
organisation and mobilisation activities and social assessments and baselines that will be 
undertaken as part of the cluster identification and validation.  
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts 
2.1 Socio-economic and nutritional assessment 
Overall poverty situation  
Zimbabwe’s  population  stands  at  13,572,560  persons  (6,514,829  males  and  7,057,731 
females  (2017))  with  an  average  household  size  of  4.2  persons1.  SACP  will  be 
implemented in the five out of the ten country’s provinces2: Mashonaland Central, 
Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West  Midlands and Matebeleland North. Within 
these five targeted provinces, SACP will be implemented in 18 out of the 60 rural 
districts3 in Zimbabwe. The districts are further broken down into wards and SACP 
will  be  implemented  in  428  out  of  the  1,552  rural  farming  wards  in  Zimbabwe. 
The  total  population  in  the  5  provinces  is  6,363,090  people  (51.6  per  cent  women). 
Midlands has the highest population of 1,614,941 people, followed by Mashonaland West 
with  1,501,656  people,  Mashonaland  East  and  Matebeleland  North  has  the  least 
population. Mashonaland Central has the largest population in rural areas (93.8 per cent) 
followed by Matebeleland North (91 per cent), Mashonaland East (86 per cent), Midlands 
(75.4 per cent) and Mashonaland West (75 per cent). 
Zimbabwe has three main rural land use sectors (Table 1).  
(i) Smallholder farming areas, consisting of:  
  Communal  lands  where  farmers  have  areas  for  cropping  and  common  grazing 
lands;  production  is  mainly  for  subsistence  with  the  surplus  being  sold  to  the 
market. The population makes up about 51% and occupies 42% of total arable land 
area,  
  Old  Resettlement  Schemes  (redistribution  programme  from  1982  to  1998):  This 
involved  ‘willing  buyer  willing  seller’  approach  and  resettled  farmers  from 
1 ZIMSTAT (2017) Intercensal Demographic Survey (IDCDS) 
2 Manicaland, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Mashonaland Central, Matebeleland North, Matebeleland 
South, Midlands, Masvingo, Harare and Bulawayo 
3 Matebeleland North Province (Hwange; Binga, Nkayi, and Lupane districts); Mashonaland West 
(Chegutu,Mhondoro-Ngezi, Zvimba, and Sanyati districts); Mashonaland Central (Rushinga, Mt Darwin, 
Muzarabani and Shamva districts); Mashonaland East (Goromonzi, Murehwa, Mutoko, and UMP districts); 
Midlands (Chirumanzu, Kwekwe) 
1 
communal lands on an individual family basis or as co-operatives. Five models, A 
to E, have been used in these schemes, and  
  A1  Farms,  which  include  an  individual  family  farm  of  at  least  six  hectares 
(depending  on  natural  regions)  plus  a  common  grazing  land  for  livestock.  The 
homesteads are in villages and farmers have fields at a designated area.  
(ii) Small Medium Scale Commercial Farming Areas consisting of:  
  A2  Farms  where  an  individual  has  a  farm  for  crop  and  livestock  production  (no 
common grazing land). Farmers, males or both spouses jointly or females in their 
own right, are given offer letters and 99 years lease agreements issued; and  
  Small  Scale  Commercial  Farming  Areas  consisting  of  approximately  9,655  farms 
with an average size of 148 hectares. Small Scale Commercial Farms occupy 4% 
of  all  arable  land  and  farmers  have  title  deeds  or  lease  with  option  to  purchase 
deed of grant.  
(iii) Large Scale Commercial Farming Areas consisting of farming areas occupied by 
white commercial farmers, state farms, forests and national parks.  
Table 1: Zimbabwe Land Classification 
Farmer Cluster 
Smallholder 
Farmers 
Small-Medium 
Scale 
Commercial 
Large Scale 
Commercial  
Land Category 
1980 
Area 
(million ha) 
16.4 
Communal 
Old resettlement  
0 
New resettlement  A1  0 
0 
New resettlement A2 
1.4 
Small- Scale 
Commercial Farms 
Large Scale 
Commercial Farms 
State Farms 
Urban land  
National Parks and 
forest land 
Unallocated land 
0.5 
0.2 
5.1 
15.5 
0 
2010 
% 
Area 
(million ha) 
%  No. of 
farmers 
41.9  16.4 
3.5 
4.1 
3.5 
1.4 
3.6 
72,000 
41.9  1,000,000 
9 
10.5  141,656 
9 
3.6 
8,000 
14,072 
39.6  3.4 
8.7 
4,317 
0.7 
1.3 
0.5 
0.3 
13.0  5.1 
1.8 
0.8 
13.0 
1.8 
0 
Source: Ministry of Lands Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement 
0.7 
Agriculture  is  the  backbone  of  the  Zimbabwean  economy  and  is  dependent  on  rainfall, 
making the economy susceptible to weather or climate variations. Maize is the main staple 
crop,  widely  grown  by  both  commercial  and  communal  farmers.  Tobacco  is  the  largest 
foreign currency earner, while cotton is the second major cash crop. Other major crops 
grown include sugar beans, sunflower, small grains, cowpeas and horticulture.  
Poverty situation. Poverty rates (Table 2) are increasing with 76.9 per cent of the rural 
households being poor compared to 30.4 per cent of urban households4.  The majority of 
the  population lives in  rural  areas  with livelihoods  mainly  based  on  rain-fed  agricultural 
production, characterised by low input use and low productivity.  
4 World Bank 2019 
2 
Table 2: Poverty prevalence and extreme poverty prevalence by province (targeted 
provinces are shaded) 
Province 
Population 
Mashonaland Central 
Matebeleland North 
Mashonaland West 
Manicaland 
Mashonaland East 
Masvingo 
Midlands 
Matebeleland South 
Harare 
Bulawayo 
Total  
Source: PICES 2017 
1,152,520 
749,017 
1,501,656 
1,752,698 
1,344,955 
1,485,090 
1,614,941 
683,893 
2,123,132 
653,337 
13,061,239 
Poverty 
Prevalence 
% 
81.6 
74.3 
71.1 
71.0 
65.6 
64.8 
63 
62.8 
31.1 
22.3 
Extreme 
Poverty 
Prevalence 
% 
41.2 
33.3 
31.6 
27.9 
22.2 
20.7 
21.8 
17.8 
3.8 
0.9 
Proportion of 
rural poor 
households % 
16.1 
12.5 
10.5 
12.2 
14.0 
10.0 
11.9 
11.0 
Rural 
poverty 
prevalence 
% 
84.7 
78.6 
82.7 
78.7 
71.3 
71.5 
77.6 
68.5 
76.9 
Households  headed  by  communal  and  resettlement  farmers  suffer  from  the  greatest 
poverty prevalence, 82.9 per cent (40.0 per cent extreme) compared to households from 
other farm clusters (Table 1). Rural poverty is most prevalent in communal lands, 79.2 
per cent  of which 34.0 per cent is extreme, followed by resettlement areas, 76.4 per cent 
and 29.9 per cent extreme. In rural areas, communal and resettlement farmers constituted 
80.6 per cent of the economically active population5.  
HIV prevalence rates have declined from 25 per cent in 2010 to 18 per cent in 2005 and 
15  per  cent  in  2018.  While  there  is  a  reduction  in  the  prevalence  of  HIV  and  AIDS 
household  economies  continue  to  be  affected.  The  prevalence  rate  is  highest  in 
Matebeleland North 18 per cent. Mashonaland East 16 per cent, Mashonaland West 15 per 
cent, Midlands 15 per cent and Mashonaland Central 14 per cent 6.  
Economic  situation.  Recently,  Zimbabwe’s  economy  has  been  characterized  by 
macroeconomic  imbalances  such  as  a  high  budget  deficit,  balance  of  payment  deficits, 
inflation  and  low  economic  growth.  Inflation  is  rising  sharply.  The  country  is  currently 
facing  foreign  currency  shortages,  cash  shortages  and  fuel  shortages.  The  Transitional 
Stabilisation Programme, introduced in October 2018, and which draws on the Vision 2030 
to address the above challenges, is expected to end in December 2020.  
Due  to  the  decline  in  formal  employment,  many  workers  are  engaged  in  poorly 
remunerated informal  jobs,  remittance income  and  gold  panning.  As  a  result, economic 
activity  has  contracted,  social  indicators  have  deteriorated  with  an  estimated  8  million 
people (more than half of the population) expected to be food insecure in 20207. The food 
insecurity is exacerbated by the recurring droughts, reducing maize the staple crop yields 
to less than a ton per hectare, forcing the majority of the rural population to rely on food 
assistance. Dilapidated infrastructure for the transport, storage and handling of food needs 
to be repaired or replaced. Opportunities exist for partnerships involving the Government, 
farmers, the food industry, development agencies and non-governmental organisations8. 
Gender.  Despite  significant  achievements  in  gender  equality,  through  the  various 
measures  and  institutions,  the  country  still  has  a  long  way  to  go  in  terms  of  women’s 
economic empowerment and financial inclusion. In 2018, Zimbabwe scored 0.563 on the 
Human Development index and was ranked 150 out of 180 countries. It scored 0.525 and 
5 ZIMSTAT (2019) Zimbabwe Poverty Report 
6 National Aids Council of Zimbabwe (2019) 
7 IMF (2020) 
8 https://www.usaid.gov/zimbabwe/food-assistance 2020 
3 
was ranked 126 out of 162 countries on the Gender inequality Index (GII)9 and was ranked 
47th out of 153 countries on the Global Gender Gap, with a score of 0.73010.  
Approximately  80  per  cent  of  women  in  Zimbabwe  live  in  communal  areas  where  they 
constitute 61 per cent of the subsistence farmers and provide 70 per cent of the labour. 
Female-headed households (FHH) are mostly categorised as poor and comprise of 35 per 
cent of total households population in Zimbabwe11. Zimbabwe has high literacy rates, 89 
per cent for males and 88 per cent for females12. Poverty prevalence among rural men is 
85.6 per cent and 86.3 per cent for women compared to 37.7 per cent and 36.5 per cent 
for the urban male and female13. 
Women in Zimbabwe are faced with a number of constraints along the agricultural value 
chains, including: (i) Production: lack of land ownership, land grabbing by male relatives, 
low  paid  employment,  limited  assets,  limited  access  to  credit  due  to  lack  of  collateral 
security,  lack  of  livestock  ownership,  limited  security  of  tenure  resulting  from 
discriminatory customary laws14, large share of agricultural labour, low paid employment; 
(ii)  Markets:  lack  of  facilities,  safety  issues,  limited  agricultural  information  and  unfair 
prices;  (iii)  Transportation:  unsafe  transportation,  travelling  at  night; (iv)  Limited 
participation  in  decision  making  processes:  at  HH  and  community,  farm  management, 
investments,  community  development,  and  (v)  vulnerability  to  climate  change  impacts 
due  to  underlying  existing  power  relations,  structures,  gender  inequalities  and  lower 
adaptive  capacity.  Women  have  less  opportunities  compared  to  men  to  attend 
training/extension  services  in  relation  to  climate  information,  awareness  raising  on  the 
importance  and  effects  of  climate  change  and  knowledge  gaps  regarding  climate  smart 
agriculture/technologies. When women are invited, they first have to seek permission or 
negotiate  to  participate  in  capacity  building  activities. Addressing  these  constraints  will 
assist  to  close  the  gender  gap  in  agricultural  production  for  instance  through  contract 
farming. 
Zimbabwe’s  commitment  towards  the  promotion  of  Gender  Equality  and  Women 
Empowerment  (GEWE)  is  illustrated  by  ratification  and  signature  of  international  and 
regional conventions and declarations. Domestically, various legislative reforms and policy 
frameworks have been introduced aligned with the Sustainable development Goals (SDGs) 
No  5  on  Gender  Equality,  the  2013  National  Gender  Policy  and  2013  Constitution  for 
Zimbabwe that includes women’s rights as part of the Bill of Rights. 
Despite  the  efforts  to  address  gender  inequalities  and  other  gender-related  challenges, 
violence against women and girls remains prevalent; the pace of economic advancement 
and empowerment is slow; there are high rates of child marriage, youth pregnancy and 
maternal mortality; and young women and adolescent girls are highly vulnerable to HIV 
and sexually transmitted infections. These inequalities are manifested in consistently low 
representation  of  women  in  leadership  and  decision-making  positions  in  the  public  and 
private  sectors;  comparatively  low  levels  of  female  participation  in  the  labour  market; 
incidences of child labour; over- representation of women in the informal economy; and 
low access to productive resources, such as land, housing and mineral wealth. 
Division of Labour. Rural women work long hours, spending at least 49 per cent of their 
time  on  agricultural  activities  and  about  25  per  cent  on  unpaid  domestic  work15.  On 
average women work five hours more than men in both the dry and rainy season to fulfil 
both  their  reproductive  and  productive  roles  (SNV  2017).  Reproductive  roles  such  as 
9 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/ZWE.pdf 
10 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf 
11 MLARR (2019) Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Framework. 
12 http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/zw 
13 RBZ (2018) Women Empowerment and Financial Inclusion  
14 FAO (2017) Zimbabwe Country Gender Assessment Report. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6997e.pdf 
15 FAO, 2017 Country Gender Assessment of Agriculture and the Rural Sector 
4 
cooking, washing, sweeping, fetching water and firewood are regarded as women’s roles. 
In some communities, women travel long distances in search of firewood. Due to climatic 
changes, water bodies are drying up and women have to travel long distances in search 
of water, a time-consuming process. Women mostly fetch water and firewood using their 
heads and this is physically burdensome and has long-term health effects. Fetching water 
and  firewood  is  mostly  done  by  men  from  households  with  access  to  labour-saving 
technologies  such  as  wheelbarrows  and  ox-drawn  carts.  Traditionally  men  and  women 
have  defined  productive  roles  although  some  of  those  roles  intersect.  Women’s 
reproductive  roles  as  well  as  agriculture  activities  in  the  cultivation  of  other  food  crops 
limit the time available for processing of vegetables (FAO, 2017). Women are responsible 
for food and nutrition security for the household including the cultivation of food crops and 
preparation of meals. 
Access  and  control  over  assets.  Land  ownership  favours  men  in  communal  areas; 
women  can  only  access  land  through  their  husbands  or  a  male  relative.  FHHs  average 
arable land holding is lower than male-headed households. Only 13.9 per cent of the large 
commercial farms are owned by women, while 34.5 per cent of land in the communal area 
are  female  owned.  Women  own  3.5  per  cent  and  16.3  per  cent  of  A2  and  A1  farms 
respectively.16  
Men  dominate  in  livestock  ownership  and  production,  making  decisions  on  their 
management, use and disposal. Livestock ownership is gendered, as 45 per cent of men 
own cattle compared to 23 per cent of women, and about 63 per cent of the women own 
poultry compared to 13 per cent of men in Matebeleland North 17. Women prefer to own 
small livestock, mainly goats and chickens mainly because in addition to providing meat, 
milk, eggs and manure, they could be easily sold or bartered for food or labour in times 
of need. Men make decisions on the use of veterinary technologies associated with large 
livestock and they put more man-hours in the production of these livestock than women 
and children18.  
Decision  making  roles  in  rural  households.    Women  have  limited  participation  in 
decision-making processes at both household and community levels. Men make decisions 
around  farm  management,  investments,  community  development.  At  household  level, 
landowners  remain  decision  makers  despite  minimal  involvement  in  fieldwork;  while 
women contribute to production, harvesting, processing, they have limited opportunities 
to claim benefits of their labour. Investing in women empowerment can advance gender 
equality  across  various  activities  and  institutions  along  selected  value  chains  and  thus 
contribute to an increased number of women who can make strategic life choices, which 
is an essential driver for inclusive food systems.  
Gender Strategy in SACP   
The involvement of women in APGs, Microenterprises and Agribusiness enterprises in the 
matching  grant  facility  for  the  development  of  value  chains  provides  an  opportunity  for 
developing a gender strategy that includes the following:  
Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  approach  will  be  adopted  for  achieving 
(i) 
gender  transformation.  This  community-led  empowerment  methodology  can  be 
complementary  to  a  food  system  or  a  value  chain  development  approach.  Poor  women 
and men are put in the centre of GALS and are perceived as drivers and shapers of their 
own  development  rather  than  victims.  Through  participatory  processes  and  simple 
mapping and diagram tools, men and women jointly identify and address obstacles in their 
environment.  This  enforces  them  to  have  more  control  over  their  personal,  household, 
community and organisational development to improve income, food and nutrition security 
16 MLARR (2019) Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Framework. 
17 FAO (2017) Zimbabwe Country Gender Assessment Report. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6997e.pdf 
18 http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6997e.pdf 
5 
in  a  gender-equitable  way.  Ultimately,  GALS  can  promote  collaboration  between 
vulnerable and powerful value chain actors.19 
(ii) 
Alleviating  the  women’s  workload  and  improving  their  well-being.  Facilitating 
women’s  access  to  CSA  technology  that  does  not  increase  the  workload  for  women, 
carrying  out  training  close  to their  homes,  arranging for  child-care  sessions  to  facilitate 
women’s participation in training while easing their workload. The use of GALS will ensure 
that  both  the  men  and  women  are  targeted  at  the  same  time,  while  also  providing  an 
opportunity  to  question  unequal  gender  relations  within  the  household.  A  Women’s 
Empowerment  in  Agriculture Index  (WEAI)  baseline  survey  will  be  undertaken  in  order  to 
understand the women’s role and needs in terms of the five domains of  empowerment: 
production, leadership, income, resources and time poverty. These are in line with IFAD’s 
focusing  on  economic 
policy  on  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment 
empowerment, decision making and representation and workload balance.  
(iii) 
Strengthen the capacities of BDS providers to operate in a gender sensitive manner 
and increase women’s access to information, knowledge and skills necessary to run their 
enterprises. SACP will appoint gender and social inclusion staff as part of the  NPMU and 
the four PPIUs. Community gender sensitisation training by Agritex will ensure availability 
of mentoring and coaching services to women and men throughout the project life. 
(iv)  Women  will  account  for  a  minimum  of  50  per  cent  project  beneficiaries,  with 
adequate  participation  and  representation  in  decision  making  committees  across  all  the 
project components. Component 1, training should not only address technical skills (e. g 
business  skills  and  entrepreneurship),  but  also  soft  skills  that  act  as  a  barrier  for  the 
participation of women including confidence building, leadership skills, reproductive health 
rights and Gender Based Violence (GBV).  
Youth  aged  between  the  ages  of  15  and  3520  make  up  36%  of  Zimbabwe’s 
population21.This  presents  a  demographic  dividend,  which  the  country  is  yet  to  fully 
harness, as evidenced by the rising youth unemployment in both urban and rural areas. 
About  48.9%  of  rural  male  and  55.2%  of  rural  female  youths  are  unemployed22. 
Unemployment rates for the 15-24 age group for both sexes is about 27 percent. The rate 
for  rural  areas  (29.5%)  is  higher  compared  to  that  of  urban  areas  (23.9%).  Female 
unemployment rate is high (30.3%) as compared to males (24.6%). 
Young  men  are  more  likely  to  secure  employment  compared  to  young  women  in 
Zimbabwe. Formal employment is diminishing in both urban and rural areas; accompanied 
by a sharp increase in the cost of living this is driving high rates of migration of rural youth 
to urban areas or neighbouring South Africa and Botswana. In addition, many youths that 
leave the rural areas to acquire  university education or other vocational training do not 
return to the rural areas upon gaining their qualifications. High levels of youth migration 
and brain drain are major challenges to effective youth inclusion in several development 
initiatives including the IFAD funded Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme. 
In urban areas, many youths are turning to informal trading and entrepreneurship – such 
opportunities are limited in rural areas. The likely rural economic opportunities largely lie 
in  agriculture;  however,  youth  associate  agriculture  with  old  poor  people,  high  labour 
demands and low-income returns23. Distribution of employed 1.5 million youths, aged 15–
35, shows that about 37 per cent (41 per cent males and about 32 per cent females) were 
19 Wageningen (2020) 
20 The 2013 national youth policy defines youth as persons between 15 and 35 years of age. This age range is 
stipulated in the new Constitution and is also in line with the continental definition of youth as defined in the 
African Youth Charter.  
21 Zimbabwe Youth Investment Case Study: Business Key Findings Report (2016) 
22 Zimstat (2019). Labour force and child labour survey  
23 https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/future-through-looking-glass-africas-youth-taking-up-role-farai-gwelo/ 
6 
employed  in  agriculture,  forestry  and  fishery  industry  and  nearly  36  per  cent  had 
elementary  occupations  (38 per  cent  males  and  33  per  cent  females).  Approximately 
16.7 per cent males and 19.9 per cent females were employed as skilled workers in these 
sectors. About 11 per cent males and 28 per cent females were employed in retail, sale 
and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles. The age group 15–19 years had the highest 
percentage  of  youths  with  elementary  occupations  (51  per  cent)  (Labour  Force  Survey 
2019).  
Zimbabwean youth are highly motivated and willing to participate in ventures that have 
quick  and  higher  returns  per  dollar  invested24.  Considering  that  64.4  per  cent  of  the 
working age population resides in rural areas25, where agriculture is the main economic 
driver, agriculture value chain innovation is important for capturing interest. HarvestPlus 
reported  successful  youth  inclusion  in  its  quick-wins  and  high  returns  iron  bean  value 
chain26.  
Youth in Zimbabwe are among the poorest in the world, with the majority of working youth 
earning less than USD 2 per capita per day27. Their low ownership of productive resources 
such as land, other immovable assets or  capital; lack of interest in primary production; 
mismatch of skills with industry requirements and lack of business skills demands for new 
ways  of  including  youth  in  economic  activities28.  Goal  1  of  the  Revised  National  Youth 
Policy  for  Zimbabwe  (2013)29  identifies  five  entry  points  to  empower  the  youth  to 
participate and contribute to socio-economic development. These include provision of work 
for  all  young  men  and  women;  assisting  youth  in  attaining  the  knowledge,  skills  and 
experiences  required  to  enable  them  to  effectively  participate  in  national  development; 
paying special attention to empowering previously marginalised young women and girls, 
youth with disabilities, youth living with HIV, out of school youth and youth living in rural 
areas; involving youth at the planning, decision making, implementation and evaluation 
levels of all youth development programmes; and promoting gender equality and equity 
among youth. 
Indigenous  peoples  (IPs).  There  is  no  specific  policy  on  IPs  in  Zimbabwe,  since  the 
Government considers all Zimbabweans to be indigenous. However, there are tribes that 
define themselves as indigenous. The San (Tshwa) people have lived nomadically and are 
found in Matebeleland region. There is a population of around 2,500 in Zimbabwe, and the 
group  is  located  in  the  area  of  Tsholotsho  close  to  the  border  of  Botswana.  The  Doma 
(1,050 people) are found in Gururve and Mbire districts, Mashonaland Central and Karoi 
district in Mashonaland West province. Originally hunters and gatherers, this community 
has been faced with varying challenges in maintaining their livelihoods and integrating into 
the  surrounding  communities.  Tsholotsho  district  is  home  to  an  estimated  1,500  San 
people  and  the  remaining  800-1,000  are  settled  in  Bulilima-Mangwe  in  Matebeleland 
South.  The  San  constitute  2  per  cent  of  Tsholotsho’s  population,  where  50  per  cent  is 
Kalanga  and  48  per  cent  is  Ndebele  (Madzudzo  2001).  The  vast  majority  of  Tshwa  are 
landless an important problem facing them along with poverty. The Tshwa were removed 
from the Wankie Game Reserve in the late 1920s and early 1930s. The risks faced by the 
Tshwa  include  joblessness,  homelessness,  marginalization,  food  insecurity,  increased 
morbidity  and  mortality,  loss  of  access  to  common  property  assets  and  social 
disarticulation. There is high illiteracy, food insecurity, increased number of orphans, lack 
of  identification  documents  and  poor  nutrition  among  the  Tshwa.  The  young  male  find 
work as gardeners in Bulawayo and neighbouring Botswana but the low education limits 
24 UNICEF (2016). Zimbabwe Youth Investment Case Study Business Key Findings Report. 
25 Zimstat (2019). Labour Force And Child Labour Survey 
26 Bakker et al., (2020) Pre-Design Report “Climate adaptation and mitigation measures for nutrition co-
benefits in IFAD investments in Zimbabwe”. Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation. Wageningen. 
27 https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Youth/ZimbabweHRCommission.pdf 
28 https://www.o4z.org.zw/index.php/news/308-challenges-faced-by-youth-entrepreneurs-in-zimbabwe 
29 https://www.youthpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/library/2013_YouthPolicy_Zimbabwe_Eng.pdf  
7 
their  mobility.  SACP  will  proactively  engage  with  the  representatives  of  these  peoples, 
ensuring free prior and informed consent (FPIC). 
Marginalised groups. According to the 2013 National Survey on Living Conditions among 
Persons with Disabilities (PWD) in Zimbabwe, the prevalence of disability in the country is 
estimated  to  be  7  per  cent,  amounting  to  approximately  914,267  persons.  The  large 
population  of  PWD  are  children  and  young  people,  600,000  (UNICEF).  The  disability 
population of males is estimated to be 56  per cent while females make up 44 per cent. 
Around 52 per cent of disabled children have access to education. However, learners with 
disability face attitudinal and physical barriers in accessing education. About 835 of women 
with  disability  and  74  per  cent  of  male  with  disability  are  unemployed.  Many  disabled 
persons have difficulties in accessing health facilities; in particular, women with disabilities 
face challenges in accessing sexual and reproductive health.  
People living with disability are also vulnerable to food insecurity and accessing water and 
sanitation  facilities.  According  to  ZIMSAT  (2019),  the  prevalence  of  poverty  among  the 
disabled  people  is  74.1  per  cent  compared  to  69.5  per  cent  for  non-disabled.  Other 
unrenderable groups include households that are vulnerable to nutrition mainly FHH, child 
headed  households,  households  headed  by  the  aged,  uneducated,  chronically  ill  and 
households  belonging  to  the  apostolic  religious  sect.  PWD  will  benefit  from  nutrition 
sensitive education and increased employment opportunities that are likely to result from 
SACP interventions.  These groups will be integrated in the APGs. 
Nutrition. Zimbabwe  is  in  a  food  and  nutrition  security  crisis,  with  56  of  the  country’s 
districts experiencing ‘crisis’ hunger30. Recent media reports claim the country has run out 
of food stocks31. The country’s stunting average is 26.2 per cent and in the SACP target 
areas,  Mashonaland  Central  (27  per  cent)  has  the  highest  stunting  prevalence32. 
Underweight and wasting are also high across all the provinces with Mashonaland Central 
and West having the highest prevalence of underweight (10 per cent) while Mashonaland 
Central  and  Matabeleland  North  have  the  highest  prevalence  of  wasting  (3.3  per  cent) 
among under-five children. The prevalence of all these three indicators is higher in rural 
areas compared to urban areas with children in the poorest households (28 per cent) being 
twice more likely to be stunted than those in richest (14 per cent)33. This can be attributed 
to  the  inadequate  dietary  diversity  that  often  follows  the  timely  introduction  of 
complimentary foods, particularly in the rural areas. Average women’s dietary diversity in 
the SACP target areas is five in Mashonaland East and four in Mashonaland Central and 
West and Matabeleland North. 
Groups  that  are  highly  vulnerable  to  malnutrition  in  Zimbabwe  include  child-headed 
households, orphans, people living with disabilities or chronic illness and the elderly who 
lack land, assets, finance or the ability to work. The National Food and Nutrition Security 
Policy makes special mention of the need to empower those affected by HIV/AIDS and TB. 
Other  nutritionally  vulnerable  groups  in  the  SACP  target  areas  include  minority  ethnic 
groups  such  as  the  BaTonga  who  are  found  in  Binga  district,  Matabeleland  North  who 
mainly rely on subsistence farming; as well as the Tshwa (Tyua, Cuaa) San and the Doma 
people in Mbire District Mashonaland Central who have a history of foraging and now have 
a limited reliance on wild plants, animals and insects. 
Rural  and  FHH  have  an  increased  likelihood  of  suffering  from  malnutrition.  The  greater 
prevalence of malnutrition in rural areas has been attributed to reduced food availability 
30 http://www.ipcinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/ipcinfo/docs/IPC_Zimbabwe_Acuteper cent20Foodper 
cent20Insecurity_2019June2019Dec.pdf  
31 NewsDay, 7 June 2020. Zimbabwe runs out of food. 
32 Zimbabwe National Nutrition Survey (2018). 
33 Zimbabwe  Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (2019) 
8 
caused by poor agricultural performance; lower access to food due to high levels of poverty 
and poor food utilization due to lack of knowledge on how to use the available food34.  
Food scarcity is a serious concern in Zimbabwe with production of staple cereals and other 
foods  declining.  Average  cereal  stocks  decreased  by  60  per  cent  in  2019  compared  to 
201835. In the SACP target areas, Matabeleland North experienced the greatest decrease 
and recorded the lowest household cereal stock (20.1kg); Mashonaland central recorded 
the highest (42.2kg) which is still insufficient to meet household requirements. Key drivers 
of food insecurity in Zimbabwe are a difficult macro-economic environment, high food price 
inflation  (food  prices  increased  by  up  to  42  per  cent  between  11 February  and 
11 April 202036),  recurrent  climate-induced  shocks  such  as  the  2018/19  drought,  which 
resulted in a poor cropping season, floods, and most recently the COVID 19 pandemic37.  
Malnutrition in rural areas is compounded by poor water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH). 
Poor rural households in Zimbabwe have disproportionately less access to potable water 
and  sanitation  facilities.  Matabeleland  North  has  the  highest  levels  of  open  defecation 
(more than 50 per cent in all its districts); with Binga district having up to 74.3 per cent38. 
Limited  access  to  safe  water  affects  particularly  women,  as  they  have  to  walk  long 
distances  to  fetch  water.  A  large  proportion  of  women  (33  per  cent)  also  experience 
challenges accessing health facilities due to distance with the highest being in Mashonaland 
Central (49.1 per cent)39. 
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications 
Environmental assessment  
Agroecological  regions.  Zimbabwe  has  five  agro  ecological  regions  (NR  I  to  V), 
distinguished by annual rainfall and agricultural productive potential of the soils. Intensity 
of farming activities varies across these natural regions. Agricultural productivity declines 
from region I to V. (i) NR I receives more than 1 000 mm of rainfall per annum. The main 
agricultural  activities  include  forestry,  fruit  production  and  intensive  livestock  rearing. 
(ii) NR  II  receives  between  750-1  000  mm  of  rainfall  per  annum.  It  specializes  in  crop 
farming  and  intensive  livestock  breeding  (15  per  cent  of  total  arable  area).  (iii)  NR  III 
receives between 650-800 mm of rainfall per annum and specializes in livestock breeding, 
fodder and cash crops. Rain-fed production is possible in most years, but there are periodic 
crop failures due to mid-seasons dry spells and delayed commencement of rain. The region 
has marginal production of maize, tobacco and cotton, (19 per cent of total arable area). 
(iv) NRIV receives 450-650 mm of rainfall per annum. It specializes in extensive livestock 
breeding and drought-tolerant crops (38 per cent of total arable area). (v) NR V receives 
too low and erratic rains for even drought-tolerant crops. It specializes in extensive cattle 
and game ranching (27 per cent of total arable area). There is a 20-40 per cent variation 
in annual rainfall in NR IV and V, and yield variation ranges between 15-60  per cent. The 
targeted provinces under SACP, Matebeleland North falls in NR IV and V, Midlands Province 
falls  within  NR  III  and  IV,  Mashonaland  provinces  largely  fall  under  NR  II,  III  with  the 
northern part of Mashonaland Central (Rushinga and Mudzi districts) in NR IV. The land 
classifications in these Provinces include forests, safari areas, former commercial farming 
blocks, national parks, communal areas and resettlement areas.  
34 Bakker et al., (2020). Pre-Design Report “Climate adaptation and mitigation measures for nutrition co-
benefits in IFAD investments in Zimbabwe”. Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation. Wageningen, 
May 2020 
35 Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee Report (2019) 
36 https://www.news24.com/fin24/Economy/Africa/zim-announces-price-freeze-as-food-costs-skyrocket-
during-lockdown-20200422-2 
37 Trading economics (2020). Zimbabwe Food Inflation 2003-2020 Data. (Accessed 06 June 2020) 
38 ZIMVAC (2019). Rural livelihoods assessment report. 
39 Zimbabwe Demographic Health Survey of 2015 
9 
Environmental challenges linked to agriculture (e.g. food gardens) include erosion along 
stream  and  riverbanks  and  siltation  of  water  bodies,  particularly  in  communal  areas. 
Unequal  distribution  of  livestock  leads  to  overstocking  and  exceeding  of  the  carrying 
capacity in communal areas resulting in land degradation from. Compacting of soils causes 
reduced water penetration, increased run-off and gully formation. 
Zimbabwe’s land includes arid and semi-arid areas. The available water resources are not 
well developed or protected due to limitation of resources. Therefore, water is not available 
in sufficient quantities and quality. The country is water stressed and by 2025 is expected 
to  be  water  scarce.  Wetlands  are  an  important  water  source  in  communal  areas,  while 
ground  water is  also important  for livestock,  domestic use  and irrigation in  rural  areas. 
Deforestation is an increasing concern, resulting from conversion of forests into cultivated 
land. The land clearing leads to loss of biodiversity and habitats. Trees are also used to 
cure tobacco. Another source of land degradation are the veld fires caused by poor land 
management practices. 
The main natural resources that will contribute to achieving the objectives of the SACP are 
the land and water resources. The investments by the farmers in climate smart agriculture 
and investments in agro-industry and development of irrigation and water supply schemes 
may lead to intensive use of the land resources and depletion of ground water resources. 
These impacts will be localised and adverse ones can be managed through climate smart 
agriculture practices such as integrated soil fertility management, crop diversification and 
improved water sue efficiency. These measures will be promoted under SACP.  
Climate trends and impacts. Zimbabwe’s climate is largely influenced by altitude, and 
mean annual temperature varies from 18°C in the Highveld to 23°C in the lowveld5. Trends 
in  historical  temperature  show  that  Zimbabwe  has  experienced  a  warming  trend,  with 
mean  annual  temperatures  having  increased  by  0.4°C  between  1900  and  2000  (GoZ, 
2015). The period 1980 to 2015 has been the warmest since Zimbabwe started recording 
temperature,  and  there  are  more  hot  and  fewer  cold  days  (GoZ,  2015).  Over  the  last 
century, daily minimum temperatures have increased by approximately 2.6°C and daily 
maximum  temperatures  have  increased  by  2°C  during  the  same  period  (Zimbabwe 
Meteorological  Service).  This  warming  trend  has  been  greatest  during  the  dry  season 
(Government of Zimbabwe, 2015), and maximum temperatures have been higher in the 
Lowveld (Beitbridge and Victoria Falls), and lower in the  Highveld (Chipinge) but largely 
showing an increase at all altitudes since 1980 (UNDP, 2017).  
Rainfall  in  Zimbabwe  has  always  been  temporally  and  spatially  variable,  but  the  timing 
and amount of rainfall received are becoming increasingly uncertain. In the past, the rainy 
season generally began in October/early November, but most parts of the country are now 
only receiving rains as late as mid-December (CIAT/World Bank, 2017). Droughts, which 
are  becoming  increasingly  frequent  and  severe  in  southern  and  western  Zimbabwe, 
represent the most important agricultural risk for the country. Recent examples include 
the  droughts  of 2015/16  and 2018/19,  both  of  which  resulted in  decreased  agricultural 
output and increased food insecurity (World Bank Disaster Risk Assessment report, 2019). 
In  a  recent  climate  vulnerability  analysis  conducted  by  the  University  of  Cape  Town, 
financed  under  ASAP  2,  several  stakeholders  suggested  that  variable  and  unpredictable 
timing of rainfall, as well as a general long-term trend towards delayed start of the rainy 
season, was observed by farmers throughout the country. In addition, there was a general 
agreement that average temperatures have increased and that excessively hot days and 
heat waves are more common compared to the historical climate (UCT, 2019). 
The  average  reduction  in  national  rainfall  predicted  for  the  months  of  October  and 
November is likely to vary between provinces and Zimbabwe’s agro-ecological zones but 
in some cases may result in inadequate rainfall to support effective establishment of crops 
during the period, which is traditionally associated with the start of the growing season. 
10 
Climate  change  may  delay  the  onset  of  rainfall  relative  to  the  traditional  agricultural 
calendar, in turn resulting in changes to the timing of various  agricultural activities such 
as  field  preparation  and  sowing  of  seed.  The  rain-fed  agricultural  growing  season  is 
characterised by monthly rainfall deficits and is likely to result in fundamental changes to 
local  crop  choices  and  agricultural  practices  by  the  year  2050.  Drought-sensitive  crops 
such as maize are likely to be increasingly unreliable or poor in yield, which will be further 
exacerbated by predicted increases in temperature. However, the magnitude of this effect 
is likely to vary between and within each province according to the spatial distribution of 
rainfall (UCT, 2019). 
The  large  increases  in  temperature  (2–2.7⁰C)  in  the  months  of  October–December  will 
increase crop water demand and evapotranspiration losses of water from agricultural soils, 
coinciding with the reduced rainfall predicted for the same months. This effect is likely to 
increase  the  risks  of  crop  failure  because  of  inadequate  or  erratic  rainfall  during  the 
establishment  of  rain-fed  crops.  Furthermore,  the  increased  average  temperatures  are 
likely to include increased  frequency  or  severity  of  heat  waves  and unusually hot  days, 
further contributing to evapotranspirative losses of water and crop stress.  
Taken  cumulatively  over  the  entire  growing  season, the  combination  of  reduced  rainfall 
and increased mean temperature is likely to reduce agricultural production, either because 
of decreased yield or outright crop failure, particularly in the case of heat- and drought-
sensitive crops such as maize and wheat. However, the magnitude of this effect is likely 
to vary between and within each province according to the spatial distribution of rainfall 
as  well  as  anomalies  in  average  temperature  (UCT,  2019).  In  the  months  of  October–
December at the onset of the growing season, the relative size of the anomalies in average 
temperature appear to be greatest in the  south-western and north-western parts of the 
country, coinciding with the provinces of Matabeleland South and Matabeleland North.  
2.3 Poverty and target group profiles 
SACP target group consists of smallholder farmers: communal, old resettlement and A1 
farmers, which includes 50 per cent FHH and women in male-headed households, as well 
as 30 per cent youth (23,472 youths consisting of 50 per cent youth females aged 15 to 
35 years).
11 
Table 3: Poverty Categorisation of rural households in Zimbabwe 
A 
Household type 
Chronically poor and 
unable 
Chronically food insecure 
and dependent on social 
safety nets 
B1  Chronically poor but able 
Often chronically food 
insecure but capable of 
becoming transitory food 
secure 
B2  Transiently poor 
Transitory food insecure 
C 
Self-sufficient 
Often food secure, with a 
risk of transitory food 
insecurity 
Women HH 
Youth 
Total  
Characteristics 
  Little or no land  
  No economically actively people 
  Child or elderly-headed households  
  Climate change vulnerability 
  Below poverty line 
  Access to land/livestock and labour  
  Farming/livestock rearing and wage 
labour 
  One economically active person 
  Lack resources to purchase inputs 
  Below total consumption poverty line 
  Access to land and labour  
  Cash constrained and vulnerable to 
shocks. 
  2-3 economically active people 
  Can increase productivity to achieve 
food and income security and 
contribute to economic growth. 
  Access to land and labour  
  Potential to produce a saleable 
surplus. 
  3-4 economically active people 
  Able to withstand shocks without 
external assistance. 
  Limited decision making power   
limited access to production means 
 
  Heavy workload and time poverty  
  Limited access to finance 
  Climate change vulnerability 
  Lack of access to production means 
  High unemployment 
How the project impacts them 
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions  
  Community investments 
  Collaborate with humanitarian organisations 
  GALS 
  Matching grants for APGs 
  Infrastructure 
  Empowerment & skills development e.g. CSA & 
agribusiness, diversification of production 
  GALS training & Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
  Promote farmer to framer learning in extension 
  Matching grants for APGs 
  Marketing, business and technical skills 
  Market access (out-grower, contract farming) 
  Nutrition sensitive interventions 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
  Contract framing 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  GALS Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
  Business expansion support 
  New technologies to increase production 
  Value addition and innovation to increase 
production and marketing of commodities 
Improved decision making at community level;    
Improved participation in APG, leadership skills,  
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
 
 
  Reduced workload, improved access to finance; 
 
  CSA and improved entrepreneurial skills  
  Access to matching grants 
  Improved BDS skills 
 
 
  Improved digitalization and adoption of 
improved Agribusiness 
improved Leadership skills 
Improved well-being and nutrition  
technologies 
12 
No households 
10,940  (5,470 
women) 
16,400  (8,200 
women) 
40,000 
(20,000) 
women) 
10,900  (5,450 
women) 
39,120 
(included in A, 
B1, B2, C and 
youth) 
23,472 
78,240 
The smallholder farming households in the target area are shown in the table below: 
Table 4: Smallholder households (HHs) in the targeted provinces and districts 
Communal 
farmers HHss 
Old 
Resettlement 
farmers HHs 
A1 farmers 
HHs 
Target 
beneficiary 
HHs per 
province 
Agricultural 
producer 
groups 
(APGs) 
APGs per 
District 
Matebeleland 
North 
66,303 
(24,683 
women) 
183 (91 
women) 
Mashonaland 
East 
 139,570 
(60,356 women) 
69 (19 women) 
Mashonaland 
West 
70,797 
(25,339 
women) 
Mashonaland 
Central  
 104,830 
(27,563 
women) 
7,871 (4,162 
women) 
3,226 (916 
women) 
Midlands 
99,439 
(25,330 
women) 
7,207 
women) 
(3,098 
1,607 (409 
women) 
18,049 (4,287 
women) 
27,063 (4,300 
women) 
2,147(366 
women) 
17,600 
17,600 
17,600 
17,600 
13,538  (4,112 
women) 
7,840 
180 
180 
180 
180 
80 
Hwange 
(45), 
Binga(45), 
Lupape(45)  
Nkayi (45) 
Goromonzi(45) 
Murehwa(45) 
Mutoko(45)  
UMP (45);  
Chegutu (45) 
Mhondoro 
Ngezi (45) 
Zvimba (45) 
Sanyati (45)      
Rushinga 
(45) Mt 
Darwin(45) 
Muzarabani 
(45) 
Shamva(45) 
Kwekwe(40)  
Chirumanzu 
(40)  
Source: Adapted from Agritex, MLAWRR 
Smallholder farmers: Rural poverty is most prevalent in Communal Areas (CAs) 79.2 per  
cent followed by Resettlement Areas (RA)40 with 76.4 per cent. About 76 per cent of the 
rural households are poor compared to 38.2 per cent of urban households. The average 
size in CAs is 4.4 persons and in RAs it is 4.6 persons and the relatively large household 
size are likely to be poor. Poor households in CAs are characterised by high dependency 
ratios.  CA and RA farmers contribute to 80.6 per cent of economically active population.  
About 30 per cent of the households in rural areas rely on unsafe water supplies. Most of 
the  urban  population has  access to  sanitation  (91.5  per  cent)  with 36.8  per  cent  of  the 
rural  households  having  no  toilet  at  all.  In  Matebeleland  North,  61.4  per  cent  of  the 
population  in  Tsholotsho  district  and  74  per  cent  of  the  population  have  no  sanitation 
facilities. In terms of safe water supplies, 22.5 per cent and 23 per cent of the population 
in Binga and Lupane districts have access to unsafe water supplies. 
Through SACP, the SHF will form 800 Agricultural Producer Groups (APGs) which will apply 
for matching grants to upgrade their value chain or engage in SMSEs. Farmers will also 
apply to get the funding for the rehabilitation of dysfunctional agro-processing units, water 
and  sanitation  and  irrigation  infrastructure.  The  farmers  will  also  benefit  from  inputs, 
business and entrepreneurial skills, knowledge on CSA technologies, nutrition, access  to 
markets in order to improve their income levels and food security. Farmers will be assisted 
to get their groups registered so that they can borrow their matching grant contribution 
from the bank. The APGs will receive training in BDS, development of proposal, financial 
literacy,  entrepreneurship,  GAPs,  among  others.  Farmers  will  also  produce  a  single 
commodity that will be linked to agribusiness. 
40 Resettlement areas are A1 , A2, old resettlement after independence 
13 
Women:  Interventions  on  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment  will  focus  on 
strengthening women’s economic empowerment, decision making and achieving workload 
balance.  At  the  same  time,  the  project  will  strengthen  women’s  voices  in  determining 
household priorities, spending patterns, and in addressing their own well-being. Gender 
roles  and  relations  are  tackled  involving  men  and  women.  In  line  with  IFAD’s  focus  on 
promoting transformation of gender relations, the project will carry out community Gender 
Action  Learning  Systems  (GALS)  to  address  underlying  cultural  and  traditional  norms, 
attitudes, behavioural systems, as well as gender and age stereotypes. Women will consist 
of  50  percent  of  beneficiary  households,  which  is  equivalent  to  39,120  beneficiary 
households. A baseline survey of Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI) will 
be used to identify constraints and opportunities for women with regards to production, 
access to resources, income, leadership and time poverty. Based on the outcome, SACP 
will  design  appropriate  strategies to  address  the  constraints  faced  by  women and  men. 
Women  will  benefit  from  matching  grants  under  APGs,  MSMEs  and  Lead  Value  Chain 
Enterprises. Women will be empowered through training in business development, climate 
smart agriculture, financial literacy training among others.   
Youth: have limited  productive  resources,  skills  and  capital.  SACP  will target the youth 
directly by identifying skilled and unskilled youth interested or already involved in livestock 
or irrigated crop production or post-production activities such as processing, marketing, 
artisanry or casual labour. The APGs will allocate 30 per cent of membership to interested 
youth and will serve as a model for youth mentorship, upskilling and transfer or indigenous 
knowledge.  With  a  target  of  78,240  beneficiary  households,  SACP  will  provide 
opportunities for 23,472 young women and men between the ages of 15 and 35. Value 
chain analysis will be done to identify opportunities for youths disaggregated by age and 
gender to ensure that appropriate opportunities are availed to young men and women of 
all the age groups (15-24 and 25-35). In addition, youth that are interested in being part 
of the APGs will benefit from technical assistance on business plan development, climate-
smart agriculture and financial literacy and planning, and technical training related to the 
specific operations of the enterprise.  
Institutional analysis 
The most important institutions that present potential strategic partners to help achieve 
IFAD's mainstreaming agenda are outlined below.  
Agritex a department in the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement 
(MLAWRR) has specialist branches, provincial and district offices that provide technical and 
advisory  services,  regulatory  services, farmer  training, food  technology (including  post-
harvest  processing  an  product  development)  dissemination  of  technologies  and  provide 
market  oriented  extension  for  sustainable  farming.  Currently  Agritex  is  rolling-out 
countrywide training of its extension staff on nutrition-sensitive agriculture. It would be a 
strategic  partner  for  the  delivery  of  nutrition  education  at  ward-level  and  for  providing 
extension support to the smallholder farmers. 
The Ministry of Health and Child Care adopts essential nutrition actions for improving 
maternal, new-born, infant and young child nutrition and health at facility and community 
levels.  Partnership  with  the  MoHCC  will  be  important  for  ensuring  better  access  of  the 
SACP target group to healthcare services as well for delivery of nutrition education and for 
delivery of health services for those suffering from HIV and AIDS. 
Harvest Plus promotes rural nutrition through increased production and consumption of 
bio-fortified  crops.  In  the  SIRP  project,  Harvest  Plus is  responsible for  the  promotion  of 
bio-fortified  crops,  provision  of  nutrition  training materials,  and is  a  partner in  nutrition 
training and provision of agronomic extension with regards to production of bio-fortified 
crops. A similar partnership is envisioned for the SACP project. 
14 
The  Zimbabwe  Agricultural  growth  programme  (ZAGP)  is  an  EU-supported 
programme focusing on livestock value chains in all 10 provinces of Zimbabwe. Partnership 
with ZAGP will be important for increasing access to small livestock, which is important for 
the livelihoods of women and for increased access to animal source protein.  
UNICEF  in  Zimbabwe  works  to  improve  water  and  sanitation  services  as  well  as  basic 
hygiene practices. It is currently leading the initiative to end open defecation in Zimbabwe 
by 2030. It works in 45 districts and would be a strategic partner for the delivery of WASH 
interventions in the SACP project target districts.  
The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) 
is  a  CGIAR  organization  that  conducts  agricultural  research  for  development  in  the 
drylands, focusing on crops and livestock production of relevance to smallholders. ICRISAT 
would be a strategic partner for the supply of iron-rich millet and other small-grains that 
are of nutritional importance in the SACP project. 
Econet Wireless has a subsidiary, ECOSURE that has a new facility to enable small-scale 
farmers  to  access  cold-chain  facilities  for  enhanced  market  access  and  high  value  crop 
production.  Access  to  such  cold-chain  facilities  by  SACP’s  horticulture  value  chains  has 
potential to reduce postharvest food loss from spoilage. 
International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  has  relevant  experience  in  targeted 
interventions (focus on women and youth) and models of small scale agro-processing and 
post-harvest  that  could  benefit  smallholder  farmers in  reducing food  wastage  and  post-
harvest losses.  
The  Youth Desk  in  the  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water  and  Rural  Settlements  is 
currently  implementing  the  National  Young  Champion  Farmer  Program  to  develop  a 
database of young farmers in the 10 Provinces of the country. SACP will collaborate with 
the Youth Desk for the identification of youth in cropping, animal husbandry, innovation, 
irrigation and mechanisation, farm infrastructures and ICT.   
Norwegian Agency for the Development Cooperation  (NORAD).  A  grant  proposal 
for  NORAD  is  being  currently  finalized  and  would  provide  supplementary  financial 
resources to strengthen the implementation of nutrition-sensitive interventions in SACP. 
Ministry  of  Women’s  Affairs,  Community,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise 
Development is  responsible  for  gender  and  women’s  economic  empowerment  through 
MSMEs and has experience in running BDS and managing the Women Development Fund. 
The  Ministry  is  also  responsible  for  the  registration  of  cooperatives.      The  Ministry  has 
adequate capacity as it has structures at grassroot level. Women’s groups will complement 
the efforts in approaching women and gender issues from a rights perspective in terms of 
prevention  of  gender-based  violence,  counselling  services,  sexual  reproductive  health 
rights, legal al assistance and tacking issues in inheritance. 
Women’s organisations and groups advocate to protecting women’s rights, promoting 
gender  equality  and  empowerment  in  terms  of  prevention  of  gender-based  violence, 
counselling  services,  sexual  reproductive  health  rights,  legal  al  assistance  and  tacking 
issues  in  inheritance.  Knowledge  sharing  and  documentation  of  experience  on  gender 
equality and women’s empowerment issues. 
UN Country Team  (UNCT) coordinates gender equality and women’s empowerment and 
rights issues among the UN Agencies. UNCT has capacity since it works in conjunction with 
the  UNIFEM  and  other  implementing  partners  include  FAO,  UNDP,  and  UNFPA  for 
programmes  on  GEWE  development.  UNCT  is  a  key  resource  for  knowledge  sharing, 
documentation  and  dissemination  of  good  practices  on  gender  equality,  women’s 
empowerment and women’s rights. 
15 
Ministry of Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry is responsible 
for environmental management and international climate and environment funds. The two 
important  units  under  the  Ministry  are  Climate  Change  Department  and  Environmental 
Management  Authority.  The  former  houses  the  National  Designated  Authority  for  the 
Green  Climate  Fund  and  will  play  a  key  role  in  securing  co-financing  resources  for  the 
SACP. EMA ensures adequate environmental safeguards are met in the targeted areas and 
carries out environmental education, conservation of natural resources. The Agency has 
capacity to carry out the tasks through its decentralized structures. 
The main national policy, strategic and regulatory frameworks relevant to the SACP from 
a safeguard and IFAD mainstreaming perspective are the following.  
The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (2012) seeks to promote and ensure 
adequate  food  and  nutrition  security  in  Zimbabwe.  The  Food  and  Nutrition  Policy  for 
Zimbabwe  highlights  some  priority  actions  for  addressing  food  security  issues  through 
agriculture  and  these  include,  among  others,  diversification  of  agricultural  production 
including  indigenous  small  grains  and  livestock;  enabling  farmers  to  expand  from 
subsistence  farming  to  marketing  excess  produce;  promoting  household  income 
generation  activities;  strengthening  postharvest  management  to  reduce  postharvest 
losses; reaffirming women’s central role in agriculture without affecting their other roles; 
and increasing awareness and demand for nutritious food. 
The Zimbabwe National Nutrition Strategy (2014-2018) is guided by the mission to 
implement evidence-based nutrition interventions that are integrated within a broad multi-
sectoral  collaboration  framework.  The  Zimbabwe  National  Nutrition  Strategy  identifies 
inadequate nutrition knowledge and practices, weak value chains for nutrient dense foods, 
weak  coordination  and inadequate  resourcing  of nutrition interventions,  poor  water  and 
sanitation interventions, among others, as contributing to high malnutrition41. 
The  National  Youth  Policy  (2015)  aims  to  provide  opportunities  for  sustainable 
livelihoods and decent work for all young men and women. The policy operationalises the 
African Youth Charter, which gives direction for youth empowerment and development at 
continental, regional and national levels. 
National Gender Policy and Action Plan (2017) seeks to address the emerging issues 
prevailing under the changing political, economic and social contexts at local, regional and 
global  levels.  It  identifies  eight  priority  areas  namely:  Gender,  Constitutional  and  Legal 
Rights;  Gender  and  Economic  Empowerment;  Gender,  Politics  and  Decision  Making; 
Gender and Health; Gender, Education and Training; Gender Based Violence; Gender and 
Environment;  and  Gender,  Media  and  ICTS.  It  is  underpinned  by  principles  of  gender 
justice, equality, integration and inclusiveness. 
Environmental  Management  Act  (2006);  provides  a  range  of  requirements  such  as 
Environmental  impact  Assessments  and  Environmental  Management  Plans.  These 
requirements  will  apply  for  the  irrigation  development  activities  under  SACP  and  the 
matching grants under Component 1.  
National Environmental Policy and Strategies (2009)  advocate  for integrated land 
use planning to achieve sustainable land use taking into account available land use options. 
The  business  plans  developed  will  have  to  take  into  account  the  land  use  planning  and 
different  options  available  for  communities  in  their  various  locations.  The  plans  and 
subsequent investments will also have to apply integrated water resources management 
principles, which Zimbabwe adopted the in 1990s. 
41   Global nutrition report (2018). Zimbabwe. https://globalnutritionreport.org/documents/240/Zimbabwe.pdf 
16 
National  Climate  Change  Response  Strategy  (2016)  provides  a  framework  for  a 
comprehensive and strategic approach on aspects of adaptation, mitigation, technology, 
financing,  public  education  and  awareness. In  the  years,  2019  to  2021  Zimbabwe  will 
clearly define its climate change adaptation agenda and mainstream climate change into 
development planning as the road map for the National Adaptation Plan. 
The Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) priorities focus on promoting adapted 
crop  and  livestock  development  and  climate  smart  agricultural  practices,  building 
resilience in managing climate related disaster risks such as droughts and strengthening 
management of water resources and irrigation. The following prioritised interventions will 
be included under SACP: 
  Strengthening  capacities  to  generate  new  forms  of  empirical  knowledge, 
technologies (including conservation agriculture) and agricultural support services 
that meet climate challenges; 
  Promoting the use of indigenous and scientific knowledge on drought tolerant crop 
types  and  varieties  and  indigenous  livestock  that  are  resilient  to  changes  in 
temperatures and rainfall; 
  Developing  frameworks  for  sustainable  intensification  and  commercialization  of 
agriculture at different scales across agro ecologies; 
  Promoting  and  supporting  water  harvesting  as  a  climate  change  adaptation 
strategy; 
  Developing, rehabilitate and maintain surface and groundwater resources; 
  Promoting efficient water use practices in the economy; 
  Strengthening  biodiversity  conservation  management  and  integrity  of  natural 
ecosystems to adapt to climate change; and 
  Strengthening water and moisture conservation initiatives. 
The  interventions  will  be  financed  mainly  through  the  climate  smart  agriculture 
interventions resulting from the matching grants. These priorities for the agriculture sector 
are reiterated in the National Climate Change Response Strategy. Based on the status of 
current  budget  provisions,  the  total  domestic  support  through  the  national  government 
needed to build resilience of the agricultural sector is estimated at USD 8.725 billion. The 
required  international  support  for  adapting  the  agricultural  sector  of  Zimbabwe  is 
estimated  at  USD 26.175  billion  by  2030  under  BAU.  Further  collation  and  analysis  of 
information  on  support  for  financial  investment,  capacity  development  and  technology 
generation and transfer in adaptation initiatives is however required (NDC). 
Environmental and social category 
The environmental and social categorisation of SACP is B. The project interventions will be 
in non-sensitive areas and mainly consist of small-scale infrastructure related investment. 
The small-scale infrastructure under Component 2 (irrigation schemes averaging 75 ha; 
last  mile  feeder  roads  of  approximately  five  kilometre  length  and  water  supply 
investments)  will  result  in  localised  and  mostly  reversible  negative  environmental  and 
social impacts. The potential negative impacts such as vegetation loss, changes in water 
flows, waste generation, soil loss and land levelling will be minimised through screening 
and implementation of site-specific Environmental Management Plan (EMPs) where these 
are  required  (First  Schedule  of  Environment  Management  Act).  Investments  under  the 
matching grants in Component 1 will be screened for environment and social risks as part 
of the selection criteria.  Any environmental licences or certification will be a pre-requisite 
for  the  approval  of  matching  grants  for  the  private  sector.  The  APGs  will  be  supported 
through the process of acquiring the necessary certificates and licences.  
The  SACP  potential  interventions  being  financed  under  the  matching  grants  and 
infrastructure  development  which  are included in the  First  Schedule  of the Environment 
Management Act and thus require an environmental impact assessment are:  irrigation, 
17 
agro-industries,  ground  water  development  for  agricultural  water  supply  and  water 
withdrawals from rivers and reservoirs. No thresholds are provided on the infrastructure 
development,  the  depth  of  the  assessment  is  based  on  the  scope  of  works  to  be 
undertaken. The mandatory steps to be followed in considering these sub-projects under 
the SACP include: 
a)  screening as a result a prospectus will be produced  
b)  submission of prospectus for Environment Management Agency (EMA)review  
c)  desk review by EMA with feedback provided within 30 days  
d)  ground truthing by EMA  
e)  development of Environmental Management Plan if required.  
Rehabilitation of irrigation schemes  requires an EMP to be developed. An Environmental 
Impact  Assessment  (EIA)  is  required  based  on  the  scope  of  works  particularly  where 
expansion will be undertaken. Rural roads do not have specific EIA requirements though 
they  can  be  included  in  the  assessments  for  irrigation  scheme  development  and  agro-
industries.  The  social  risks  are  outlined  above  in  the  sections  on  gender,  youth  and 
nutrition.  These  risks  will  be  minimised  and  managed  through  Gender  Action  Learning 
System  (GALS)  and  capacity  building including in  nutrition  sensitive  and inclusive value 
chains. Local partners from Government Agencies and NGOs will play a key role in the risk 
management  strategies.  A  grievance  redress  mechanism  building  on  existing  structures 
has been outlined for the project to address any risks in this regard during implementation. 
An  ESMP  matrix  for  the  SACP  is  included  as  an  Appendix  to  the  SECAP  Annex.  The 
screening criteria for the infrastructure projects to ascertain adherence to the Category B 
thresholds i.e. max 10 kilometres for roads and 100 ha for irrigation is included in the PIM. 
The estimated costs for the ESMP are included in the detailed costs for the project. For the 
matching grants under Category 1 the estimated costs for the ESMP is approximately 2 per 
cent of the overall sub-project costs for which the plans are required. The estimated costs 
for  the  ESMP  implementation  are  approximately  5  per  cent  of  the  infrastructure 
development  cost.  Based  on  these  estimates  the  approximate  costs  for  the  ESMP 
implementation are USD 785,000.  
Climate risk classification 
The climate risk classification for SACP is high. The main climate risks affecting the SACP 
target beneficiaries are droughts, floods and increasing temperatures. The five provinces 
selected  for  the  SACP  interventions  are  less  vulnerable  to  droughts  compared  to  the 
southern  and  eastern  part  of  the  country.  However,  the  provinces include  agro-climatic 
zones  where  periodic  crop  failures  occur  due  to  mid-seasons  dry  spells  and  delayed 
commencement of rain. The target groups also have low adaptive capacity exacerbated 
by  the  levels  of  poverty  and  limited  ability  to  invest  in  climate  change  adaptation 
measures.  The  in-depth  climate  vulnerability  analysis  conducted  for  Zimbabwe  by  the 
University  of  Cape  Town  with financing  from  the  Adaptation  for  Smallholder  Agriculture 
Programme (ASAP 2) recommends various climate change adaptation options, which will 
be provided to the smallholder farmers under the SACP (Table 5). These include ensuring 
diversified,  multi-crop  and  intercropped  agricultural  systems,  promoting  locally  adapted 
and drought-tolerant varieties and investing in post-harvest processing facilities.  
Climate change resilience is one of the criteria for the matching grant investments for the 
APGs. The capacity of the smallholders in climate smart agriculture will be developed prior 
to the investment approvals. Given the limited resources available and the scale of need 
for  climate  change  adaptation  further  resources  will  be  sought  from  the  Green  Climate 
Fund  or  ASAP+  to  finance  measures  such  as  further  investment  in  climate  resilient 
infrastructure development and processing facilities for the diversified value chains as well 
as research and development of locally adapted drought-tolerant mixed crop and livestock 
systems.  The  SACP  contributes  to  the  priorities  outlined  in  the  NDC  such  as  promoting 
18 
water use efficiency practices, water harvesting and soil and moisture conservation. These 
measures can also be scaled out with GCF financing.   
Recommendations for project design and implementation 
Participatory  processes:  Value  chain  analysis  and  selection  will  be  done  in  a 
participatory manner actively involving youth and women culminating in the selection of 
value chains that are gender sensitive and suitable for youth interests and capacities. 
Opportunities  for  rural  youth:  Systematic  training  and  enhancing  productivity  in 
agricultural value chains and related off-farm activities could offer real opportunities for 
rural youth. 
Disaggregate youth populations: From the beginning of the project, SACP will be aware 
of the diversity of youth populations (gender, level of education part of value chain/crop 
preference) and target value chain analysis accordingly. The project shall not design one 
standardized approach, but tailored approaches to sub-populations of youth. 
Selection of value chains: SACP will identify value chains based on their high potential 
nutritional impact on the main nutrition problems in the target population and in relation 
to the food consumption patterns. When selecting value chains to be supported under the 
matching grant facility, the project will consider multiple commodities that can contribute 
to a healthier diet thereby contributing to a nutrition-sensitive food system. 
Training  of  Agriculture  Producer  Groups  (APGs)  on  nutrition  sensitive  value 
chains: Agricultural technical assistance that will be systematically delivered to APGs will 
include topics on variety selection, nutrition sensitive value chains as well as food loss and 
waste. This will empower the producers to make decisions that will support the production 
of nutritious and healthy foods. 
Empowerment  of  women  through income  generation  will  be  done in ways  that improve 
nutrition.  This  consists  of  different  interrelated  components,  such  as  women’s  use  of 
income for food and non-food expenditures, the ability of women to care for themselves 
and their families and women’s energy expenditure.  
Nutrition education and behaviour change communication will be layered to build on 
the  increased  income.  Increasing  the  SACP  target  group’s  nutrition  knowledge  and 
awareness should in turn boost the demand side and increase the consumption of more 
nutritious and healthy food. 
To  improve  women’s  decision  making:  SACP  will  use  GALs  to  increase  women’s 
participation in APG by encouraging membership of wives and other family members. SACP 
will also encourage women only agricultural groups to increase the participation of women 
into new economic areas. SACP will also ensure that meetings are held at times and venues 
that facilitate women’s participation. While it is important to involve women in the selection 
of women led value chains to increase acceptability, it will be important to upgrade the 
technologies to provide better returns for the women. The project will identify successful 
women within different parts of the value chain and bring them together in for example a 
leadership  platform.  These  women  will be  role  models to  other  women  and in  addition, 
they will foster collaboration among value chain actors. 
To strengthen women’s  participation in APGs will include: (i) improving better access 
to information on markets and agricultural inputs, active participation in APG, increased 
self-confidence roles and improved leadership skills; (ii) APGs will be linked with private 
sector in order to increase access to productive resources, (iii) women’s workload will be 
reduced through the provision of labour saving technologies. Training on GALs will promote 
discussions  on  roles  and  responsibilities  within  the  household  towards  greater 
19 
collaboration,  sharing  and  equity.  A  50  per  cent  quota  for  women  participation  will  be 
achieved  through  allowing  households  membership,  instead  of  focusing  on  the  head  of 
household. The project will also carry out gender sensitisation awareness for APG and raise 
awareness on labour saving technologies.   
To  address  limited  access  to  finance:  matching  grants  based  on  the  50  per  cent 
women’s  quota, will  provide  women  with  access  to finance.  APGs  will  be  encouraged  to 
formalise their registration so that they are able to access bank finance through the group 
lending  schemes linked  with  a lead  value  chain  agribusiness.  Women’s financial literacy 
will  be  enhanced  through  equipping  them  with  basic  skills  necessary  to  make  sound 
decisions  about  spending,  savings,  borrowings,  etc.  Through  GALs,  the  project  will 
encourage joint decision making at household level.  
To  address  limited  access  and  adoption  of  inputs  and  technology:  Women  led 
microenterprises  would  be  encouraged  to  engage  in  agro-dealership  to  serve  as  link 
between  input  suppliers  and  farmers  and  between  output  markets  and  traders.  Agro-
dealers  can  supply  inputs  such  as  seeds,  machinery  and  advisory  services  to  the  rural 
communities including women. Through the agribusiness matching grant, SACP will also 
promote  contract  farming to  facilitate  APG  to  access inputs, improved  technologies  and 
secure markets, which will assist women to access inputs closer home.   
To address workload and time poverty for women: Through Component 2, provision 
of drinking water sources will reduce walking distance to fetch water and improve women’s 
wellbeing. APGs will be encouraged to supply childcare facilities in order to allow for the 
participation  of  women  in  trainings.  SACP  will  promote  matching  grants  for  MSMEs 
(Component 1) for the manufacture of improved hand tools for harvesting (such as reaping 
tools, motorised reapers etc.), small scale postharvest management tools for processing 
of  crops,  etc.  to  overcome  labour  constraints.  In  addition,  the  project  will  identify  CSA 
technologies that will not increase the workload burden for women.  Improved feeder roads 
will guarantee safety of women.  
SACP will hire a Social Inclusion Specialist who will be responsible for the coordination 
of  gender  mainstreaming  activities  in  SACP  components,  as  well  as  for  monitoring 
equitable participation of men and women in the project (Component 3). The project will 
build the capacity of project implementing partners as well as the government agencies 
on  gender  mainstreaming,  in  addition  to  technical  and  soft  skills.  A  thorough  gender 
analysis  for  each  of  the  selected  VC  will  be  conducted  at  the  start-up  of  project 
implementation (Component 1). The household socio-economic survey and the Women’s 
Empowerment in Agriculture Index will be utilized as baseline for the gender analysis.  A 
Gender mainstreaming strategy and Gender Action Plan will be developed on the basis of 
the results of the gender analysis.  
Environment and Natural Resources Management (ENRM) practices will be promoted 
to ensure sustainability of the agricultural production through the CSA capacity building 
for  smallholder.  The  capacity  building  in  ENRM  should  be  well  sequenced  prior  to  any 
approval of matching grants to enable farmers make informed investment decisions  and 
appropriate incentives provided for smallholders to adopt the CSA practices.  
In cognisance of the vulnerability of the smallholders in the APGs, capacity building in 
climate change adaptation should be emphasised through climate smart agriculture 
investment promotion. Mitigation co-benefits through improved soil carbons and potential 
investment in agro-forestry systems can be included in the training material.  
The  screening  criteria for  business  plans  and  the  matching  grant  proposals under  SACP 
include ENRM and climate change considerations. However, to ensure that the investments 
achieve these benefits, measures should be included in the monitoring of the grants 
and results from the investments.  
20 
To ensure adherence to the SECAP and the national regulations, potential grantees 
should be made aware of the relevant certificates required for specified activities and the 
need to acquire these prior to the approval of grants. This can be done through templates 
for the grants and sensitisation sessions for the SACP.  
The most important entry points for making SACP nutrition sensitive are the selection of 
high  nutrition  impact  commodities  for  cluster/value  chain  development;  training  of 
Agriculture Producer Groups (APGs) on nutrition sensitive value chains and; empowerment 
of  women  through  income  generation  and  nutrition  education.  Specific  activities  under 
each entry point are identified in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) annex of the 
Project Design Report. 
The  engagement  of  youth  in  value  chain  analysis  and  selection  could  facilitate  the 
identification  of  youth  interests  within  the  value  chains  and  can  be  an  entry  point  for 
making the SACP project youth sensitive. Systematic training and enhancing productivity 
in agricultural value chains and related off-farm activities could offer real opportunities for 
rural  youth.  Quick  and  high  monetary  returns  activities  such  as  short  cycle  high  value 
crops, processing or marketing activities attract and retain youth interest. 
The main entry points for improved ENRM include the sensitization and capacity building 
activities as well as the CSA investments. The criteria included in the call and screening of 
grant  proposals  provide  measures  to  ensure  ENRM  and  climate  change  adaptation  are 
mainstreamed in the SACP. In order to report effectively on the benefits from the improved 
ENRM and climate smart investments, the grant monitoring should include data collection 
of specific indicators.  
21 
Table 5. Summarised climate change vulnerabilities and impacts on selected crops in Zimbabwe 
Climate  change  effect 
on  annual  production 
(tonnes per year) 
-230 000 tonnes  
Replacement  cost 
for lost production 
(USD per year) 
88 million  
Crop 
Maize  
widespread 
Climate 
change 
effect  on  extent  of 
suitable areas 
Fairly 
historical suitability.  
Area  considered  to  be 
good-to-excellent 
of 
suitability  will 
be 
considerably  reduced 
by Mid- Century.  
Sorghum   Marginal 
historical 
suitability.  Unsuitable 
by Mid-Century.  
-15 000 tonnes  
6 million  
Pearl 
Millet  
Good 
to  excellent, 
widespread  historical 
suitability,  
-2000 tonnes  
818 000  
Most  vulnerable 
provinces 
Recommendations  and  adaptation 
options 
Matabeleland 
North,  Midlands, 
Mashonaland  West 
and  Mashonaland 
East  
Matabeleland 
North,  Masvingo, 
Mashonaland 
Central 
and 
Mashonaland East  
Matabeleland 
North, 
Matabeleland 
South 
Masvingo  
and 
- identify and increase access to locally 
appropriate 
especially 
cultivars, 
fast/short-maturing varieties;  
-  technical  support  and  assistance  for 
farmers  to  adopt  new  practices  for 
climate  resilience  and  management  of 
climate risks;  
- promote the adoption of alternative, 
climate-resilient crops such as millet.  
- increase access to locally appropriate 
cultivars,  in  addition  to  promoting  the 
adoption of alternative climate-resilient 
cereals such as millet;  
- development supporting value chains 
and  market  for  cereal  alternatives  to 
maize  (including  advocacy  towards 
market-oriented pricing).  
-promote pearl millet as an alternative 
or  a  complement  to  other  legume  or 
cereal crops  
-  efforts  to  increase  the  demand  and 
average prices paid for pearl millet and  
22 
Further studies needed 
The  further  studies  required  are  the  baseline  studies  that  will  include  the  Project  level 
Women in Agriculture Empowerment Index and the nutrition assessments for the target 
areas. The costs for these studies are already included in the project budgets.  
The  Value  Chain  Analysis/studies  will  take  into  account  employment  opportunities  for 
youth, needs and aspirations among others (this aspect will be reflected in the VC Study 
ToRs).  
The Environmental Impact Analyses for the infrastructure development and agro-industry 
investments  will  be  undertaken  during  implementation.  The  costs  for  these  activities, 
elaboration of EMPs and obtaining any licenses or certificates is integrated in the project 
budgets for the APGs. The private sector partners will cover the costs for these activities 
from their own budgets.   
Monitoring and evaluation 
The  following  indicators  are  proposed  for  incorporation  in  SACP  for  the  mainstreaming 
themes: 
1)  Number of persons trained in income-generating activities or business 
management: 
a.  Number of young women (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
b.  Number of young men (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
2)  Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies: 
a.  Number of young women (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
b.  Number of young men (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
3)  Number of persons trained in income-generating activities or business 
management: 
a.  Number of young women (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
b.  Number of young men (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
4)  APG matching grants disbursed: 
a.  Number of young women (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
b.  Number of young men (15-19; 20-24; 25-29; 30-35) 
5)  HHs with targeted support to improve their nutrition 
6)  Percentage of women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW) 
7)  Percentage of individuals demonstrating an improvement in empowerment 
8)  Income, disaggregated by gender (to reflect intra-household income control) 
9)  Production of target nutrient-rich foods (disaggregated by commodity) 
10) Number of people reporting a significant reduction in the time spent for collecting 
water 
11)  Number of projects supported enterprises with women in leadership positions 
12)  Number of enterprises supported which are headed by young farmers 
13)  Number of rural producers’ organisations with women in leadership positions 
14)  Number of hectares of land brought under climate-resilient management 
15)  (Number) Percentage of persons/households reporting adoption of 
environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices. 
16) Number of women in leadership position in producer organisations or APGS 
17) Number of women accessing matching grants 
18) Number of women reporting a reduction in time spent in fetching of water 
19) Number of beneficiaries reporting a reduction in GBV 
20) Number of individuals reporting equitable work balance 
21) Number of individuals reporting an improvement in asset ownership 
22) Number of women adopting labour saving technologies 
23) Number of women participating in APGs 
24) Number of women participating in MSMEs 
23 
25) Number of women benefiting from LVCEs 
26) Number of women accessing matching grants 
27) Number of women owning irrigation plots 
28) Number of individuals with access to safe water and sanitation services. 
29) Number of individuals reporting increased income 
24 
References 
ZIMSTAT (May 2019)  
Zimbabwe Poverty Report 2017 
Environmental Management Act 
Nationally Determined Contributions 2015 
Climate Risk Assessment, Agriculture Sector – Zimbabwe (UCT, 2019) 
Organisation 
Youth desk 
Agritex Nutrition focal person 
Nutritionist MoHCC 
Harvest Plus Country Manager 
MoHCC  food  fortification  focal 
person 
Zimbabwe  Agricultural  Growth 
Programme TA 
UNICEF nutritionist 
person 
of 
Name 
interviewed  
Nickros Kajengo 
Nester Gumbo 
Ruth Machaka 
Sakile Kudita 
Dexter Tunga 
Contact details  
kajengon@moa.gov.zw 
gumbonester@gmail.com 
rumachaka78@gmail.com  
S.Kudita@cgiar.org 
tugngadex@gmail.com 
Neil Orchardson 
nqorchardson@zagp.co.zw  
Kudzai Mukudoka 
kmukudoka@unicef.org 
25 
Environmental/ Social 
Impacts 
Loss of vegetation due to 
rehabilitation and 
construction works  
Loss of soil due to 
construction works and 
expansion of agriculture 
cultivativation areas 
Loss of fragile ecosystems 
and biodiversity species 
due to rehabilitation and 
construction works 
Soil and water pollution 
from chemicals & fertilizers 
Loss of natural and cultural 
heritage. 
Dust, emissions, strong 
light, noise and vibration 
during construction works 
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
Selective clearing of 
project sites, preservation 
of protected plant species, 
awareness campaigns. 
Stabilization of loose soil, 
controlled excavation, 
preservation of vegetation 
cover, controlled 
transportation of raw 
materials, appropriate 
landscaping. 
Conduct feasibility studies 
to inform decsions and 
investments, use expert 
knowledge of ecologists, 
fencing/ enclosures of 
specific identified areas 
Use of appropriate disposal 
facilities, use of 
appropriate drainage 
structures, use of organic 
soil fertility enhancement, 
proper storage of 
materials, capcity building 
in safe use and handling of 
agro-chemicals 
Conduct feasibility studies, 
fencing/ enclosures, 
introduce proper antiquity 
education programmes 
Controlled operation times, 
use of appropriate 
equipment, proper 
orientation of lights, use of 
alternative materials, use 
water sprinklers to control 
dust, use of scrubbers  
Responsible Institution  Means of 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation Teams 
Verification/Indicators 
Land area affected (GIS 
tools) 
Frequency of 
verification 
Monthly  
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National Management Unit 
Area and size of gullies 
formed 
Amount of silt deposited in 
watercourses 
Soil fertility sampling  
Monthly 
Annually 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National Management 
Units 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National Management 
Units 
Size of area and species 
affected (GIS tools) 
Monthly 
Change in chemical and 
biological water quality 
Number of reported 
pollution incidences 
Bi-annually 
Annually 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National Management Unit 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation Teams 
Number or size of property 
lost 
Number of complaints  
Before project 
implementation 
During project 
implementation 
Monthly 
26 
Environmental/ Social 
Impacts 
Disturbance of marginal 
areas 
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
Avoid extraction of raw 
materials from marginal 
areas, no construction of 
structures in marginal 
areas. 
Water logging and flooding  Water control/ drainage 
Disruption of footpaths 
during construction works 
Waste generation at 
agroprocessing facilities 
and construction sites 
Spread of HIV/AIDS 
Water-borne and/ or water 
related diseases 
structures 
Provide water  and 
catchment management 
training to farmers 
Relocation and/or 
restoration of the 
footpaths after the 
works/disruption  
Awareness campaigns, 
assignment of adequate 
sites and equipment for 
waste collection and 
temporary storage 
Capacity building for 
smallholders in waste 
management 
Facility designs to include 
waste management 
Strengthen HIV/AIDS 
awareness campaigns at 
different levels, 
encouraging participation 
of the private and public 
sectors in HIV/AIDS 
issues. 
Awareness and education 
campaigns at community 
level  
Provision of potable water 
supplies and sanitation 
facilities, capacity building 
in sanitation and health 
Responsible Institution  Means of 
Verification/Indicators 
Size of area affected 
Frequency of 
verification 
Bi-annually 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National Coordination 
Provincial Project 
Implementation Teams 
Prolonged presence of 
water 
Poor growth of crops  
Presence of salts in the soil  
Annually 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams 
Number of footpaths in 
use 
Problems of accessibility 
Quarterly 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National Management Unit 
Number of waste 
management systems in 
use 
Number of waste collection 
sites  
Quarterly  
National Project 
Management 
Local institutions and 
committees 
Number of campaigns 
per cent increase in those 
affected. 
Annually 
(Monthly statistics from 
hospital and clinics) 
Project Provincial 
Coordination teams 
/District Authorities 
Increase in water related 
diseases  
Bi-annually 
27 
Environmental/ Social 
Impacts 
Work related accidents 
during rehabilitation and 
construction works  
Disputes over water 
resources 
Sexual Harassment/ 
Sexual exploitation and 
Abuse 
Gender based voilence  
Recommended 
Mitigation Measures 
issues, awareness 
campaigns 
Awareness and 
capacitation in 
occupational and safety 
Use of adequate personal 
protective equipment 
Provide water 
management training to 
farmers and introduce 
alternative sources  
Establish mechanisms for 
complaints and conflicts 
resolution 
Awareness raising and 
capacity building on the 
policy of no tolerance for 
SH/SEA 
GALS 
Awareness raising and 
capacity building on 
prevention of GBV 
GALS 
Responsible Institution  Means of 
Verification/Indicators 
Frequency of 
verification 
Contractors 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams 
Number of reported 
accidents 
Annually 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National Project 
Management Unit 
Provincial Project 
Implementation teams/ 
National management 
Unit/ District Authorities 
Number of grievances and 
conflicts resolved  
Annually 
Number of reported 
incidents 
Annually 
National management 
Unit/ District Authorities 
Number of reported 
incidents 
Annually  
28 
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project
Annex 6 : First 18 Months’ Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development
Unit
Planned Quantities
Unit (US$)
Budget (US$'000)
Expenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)
Qrt 1
Qrt 2
Qrt 3
Qrt 4
Qrt 5
Qrt 6
Qrt 1
Qrt 2
Qrt 3
Qrt 4
Qrt 5
Qrt 6
Total
IFAD Loan OFID Loan SmallholdersAgribusinessGovernment
Total
Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization
A. Mobilisation (preparations)
1. Community Mobilization Consultant
Specialist Preparation Days
Specialist Training Days
Specialist DSA
day
day
day
A. Mobilisation Preparations
1. Provincial Workshop Participant and Venue Costs
Travels
DSA
Full Board at Government Training Centre
Workshop venue
day
day
day
day
1
3
3
40
100
100
5
1
3
3
40
100
100
5
1
3
3
40
100
100
5
1
3
3
40
100
100
5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
300
300
300
25
25
20
150
Total:Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization
Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses
A. 1.2.1 Business Development Services
1. 1.2.1.1 Lead Enterprise Proposal Preparation Workshop
Item 1: BDS Specialist Preparation Days
Item 2: BDS Specialist Training Days
Item 3: Venue for Training Days
days
days
days
3
1
3
1
3
1
3
1
0.75
2.00
0.75
2.00
500
500
1 000
1 000
1 000
1 000 ######
######
1,000
Subtotal 1.2.1.1 Lead Enterprise Proposal Preparation Workshop
2. 1.2.1.2 MSME Business Development Services
Item 1: BDS Specialist Preparation Days
Item 2: BDS Specialist Training Days
Item 3: BDS Specialist DSA cost
days
days
days
Subtotal 1.2.1.2 MSME Business Development Services
3. 1.2.1.3 APG BDS TOT and Coaching
Item 1: BDS Specialist Preparation Days
Item 2: BDS Specialist Training Days
Item 3: BDS Specialist Coaching Days
Item 4: BDS Specialist DSA Cost
Subtotal 1.2.1.3 APG BDS TOT and Coaching
4. 1.2.1.4 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs
Item 1: Travels
Item 2: DSA
days
days
days
days
days
days
Item 3: Full Board at Government Training Centredays
Item 4: Venue at Government Training Centre days
Subtotal 1.2.1.4 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs
Subtotal 1.2.1 Business Development Services
B. 1.2.2 CSA Productivity Enhancement
1. 1.2.2.1 CSA TOT and Coaching
Item 1: Agritex Specialist Preparation Days
Item 2: Agritex Specialist Training Days
Item 3: Agritex Specialist Coaching Days
Item 4: Agritex Specialist DSA Cost
Subtotal 1.2.2.1 CSA TOT and Coaching
2. 1.2.2.2 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs
Item 1: Travels
Item 2: DSA
days
days
days
days
days
days
Item 3: Full Board at Government Training Centredays
Item 4: Venue at Government Training Centre days
Subtotal 1.2.2.2 TOTs Participant and Venue Costs
3. 1.2.2.3 Extensionist Awards per APG success
5
25
25
3
3
50
53
20
60
60
3
3
3
50
53
20
60
60
3
5
25
25
3
3
50
53
20
60
60
3
3
3
50
53
20
60
60
3
5
25
25
3
3
50
53
20
60
60
3
3
3
50
53
20
60
60
3
5
25
25
3
3
-
50.00
50.00
-
50.00
50.00
-
-
-
-
50 100.00
100.00
53 100.00
100.00
20
60
60
3
3
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50 100.00
100.00
53 100.00
100.00
20
60
60
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
300
300
75
300
300
300
75
25
10
20
50
75
75
75
75
25
10
20
50
Item 1: Award per extensionist
number
25
25
25
25
50.00
50.00
250
0.38
0.90
0.90
1.00
2.50
2.00
0.75
6.25
1.38
0.50
1.00
-
1.50
7.50
1.88
-
0.75
0.75
15.00
3.94
-
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
0.19
0.19
3.75
3.94
-
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
-
6.25
0.38
0.90
0.90
1.00
2.50
2.00
0.75
0.38
0.90
0.90
1.00
2.50
2.00
0.75
0.38
0.90
0.90
1.00
2.50
2.00
0.75
6.25
6.25
6.25
1.38
0.50
1.00
1.50
7.50
1.88
0.75
0.75
15.00
3.94
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
0.19
0.19
3.75
3.94
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
1.38
0.50
1.00
1.50
7.50
1.88
0.75
0.75
15.00
3.94
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
0.19
0.19
3.75
3.94
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
6.25
1.38
0.50
1.00
-
1.50
7.50
1.88
-
0.75
0.75
15.00
3.94
-
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
0.19
0.19
3.75
3.94
-
0.50
0.60
1.20
0.13
-
6.25
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.38
1.00
2.00
-
-
15.00
3.75
-
-
-
30.00
7.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.38
1.00
2.00
-
15.00
3.75
-
-
30.00
7.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
7.50
7.50
7.50
7.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
4
4
4
10
8
3
25
6
4
8
6
60
15
3
3
120
31
2
2
5
1
1
1
30
31
2
2
5
1
1
3
3
4
9
7
3
0.23
0.54
0.54
0.40
1.00
0.80
0.30
1.50
3.60
3.60
4.00
10.00
8.00
3.00
23
-
-
-
3
25
5
3
7
5
51
13
3
3
102
26
2
2
4
0
1
1
26
26
2
2
4
0
0.94
0.60
1.20
0.90
9.00
2.25
0.45
0.45
18.00
4.61
0.30
0.36
0.72
0.08
0.11
0.11
4.50
4.61
0.30
0.36
0.72
0.08
6.25
4.00
8.00
6.00
60.00
15.00
3.00
3.00
120.00
30.75
2.00
2.40
4.80
0.50
0.75
0.75
30.00
30.75
2.00
2.40
4.80
0.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6.25
12.50
12.50
50
43
7.50
50.00
Subtotal 1.2.2 CSA Productivity Enhancement
C. 1.2.3 Improved Nutrition and Food Security
1. 1.2.3.1 Gender/Youth/Nutrition Training Costs
Item 1: GYN Specialist Preparation Days
Item 2: GYN Specialist Training Days
Item 3: GYN Specialist DSA cost
days
days
days
Subtotal 1.2.3.1 Gender/Youth/Nutrition Training Costs
2. 1.2.3.2 Financial Literacy Training Costs
Item 1: FL Specialist Preparation Days
Item 2: FL Specialist Training Days
Item 3: FL Specialist DSA cost
days
days
days
3
50
50
1
38
38
3
50
50
1
38
38
3
50
50
1
38
38
3
2.50
2.50
50 100.00
100.00
50 100.00
100.00
1
38
38
1.25
75.00
75.00
1.25
75.00
75.00
300
300
75
75
75
75
0.75
15.00
3.75
0.06
2.81
2.81
0.75
15.00
3.75
0.06
2.81
2.81
0.75
15.00
3.75
0.06
2.81
2.81
0.75
15.00
3.75
0.06
2.81
2.81
0.75
30.00
7.50
0.09
5.63
5.63
0.75
30.00
7.50
0.09
5.63
5.63
5
120
30
0
23
23
4
102
26
0
19
19
0.68
18.00
4.50
0.06
3.38
3.38
4.50
120.00
30.00
0.41
22.50
22.50
Total :Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses
78.53
78.53
78.53
78.53
136.72
136.72
588
499.43
-
-
-
88.13
587.56
Sub-component 1.3: Matching Grants  for Inclusive VC Investment
A. APG Matching Grants 
Matching grant selection call costs
APG Matching Grants
call
grant
lumpsum
APG Matching Grants - Beneficary Cash Contribution 
APG Matching Grants - Beneficary In-Kind Contribution 
lumpsum
Subtotal APG Matching Grants
B. MSME Matching Grants 
1 000
1 000
1 000
1 000 ######
######
1,000
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
8
8
25 000
25 000
25 000
25 000 ######
######
21,100
527.50
527.50
527.50
527.50
1 055.00
1 055.00
4 220
4 220
65.94
65.94
65.94
65.94
65.94
65.94
65.94
65.94
131.88
131.88
131.88
131.88
528
528
527.5
527.5
Matching grant selection call costs
MSME Matching Grants
call
grant
1 000
6 250
1 000
6 250
1 000
6 250
1 000 ######
######
1,000
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
6 250 ######
######
27,000
168.75
168.75
168.75
168.75
MSME Matching Grants - Beneficary Cash Contribution 
lumpsum
MSME Matching Grants - Beneficary In-Kind Contribution 
lumpsum
Subtotal MSME Matching Grants
C. Lead Enterprise Matching Grants 
84.38
84.38
84.38
84.38
84.38
84.38
84.38
84.38
Matching grant selection call costs
call
250.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
500.00
500.00
8,000
Lead Enterprise Matching Grants
grant
2 500.00
2 500.00
2 500.00
2 500.00
######
######
62,500
Lead Enterprise Cash Contribution - Matching grant
lumpsum
2.00
156.25
156.25
Lead Enterprise Credit Line
loan
-
-
-
-
######
######
100,000
-
2.00
156.25
156.25
-
2.00
156.25
156.25
-
2.00
156.25
156.25
-
Subtotal Lead Enterprise Matching Grants
1.00
337.50
168.75
168.75
4.00
156.25
156.25
250.00
1.00
337.50
168.75
168.75
4.00
156.25
156.25
250.00
6
6
1 350
1 350
675
675
16
938
938
500
16
500
8.00
4 220.00
527.50
527.50
6.00
1 350.00
675.00
675.00
16.00
937.50
937.50
500.00
675
675
937.50
937.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Total: Sub-component 1.3: Matching Grants  for Inclusive VC Investment
1 313
1 313
1 313
1 313
2 563
2 563
10 380
6 100
Total Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development
1 398
1 398
1 398
1 398
2 700
2 700
10 993
6 622
Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure
A. Participatory Cluster Infrastructure Investment Planning 
1. Vehicles
4WD Twincabs
2. Workshops
Initial ward vists
First dialogue meetings
Followup dialogues
Preparation of proposals
Subtotal Workshops
no
no
no
no
4 000.00
-
-
-
112.50
112.50
112.50
112.50
-
-
-
-
-
50.00
43.75
-
50.00
43.75
-
50.00
43.75
-
50.00
50.00
62.50
43.75
57.50
50.00
62.50
57.50
60,000
240
-
250
250
250
250
28.13
-
12.50
10.94
28.13
28.13
28.13
-
12.50
10.94
-
12.50
10.94
-
12.50
10.94
Subtotal Participatory Cluster Infrastructure Investment Planning
B. Climate Proofed Infrastructure Investments 
1. Smallscale irrigation
Design
Construction
Construction supervision
Subtotal Smallscale irrigation
2. Climate proofed road rehabilitation
Design
Construction
Construction supervision
Subtotal Climate proofed road rehabilitation
3. Multi-purpose community water supply
Design
Construction
Construction supervision
each
each
each
each
each
each
each
each
each
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
225.00
225.00
######
######
25.00
25.00
250
5,000
250
12.50
12.50
-
-
-
-
######
######
-
-
-
-
750
23,535
750
2,050
20,500
1,025
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12.50
15.63
14.38
-
12.50
15.63
14.38
56.25
125.00
6.25
56.25
125.00
6.25
9.38
9.38
-
-
-
-
25.63
25.63
-
-
-
-
240
113
25
81
73
113
250
13
19
-
-
51
-
-
-
-
240
112.5
25
81.25
72.5
112.5
250
12.5
18.75
0
0
51.25
0
0
1 055
3 225
-
10 380
1 055
3 225
91
10 993
240.00
112.50
25.00
81.25
72.50
112.50
250.00
12.50
18.75
-
-
51.25
-
-
A. Vehicle Operation and maintenance
lump sum 
4.80
4.80
4.80
4.80
4.80
4.80
29
28.8
28.80
Total Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure
296
56
56
56
270
270
1 005
-
1 005
-
-
-
1 005
Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination
Sub-component 3.1: Institutional and policy support
A. National and VC Policy Development
Research, documentation and publications 
lump sum
Workshops, dialogue, events, study tours 
lump sum
Subtotal National and VC Policy Development
B. Support to Thematic VC Issues
Research, documentation and publications 
lump sum
Workshops, dialogue, events, study tours 
lump sum
Subtotal Support to Thematic VC Issues
11.25
6.25
11.25
6.25
11.25
6.25
11.25
6.25
11.25
6.25
36.38
11.88
36.38
11.88
11.25
6.25
11.25
6.25
11.25
6.25
33.50
11.88
33.50
11.88
118
49
112
49
88
37
84
37
29.44
12.19
117.75
48.75
28.00
12.19
112.00
48.75
Total Sub-component 3.1: Institutional and policy support
35
35
35
35
94
94
327
245
-
-
-
82
327
Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination
A. Project Management Unit
1. Vehicles
4WD Twincabs
Minibus
Subtotal Vehicles
2. Equipment and materials
Laptops and desk screens
Network storage 
Mobile phones
Office refurbishment
Office equipment
Photocopier/printer
Subtotal Equipment and materials
Subtotal Project Management Unit
B. Provincial Offices
1. Vehicles
4WD Twincabs
Motorcycles
Subtotal Vehicles
2. Equipment and materials
Laptops 
External hard drives
Mobile phones
Office refurbishment
Office equipment
Photocopier/printer
Subtotal Equipment and materials
Subtotal Provincial Offices
C. District Offices
1. Vehicles
Motorcycles
2. Equipment and materials
Laptops 
External hard drives
Mobile phones
Office equipment
Photocopier/printer
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
2 000.00
1 000.00
#######
1 000.00
14.00
1 000.00
1 000.00
1 000.00
4 000.00
8 000.00
#######
24.00
28.00
4 000.00
4 000.00
4 000.00
#######
#######
32.00
32.00
4 000.00
4 000.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Subtotal Equipment and materials
Subtotal District Offices
D. PMF Systems
Establish and train on PFM System
lumpsum
E. Workshops
90,000
90,000
2,530
2,000
633
5,175
9,200
2,070
90,000
9,300
1,840
150
633
5,175
9,200
2,070
180
90
-
33
2
9
5
9
2
-
360
74
-
44
4
18
21
37
8
180
90
138
69
33
28
2
9
5
9
2
360
74
44
4
18
21
37
8
2
8
4
8
2
276
57
38
3
15
18
31
7
41.94
20.97
180.00
90.00
4.93
0.30
1.33
0.78
1.38
0.31
32.89
2.00
8.86
5.18
9.20
2.07
83.88
17.34
360.00
74.40
6.62
0.54
2.66
3.11
5.52
1.24
44.16
3.60
17.72
20.70
36.80
8.28
9,300
298
298
228
69.34
297.60
1,840
150
633
9,200
2,070
59
5
20
37
8
7
59
5
20
37
8
50
4
17
31
7
8.83
0.72
3.04
5.52
1.24
58.88
4.80
20.26
36.80
8.28
7
6
1.05
7.00
-
-
-
-
######
3,500
Startup workshop
IFAD Financial Management Workshop
ABWP Workshops
Subtotal Workshops
F. Manuals
Manual development
Manual validation and updating
Subtotal Manuals
G. M&E Systems /e
Establish MIS System 
Server/iCloud costs
Subtotal M&E Systems
H. Studies and Surveys 
Value Chain Analysis
WEAI and Nutrition Baseline Survey 
Socio economic baseline survey
Annual outcome survey 
Mid Term and End-line Surveys 
Subtotal Studies and Surveys
I. KM Products and Communication
lumpsum
workshop
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
study
survey
survey
survey
survey
KM products and communication activities 
lumpsum
J. M&E Equipment
Digital camera (professional)
no
500.00
500.00
500.00
500.00
500.00
500.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
250.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
250.00
250.00
-
-
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
-
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
A. Salaries
1. National PMU
National Project Coordinator 
Chief Accountant
Chief Accountant (seconded)
Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor
Senior CSA Advisor
Senior Infrastructure Specialist
50% Senior Social Inclusion Specialist
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
6.00
4.00
-
4.00
4.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
M&E and Planning Specialist
pers-month 3 000.00
3 000.00
3 000.00
3 000.00
######
######
2,400
M&E and Planning Specialist (seconded)
pers-month
-
-
50% KM and Comms Specialist
pers-month
6.00
3.00
-
3.00
-
-
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
572
286
Procurement Officer
pers-month 3 000.00
3 000.00
3 000.00
3 000.00
######
######
2,400
Procurement Officer (seconded)
Financial Accountant (Officer)
pers-month
pers-month
Assistant VC and AgB Specialist (Officer)
pers-month
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
-
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
Senior VC and AgB Specialist / Prov. Coord
pers-month
50% Office Secretary
50% Procurement Assistant
Procurement Clerk
Driver / Office Assistant
Subtotal National PMU
2. Provincial PMU
CSA Specialist
Infrastructure Officer
M&E and Planning Officer
Social Inclusion Officer
Junior Procurement Officer
Driver / Office Assistant
Subtotal Provincial PMU
Subtotal Salaries
B. Per Diem In-Country Travel
PMU
Provincial and District
Subtotal Per Diem In-Country Travel
C. District Extension Officer Allowance
lumpsum
D. Vehicle Operation and Maintenance 
PMU vehicles
Provincial vehicles
District vehicles
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
12.00
pers-day
pers-day
25.00
87.50
25.00
87.50
25.00
87.50
25.00
25.00
87.50
87.50
25.00
87.50
10,000
40,000
40,000
20,000
50,000
4,000
2,400
572
3,500
3,500
572
286
534
210
210
103
103
103
171
572
367
210
210
210
210
171
75
75
20
-
20
5.00
25
5
5.00
10.00
10.00
-
-
-
20
20
5.00
3.50
20.00
2.50
-
2.50
5.00
5.00
10.00
10.00
-
-
5.00
10.00
10.00
-
-
5.00
10.00
10.00
-
-
5.00
5.00
-
-
5.00
-
-
-
5.00
-
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
1,000
5.00
0.02
0
-
0
0
1.72
0.86
7.20
-
1.72
7.20
-
0.63
0.63
0.31
0.31
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
1.72
0.86
7.20
-
0.86
7.20
-
0.63
0.63
0.31
0.31
0.01
0.01
-
0.01
0.01
1.72
0.86
7.20
-
0.86
7.20
-
0.63
0.63
0.31
0.31
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
1.72
0.86
7.20
-
0.86
7.20
-
0.63
0.63
0.31
0.31
0.01
0.01
-
0.01
0.01
1.72
0.86
7.20
-
0.86
7.20
-
0.63
0.63
0.31
0.31
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
1.72
0.86
7.20
-
0.86
7.20
-
0.63
0.63
0.31
0.31
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
6.86
4.40
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.05
1.88
6.56
6.86
4.40
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.05
1.88
6.56
6.86
4.40
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.05
1.88
6.56
6.86
4.40
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.05
1.88
6.56
6.86
4.40
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.05
1.88
6.56
6.86
4.40
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.05
1.88
6.56
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.74
9.23
6.32
5.74
9.23
6.32
5.74
9.23
6.32
5.74
9.23
6.32
5.74
9.23
6.32
5.74
9.23
6.32
20
4
40
40
15
25
10
30
40
40
10
-
23
5
-
0
0
0
0
10
5
43
-
6
43
-
4
4
2
2
3
41
26
15
15
15
15
12
11
39
30
34
55
38
17
3
34
34
13
21
9
26
34
34
9
19
4
0
0
-
0
0
8
4
34
-
5
36
-
2
2
1
1
2
33
18
9
9
9
9
7
11
39
30
31
50
34
3.00
0.53
6.00
6.00
2.25
3.75
1.50
4.50
6.00
6.00
1.50
20.00
3.50
40.00
40.00
15.00
25.00
10.00
30.00
40.00
40.00
10.00
3.38
22.50
0.75
5.00
-
0.01
-
-
-
2.16
1.08
9.07
-
1.26
6.91
-
1.51
1.51
0.74
0.74
0.08
0.05
-
0.07
0.07
10.30
5.15
43.20
-
6.01
43.20
-
3.78
3.78
1.85
1.85
1.23
3.08
8.65
8.72
6.05
6.05
6.05
6.05
4.92
3.44
5.54
3.79
41.18
26.42
15.12
15.12
15.12
15.12
12.31
11.25
39.38
30.00
34.43
55.39
37.94
Subtotal Vehicle Operation and Maintenance
E. Airtime Allocation
Airtime allocation - PMU
Airtime allocation - Districts
Airtime allocation - Provinces
Subtotal Airtime Allocation
F. Office Operating Costs 
PMU
Provincial
Subtotal Office Operating Costs
pers-year
pers-year
pers-year
3.50
7.00
7.00
3.50
7.00
7.00
3.50
7.00
7.00
3.50
7.00
7.00
3.50
7.00
7.00
3.50
7.00
7.00
276
276
276
lumpsum
lumpsum
0.97
1.93
1.93
1.00
2.00
0.97
1.93
1.93
1.00
2.00
0.97
1.93
1.93
1.00
2.00
0.97
1.93
1.93
1.00
2.00
0.97
1.93
1.93
0.50
2.00
0.97
1.93
1.93
0.50
2.00
6
12
12
5
12
5
10
10
5
11
0.58
1.16
1.16
0.50
1.20
5.80
11.59
11.59
5.00
12.00
Total Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination
1 525.33
159.97
114.97
114.97
106.97
125.47
2 148
1 730
Total Component 3: Institutional Support and Project Coordination
1 560.33
194.97
149.97
149.97
200.60
219.10
2 475
1 975
0
0
0
0
0
0
418
2 148
500
2 475
TOTAL  First 18 Months AWPB 
3 255
1 649
1 604
1 604
3 170
3 189
14 473
8 597
1 005
1 055
3 225
590
14 473
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Project Name:
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID:
Version
1.0
Version Date
18-Jun-20
Prepared by:
Rym Ghazzali
Approved by:
TBC
Procurement 
Category
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
LCU
USD
LCU
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
TOTAL
1 790 257.00 
1 783 875.00 
2 832 505.70 
6 406 637.70 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Prior Review Thresholds
Thresholds
Goods
Works
Prior Review
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are  Prior Review  (in alignment with IFAD Procurement Handbook).
> US$ 100 000
> US$ 50 000
> US$ 30 000
Non-Consulting 
Services
> US$ 100 000
Firms - Consulting 
Services
> US$ 30 000 
Individuals - 
Consulting Services
Procurement Method Thresholds
NCB
Shopping
Goods
Works 
Non-Consulting 
Services
< US$ 50 000
< US$ 145 000
< US$ 50 000
> US$ 50 000 to < 
US$ 150 000
> US$ 145 000 to < 
US$ 500 000
> US$ 50 000 to < 
US$ 150 000
ICB
> US$ 150 000
> US$ 500 000
> US$ 150 000
ICS/CQS
LCS
QCBS
Individuals
< US$ 50 000
Firms
< US$ 50 000
> US$ 50 000 to < 
US$ 80 000
> US$ 50 000 to < 
US$ 80 000
> US$ 80 000
> US$ 80 000
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Goods
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Approved by: TBC
Version
1.0
18-Jun-20
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Total Amount
USD
LCU
1 790 257.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Description
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Basic Data
3.2.1 (A)            
3.2.1 (B) 
3.2.1 (A)
3.2.1 (D)
3.2(C) & (D)
3.2.2 (A)            
3.2.2 (B) 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (A)                
3.2.2 (B)                 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (A)                
3.2.2 (B)                 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (J)    
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
4WD Twincabs
Minibus
 Vehicle Operation and maintenance
IFAD     
(100%)
IFAD      
(100%)
OFID    
(100%)
10 units 
Participatory Cluster 
Infrastructure Investment 
(4) & Project Management 
Unit (2)
1 unit
 Project Management Unit
7 units
Participatory Cluster 
Infrastructure Investment 
(4) & Project Management 
Unit (2)
Provincial Offices & District 
Offices
Motorcycles
IFAD   (100%)
40 units
IT equipment (laptops /c; external 
hard drives; desk screens; network 
storage)
IFAD     
(100%)
69 laptops, 56 external 
storages, 13 desk screens, 
1 network
 Project Management Unit 
& Provincial Offices &  
District Offices
Mobile phones
IFAD   (100%)
74 units
Office equipment
IFAD   (100%)
9 units
Photocopier/printer
IFAD   (100%)
9 units
 Project Management Unit 
& Provincial Offices &  
District Offices
 Project Management Unit 
& Provincial Offices &  
District Offices
Project Management Unit 
& Provincial Offices &  
District Offices
Digital camera (professional)
IFAD   (100%)
5 units
M&E Equipment
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Post-Qual
Post Review
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
ICB
DC
ICB
ICB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
NS
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
900 000.00 
-
90 900.00 
-
127 755.00 
-
372 000.00 
-
146 330.00 
-
46 842.00 
-
82 800.00 
-
18 630.00 
-
5 000.00 
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3.2.1 (A) This purchase should be launched as a package together with the 4WD Twincab under one process for standardisation purposes, therefore suggested as ICB modality (900000 + 90000 = 990000 US$).
3.2.1 (D) Direct sourcing from the vehicle supplier.
3.2.1 ( C) & (D) Proposed as one off purchase advertised at the begining of the project implementation.
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 3 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Goods
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Approved by: TBC
Version
1.0
18-Jun-20
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
3.2.1 (A)            
3.2.1 (B) 
3.2.1 (A)
3.2.1 (D)
3.2(C) & (D)
3.2.2 (A)            
3.2.2 (B) 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (A)                
3.2.2 (B)                 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (A)                
3.2.2 (B)                 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (J)    
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
4WD Twincabs
Minibus
 Vehicle Operation and maintenance
Motorcycles
IT equipment (laptops /c; external 
hard drives; desk screens; network 
storage)
Mobile phones
Office equipment
Photocopier/printer
Digital camera (professional)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
27-Mar-21
N/A
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
27-Mar-21
1-Aug-20
8-Aug-20
9-Aug-20
23-Aug-20
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
27-Mar-21
25-Jan-20
1-Feb-20
3-Feb-20
19-Mar-20
30-Jan-20
N/A
1-Feb-20
17-Mar-20
25-Jan-20
1-Feb-20
3-Feb-20
19-Mar-20
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Jan-20
1-Feb-20
10-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
N/A
N/A
25-Jan-20
N/A
26-Jan-20
27-Mar-21
N/A
3.2.1 (A) This purchase should be launched as a package together with the 4WD Twincab under one process for standardisation purposes, therefore suggested as ICB modality (900000 + 90000 = 990000 US$).
3.2.1 (D) Direct sourcing from the vehicle supplier.
3.2.1 ( C) & (D) Proposed as one off purchase advertised at the begining of the project implementation.
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 4 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Goods
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Approved by: TBC
Version
1.0
18-Jun-20
Bid Evaluation
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Description
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Contract Award & Signature
Date
Contract
Award
13-May-21
Date
Contract
Signature
15-May-21
3.2.1 (A)            
3.2.1 (B) 
3.2.1 (A)
3.2.1 (D)
3.2(C) & (D)
3.2.2 (A)            
3.2.2 (B) 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (A)                
3.2.2 (B)                 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (A)                
3.2.2 (B)                 
3.2.2 (C)
3.2.2 (J)    
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
N/A
17-Apr-21
24-Apr-21
Plan
6-May-21
4WD Twincabs
Minibus
 Vehicle Operation and maintenance
Motorcycles
IT equipment (laptops /c; external 
hard drives; desk screens; network 
storage)
Mobile phones
Office equipment
Photocopier/printer
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
17-Apr-21
24-Apr-21
30-Aug-20
6-Sep-20
17-Apr-21
24-Apr-21
9-Apr-20
16-Apr-20
31-Mar-20
N/A
2-Apr-20
9-Apr-20
N/A
3-Mar-21
10-Mar-21
Digital camera (professional)
N/A
3-Apr-21
N/A
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
6-May-21
13-May-21
15-May-21
6-Sep-20
13-Sep-20
15-Sep-20
6-May-21
13-May-21
15-May-21
28-Apr-20
5-May-20
7-May-20
12-Apr-20
19-Apr-20
21-Apr-20
21-Apr-20
28-Apr-20
30-Apr-20
10-Mar-21
12-Mar-21
14-Mar-21
3-Apr-21
5-Apr-21
7-Apr-21
3.2.1 (A) This purchase should be launched as a package together with the 4WD Twincab under one process for standardisation purposes, therefore suggested as ICB modality (900000 + 90000 = 990000 US$).
3.2.1 (D) Direct sourcing from the vehicle supplier.
3.2.1 ( C) & (D) Proposed as one off purchase advertised at the begining of the project implementation.
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 5 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Consulting
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Rym Ghazzali
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Version
1.0
21-Jul-01
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Total Amount
USD
LCU
2 832 505.70
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Basic Data
Description*
Funding
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
I.A.1
II.A.1
1.1.2.1.1
1.1.2.1.1
2.1.2.1.2
3.1.2.1.3
1.1.2.2.1
1.1.2.2.1
1.1.2.3.1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Community Mobilization Consultant
IFAD (100%)
Mobilisation 
(preparations)
Workshop venue
IFAD (100%)
Provincial Workshop 
Participant and Venue 
Lead Enterprise Proposal Preparation (IC)
IFAD (100%)
Business Development 
Services
Venue for Training Days for Lead Enterprise 
Proposal 
IFAD (100%)
Business Development 
Services
MSME Business Development Services (IC)
IFAD (100%)
Business Development 
Services
 APG BDS TOT and Coaching (FA minim. 2 
companies each covering 2 provinces)
IFAD (100%)
Business Development 
Services
Agritex Specialist
IFAD (100%)
Venue for Training Days for CSA TOT and 
Coaching
IFAD (100%)
CSA Productivity 
Enhancement
CSA Productivity 
Enhancement
Gender/Youth/Nutrition (up to 4 providers/ one 
per Province)
IFAD (100%)
 Improved Nutrition and 
Food Security
2.1.2.3.2
10 
 Financial Literacy Specialist (1 commercial 
Bank)
IFAD (100%)
 Improved Nutrition and 
Food Security
2.1.2.3.2  
2.1.2.3.2  
1.1.2.3.1
11
 Workshops
OFID (100%)
Participatory Cluster 
Infrastructure 
Investment Planning /b
12
Research, documentation and publications /b 
(IC) (at least 16 researches)
IFAD (75%)
National and VC Policy 
Development & Support 
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Prior Review
Post Review
Prior Review
Post Review
Prior Review
ICS
LCS
ICS
LCS
ICS
Prior Review
QCBS
Prior Review
Prior Review
SSS
LCS
Prior Review
QCBS
Prior Review
Post Review
QBS
LCS
Prior Review
QCBS
8 700.00 
-
2 999.70 
-
10 250.00 
-
8 000.00 
-
81 000.00 
-
158 250.00 
-
62 250.00 
-
9 700.00 
-
612 000.00 
-
181 500.00 
-
580 950.00 
-
198 750.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
25-Jan-21
1-Feb-21
N/A
N/A
25-Feb-21
4-Mar-21
1-Jan-21
N/A
25-Mar-21
1-Apr-21
20-Mar-21
18-Jan-21
1-Jan-21
1-Jan-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jan-21
8-Jan-21
18-Jan-20
N/A
2-Feb-20
9-Feb-20
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 6 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Consulting
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Rym Ghazzali
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Version
1.0
21-Jul-01
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission 
deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
I.A.1
II.A.1
1.1.2.1.1
1.1.2.1.1
2.1.2.1.2
3.1.2.1.3
1.1.2.2.1
1.1.2.2.1
1.1.2.3.1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Community Mobilization Consultant
Workshop venue
Lead Enterprise Proposal Preparation (IC)
Venue for Training Days for Lead Enterprise 
Proposal 
MSME Business Development Services (IC)
 APG BDS TOT and Coaching (FA minim. 2 
companies each covering 2 provinces)
Agritex Specialist
Venue for Training Days for CSA TOT and 
Coaching
Gender/Youth/Nutrition (up to 4 providers/ one 
per Province)
2.1.2.3.2
10 
 Financial Literacy Specialist (1 commercial 
Bank)
2.1.2.3.2  
2.1.2.3.2  
1.1.2.3.1
11
 Workshops
12
Research, documentation and publications /b 
(IC) (at least 16 researches)
3-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
10-Mar-21
17-Mar-21
21-Mar-21
28-Mar-21
30-Mar-21
20-Apr-21
4-May-21
11-May-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Enter Date
N/A
N/A
6-Mar-21
27-Mar-21
10-Apr-21
17-Apr-21
21-Apr-21
28-Apr-21
30-Apr-21
21-May-21
4-Jun-21
11-Jun-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Enter Date
N/A
N/A
3-Apr-21
24-Apr-21
8-May-21
15-May-21
19-May-21
26-May-21
28-May-21
18-Jun-21
2-Jul-21
9-Jul-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Enter Date
Enter Date
Enter Date
Enter Date
N/A
N/A
10-Jan-21
31-Jan-21
14-Feb-21
21-Feb-21
25-Feb-21
4-Mar-21
6-Mar-21
20-Apr-21
4-May-21
11-May-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Enter Date
N/A
N/A
11-Feb-20
3-Mar-20
17-Mar-20
24-Mar-20
28-Mar-20
4-Apr-20
6-Apr-20
21-May-20
4-Jun-20
11-Jun-20
25-Jun-20
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 7 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Consulting
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Rym Ghazzali
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Version
1.0
21-Jul-01
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Contract Award & Signature
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Description*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of Draft 
Contract and MoN
No-objection
Date
I.A.1
II.A.1
1.1.2.1.1
1.1.2.1.1
2.1.2.1.2
3.1.2.1.3
1.1.2.2.1
1.1.2.2.1
1.1.2.3.1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Community Mobilization Consultant
Workshop venue
Lead Enterprise Proposal Preparation (IC)
Venue for Training Days for Lead Enterprise 
Proposal 
MSME Business Development Services (IC)
 APG BDS TOT and Coaching (FA minim. 2 
companies each covering 2 provinces)
Agritex Specialist
Venue for Training Days for CSA TOT and 
Coaching
Gender/Youth/Nutrition (up to 4 providers/ one 
per Province)
2.1.2.3.2
10 
 Financial Literacy Specialist (1 commercial 
Bank)
2.1.2.3.2  
2.1.2.3.2  
1.1.2.3.1
11
 Workshops
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
12
Research, documentation and publications /b 
(IC) (at least 16 researches)
2-Jul-20
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Date
Contract
Award
19-Jun-21
Date
Contract
Signature
26-Jun-21
23-May-21
6-Jun-21
10-Jun-21
17-Jun-21
N/A
23-Jun-21
7-Jul-21
11-Jul-21
18-Jul-21
20-Jul-21
27-Jul-21
N/A
21-Jul-21
4-Aug-21
8-Aug-21
15-Aug-21
17-Aug-21
24-Aug-21
N/A
23-May-21
13-Jun-21
17-Jun-21
24-Jun-21
26-Jun-21
3-Jul-21
N/A
14-Jul-20
4-Aug-20
8-Aug-20
15-Aug-20
17-Aug-20
24-Aug-20
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 8 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Goods
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Rym Ghazzali
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Version
1.0
18-Jun-20
Basic Data
Total Amount
USD
LCU
1 783 875.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
I.B.1
I.B.1                      
I.B.2
I.B.3
№
1
2
3
I.B.1                        
I.B.2                                
I.B.3
4
Description
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Design & Construction supervision
OFID (100%)
multiple lots
Smallscale irrigation
Design & Construction supervision
OFID (100%)
multiple lots
Design & Construction supervision
OFID (100%)
multiple lots
Construction
OFID (100%)
multiple lots
 Climate proofed road 
réhabilitation
Multi-purpose community 
water supply
Smallscale irrigation &  
Climate proofed road 
réhabilitation & Multi-
purpose community water 
Project Management Unit 
& Provincial Offices & 
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Post-Qual
Prior Review
Post-Qual
Post Review
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
NCB
NCB
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NCB
1
1
1
1
1
875 000.00 
-
262 500.00 
-
307 500.00 
-
313 000.00 
-
25 875.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
I.A.2
5
Office refurbishment
IFAD (100%)
5 lots
I.B.1. Multiple lots launhed in different provinces to attract local construction companies as to ensure value for money.
I.B.2. Multiple lots launhed in different provinces to attract local supervision companies as to ensure value for money.
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 9 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Goods
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Rym Ghazzali
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Version
1.0
18-Jun-20
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
I.B.1
I.B.1                      
I.B.2
I.B.3
№
1
2
3
Design & Construction supervision
Design & Construction supervision
Design & Construction supervision
I.B.1                        
I.B.2                                
I.B.3
4
Construction
I.A.2
5
Office refurbishment
Description
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
28-Jan-21
4-Feb-21
6-Feb-21
23-Mar-21
20-Feb-21
27-Feb-21
1-Mar-21
15-Apr-21
15-Mar-21
20-Jan-22
N/A
N/A
17-Mar-21
1-May-21
22-Jan-22
8-Mar-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
4-Feb-21
N/A
6-Feb-21
23-Mar-21
N/A
I.B.1. Multiple lots launhed in different provinces to attract local construction companies as to ensure value for money.
I.B.2. Multiple lots launhed in different provinces to attract local supervision companies as to ensure value for money.
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 10 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Procurement Plan - Goods
The Republic of Zimbabwe
Small Community Agriculture Project (SCAP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Rym Ghazzali
Prepared by: Rym Ghazzali
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Version
1.0
18-Jun-20
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Description
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
6-Apr-21
13-Apr-21
Plan
25-Apr-21
Date
Contract
Award
2-May-21
Date
Contract
Signature
4-May-21
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
I.B.1
I.B.1                      
I.B.2
I.B.3
№
1
2
3
Design & Construction supervision
Design & Construction supervision
Design & Construction supervision
I.B.1                        
I.B.2                                
I.B.3
4
Construction
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
I.A.2
5
Office refurbishment
N/A
6-Apr-21
N/A
I.B.1. Multiple lots launhed in different provinces to attract local construction companies as to ensure value for money.
I.B.2. Multiple lots launhed in different provinces to attract local supervision companies as to ensure value for money.
29-Apr-21
6-May-21
15-May-21
22-Mar-22
N/A
N/A
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
18-May-21
25-May-21
27-May-21
27-May-21
3-Jun-21
5-Jun-21
3-Apr-22
10-Apr-22
12-Apr-22
18-Apr-21
25-Apr-21
27-Apr-21
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 11 of 11
Printed on: 04/10/2020
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE 
SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE CLUSTER PROJECT (SACP) 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Section 
Page 
Project Purpose, Operational Area and Targeting 
SACP Institutional Arrangements and 
Responsibilities 
TOR of Key SACP Staff 
Detailed Implementation Modalities:  
Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 
Detailed Implementation Modalities: Component 
2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 
Detailed Implementation Modalities: Sub-
Component 3.1: Support to Policy and 
Institutional Development 
Planning and M&E Process and SACP Surveys 
Draft SACP Procurement Guidelines 
Draft SACP Financial Management Guidelines 
i 
SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE CLUSTER PROJECT (SACP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
PROJECT PURPOSE, OPERATIONAL AREA AND TARGETING 
A.  SACP Rationale, Objectives and Structure  
Project  Rationale.  To  transform  smallholder  agriculture  and  increase  productivity  and 
rural  incomes,  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe’s  strategy,  as  elaborated  in  the  National 
Agriculture Policy Framework 2018-2030 (NAPF),  relies on organising smallholders into 
well-governed and well-functioning cohesive groups and associations; connecting them to 
profitable value  chains  and  markets;  developing  smallholders’  capacity in  climate  smart 
production  and  in  marketing  and  business  skills;  and  revitalising  market  access 
infrastructure.  The  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water  and  Rural  Resettlement 
(MLAWRR) confirmed the Government’s commitment to transform smallholder agriculture 
by  using  the  private  sector-led  value  chain  approach  as  a  critical  instrument  in  this 
commercialisation process. 
As the afore-mentioned strategies/approaches are also at the core of IFAD’s policies for 
smallholder agriculture transformation, the new SACP intervention will be based on this 
overall approach of using private sector-led VCs as crucial instruments for climate-smart 
and commercially viable smallholder development. SACP is fully in line with the COSOP’s 
overall transformation target and its objectives of reducing poverty and improving incomes 
along  the  VCs,  through  better  market  access  and  climate-smart  and  more  effective 
production  systems.  The  strong  capacity  building  focus  and  effective  targeting  of  SACP 
activities will ensure that IFAD’s corporate mainstreaming priorities in CC, gender, youth 
and nutrition issues are appropriately built into the project design. 
SACP  is  an  initial  intervention  within  the  framework  of  a  longer-term  programming 
approach: If the SACP strategies and implementation approaches prove successful, they 
can provide an appropriate framework for the interventions when designing future IFAD-
supported  projects  in  Zimbabwe.  Furthermore,  key  international  development  partners 
share  the  same  strategic  views  on  smallholder  agricultural  transformation,  which  is 
anchored  on  climate  resilience.  The  major  lenders  (e.g.  World  Bank  and  AfDB)  are, 
however,  currently  unable  to  invest  in  Zimbabwe  due  to  arrears.  In  this  situation,  it  is 
likely that the experiences and results from SACP implementation will influence the project 
designs  of  the  larger  international  financiers,  too,  when  their  lending  to  Zimbabwe 
resumes. 
Goal and Development Objective. The project goal of the proposed SACP is: “Increased 
household  incomes  and  improved  nutrition,  through  sustainable  transformation  of  the 
smallholder  farming  sector”.  The  Project  Development  Objective  of  SACP is:  “Increased 
equitable smallholder participation in market-oriented and climate-smart value chains”. 
Project Structure. The activities of SACP are organised in four mutually interdependent 
components:  Component  1:  Inclusive Value  Chain Development,  Component  2:  Climate 
Proofed  Value  Chain  Infrastructure;  Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional  Support  and 
Project Coordination; and Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response. 
Component 1 is the key investment component of SACP.  The component design reflects 
the  situation  Zimbabwe,  in  which  the  country’s  gaps  in  smallholder-based  value  chain 
organization  result  in  low  productivity  and  low  farmer  incomes.  Challenges  persist  in 
1 
commercial smallholder production systems, and the financial sector is unable to channel 
urgently  required  financing  for  investments  by  smallholder  farmers  and  agribusinesses. 
Component  1  of  SACP is  designed  to  address  these  challenges  through  the  activities in 
three  inter-related  sub-components:  1.1:  Expressions  of  Interest,  Cluster  Identification 
and  VC  Mobilization,  1.2:  Technical  Services  for  APGs  and  Agribusinesses,  and  1.3: 
Matching Grants for Inclusive Value Chain Investment. 
The  objective  of  Component  2  is  to  improve  irrigation  water  supply  and  management, 
domestic water supply, and local level feeder roads, to facilitate the commercialisation of 
smallholder  agriculture.  The  implementation  of  activities  under  this  component  will 
encourage  private  sector  investments  in  SACP  areas,  promote  the  production  and 
marketing of large quantities of quality produce and reduce the time and cost of transport 
to the markets. The component will invest in public and semi-public infrastructure. Value 
chain  infrastructure  of  a  strictly  private  nature  will  be  financed  under  Component  1  of 
SACP. Component 2 consists of two sub-components: Sub-component 2.1: Participatory 
ward level infrastructure investment planning, and Sub-component 2.2: Climate proofed 
infrastructure investments. 
Component  3 is  divided into  two  sub-components:  3.1.  Policy  and  Institutional  Support 
and 3.2. Project Coordination. The purpose of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to support 
the efforts to create a conducive policy and institutional environment for private sector-
led  smallholder  agriculture  transformation  in  Zimbabwe.  Sub-component  3.2:  Project 
Coordination  covers  the  coordination  and  management  functions  of  SACP, including  the 
management of project implementation operations in the provinces and districts and SACP 
activities  in  the  areas  of  financial  management,  procurement,  and  M&E  and  knowledge 
management. 
Component 4, Contingency Emergency Response. Given the recurrent weather extremes 
in Zimbabwe, in particular droughts, this component has been included in SACP to enable 
IFAD to respond urgently in its support to smallholder farmers, who are the most impacted. 
Specifically, this component is expected to facilitate and expedite the implementation of 
level-2  project  restructuring,  in  the  event  of  an  emergency  or  disaster.  As  it  is  a 
placeholder for emergency funds, it has a zero allocation at design. 
B.  Geographic Targeting 
The project will be implemented in five of the ten Zimbabwean provinces of Mashonaland 
Central,  Mashonaland  East,  Mashonaland  West,  Matebeleland  North  and  Midlands.  The 
geographic targeting was based on highest incidence and prevalence of poverty1, high food 
and nutrition insecurity, and areas most prone to drought and other climatic shocks.  The 
Midlands province provides an overlap between SACP and SIRP targeted areas, in order to 
provide lesson learning and synergies between the two projects, as well as an opportunity 
to  fast  track  SACP  implementation  at  early  stage.  The  project  implementation  will  be 
phased with operations starting with value chains already identified in the SIRP-covered 
districts, which will also support the fast start-up of SACP’s field activities. 
Poverty  prevalence  rates  in  Zimbabwe  are  increasing,  with  76.9  per  cent  of  the  rural 
households classified poor compared to 30.4 per cent of urban households2. The majority 
of the population lives in rural areas with livelihoods mainly based on rainfed agricultural 
production,  characterised  by  low  input  use  and  low  productivity.  Due  to  the  decline  in 
formal employment, many workers are engaged in poorly remunerated informal jobs. The 
data on prevalence of poverty is shown in Table 1:   
1 http://www.zimstat.co.zw/sites/default/files/img/publications/Prices/Poverty_Report_2017.pdf 
2 World Bank 2019 
2 
Table  1:  Poverty  prevalence  and  extreme  poverty  prevalence  by  province  (targeted 
provinces are shaded) 
Province 
Population  
Poverty 
Prevalence  by 
Province. % 
Extreme 
Poverty 
Prevalence 
% 
Mashonaland 
Central 
Matebeleland 
North 
Mashonaland 
West 
Manicaland 
Mashonaland 
East 
Masvingo 
Midlands 
Matebeleland 
South 
Harare 
Bulawayo 
Total  
Source: PICES 2017 
1,152,520 
81.6 
749,017 
74.3 
1,501,656 
71.1 
1,752,698 
1,344,955 
1,485,090 
1,614,941 
683,893 
2,123,132 
653,337 
13,061,239 
71 
65,6 
64.8 
63 
62.8 
31.1 
22.3 
41.2 
33.3 
31.6 
27.9 
22.2 
20.7 
21.8 
17.8 
3.8 
0.9 
Proportion 
rural 
of 
poor 
households 
% 
16.1 
12.5 
10.5 
12.2 
14.0 
10.0 
11.9 
11.0 
Rural 
poverty 
prevalence 
% 
84.7 
78.6 
82,7 
78.7 
71.3 
71.5 
77.6 
68.5 
76.9 
According  to  2017  Zimbabwe  Poverty,  Income,  Consumption  and  Expenditure  Survey3, 
targeted  provinces  rank  1st,  2nd  3rd, 5th and  7th  out  of  the  ten  Zimbabwean  Provinces  in 
poverty  prevalence  for  Mashonaland  Central,  Matebeleland  North,  Mashonaland  West, 
Mashonaland  East  Provinces,  and  Midlands,  respectively.  Extreme  poverty  is  highest  in 
Mashonaland Central Province with 41.2 per cent of the population below the food poverty 
line, followed by Matabeleland North Province with 33.3 per cent, Mashonaland West with 
31.6 per cent, Mashonaland East with 22.2 per cent and Midlands with 21.8 per cent.  
Mashonaland  Central  Province  had  the  highest  proportion  of  poor  households,  (16.1 
per cent) followed by Mashonaland East Province with 14.0 per cent, Matabeleland North 
Province  at  12.5  per cent,  and  Midlands  Province  with  11.5  per  cent.  In  addition  to 
containing the highest proportion of Zimbabwe’s rural poor, Mashonaland Central Province 
had  the  highest  prevalence  of  rural  poverty,  84.7 per cent  of  rural  households  in  the 
province were poor.  
Rural  poverty  was  most  prevalent  in  communal  lands  (CL)  (79.2  percent),  followed  by 
resettlement areas (RA) with 76.4 per cent. Extreme poverty was most prevalent in CLs 
with 34.0 per cent when compared with 29.9 per cent for RAs. In rural areas, communal 
and resettlement farmers constituted 80.6 per cent of the economically active population. 
Moreover,  households headed  by  communal  and  resettlement  farmers  (old  resettlement 
and A1 farmers) suffered from the greatest poverty prevalence, 82.9 per cent, compared 
to other employment types. 
3 ZIMSTAT (2019) 
3 
With  regards  to  nutrition,  the  ZimVac  of  2018  and  2019,  and  the  MICS  2019  reports4, 
show that the most vulnerable households for malnutrition are: female and child-headed 
households,  households  headed  by  aged,  unemployed,  uneducated,  widowed  and 
chronically  ill  household  heads  and  households  located  in  the  rural  areas.  The  nutrition 
situation analysis shows that the worst-off provinces are Mashonaland Central and South, 
and Matabeleland North and Matabeleland South. When it comes to WASH, Matabeleland 
North is also facing the largest challenge as the province has the lowest percentage of the 
population  using  both  basic  drinking water  (51%)  and  sanitation  services (24%)  (MICS 
2019),  as  well  as  the  highest  proportion  of  the  population  practising  open  defecation. 
According to the Wageningen (2020), Smallholder farmers in Mashonaland West, Midlands 
and Mashonaland Central have the highest overall capacities to respond to climate change 
impacts (ranking 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, respectively. Masvingo, Matabeleland North and South 
have the lowest overall adaptive capacity5. In the targeted area, the highest population is 
in Mashonaland East, which also has the highest female population. 
Table 2: Population in the target districts 
Province/District 
Males 
Females 
Total 
Mashonaland Central 
Rushinga 
Mt Darwin 
Muzarabani 
Shamva 
Subtotal 
Mashonaland East 
Goromonzi 
Murehwa 
Mutoko 
Uzumba  Maramba 
Pfungwe (UMP) 
Subtotal 
Mashonaland West 
Chegutu 
Mhondoro Ngezi 
Zvimba 
Sanyati 
Subtotal 
Matebeleland North 
Hwange. 
Binga 
Lupane 
Nkayi 
Subtotal 
Midlands 
Kwekwe 
Chirumanzu 
Subtotal 
Grand total 
GOZ, Poverty Atlas 2015 
35,504 
103,203 
11,160 
81,380 
231,247 
111,320 
94,269 
70,970 
54,190 
38,536 
109,522 
61,831 
62,290 
272,179 
111,681 
105,330 
75,149 
58,423 
74,050 
212,725 
122,791 
123,650 
503,216 
224,987 
199,607 
144,127 
112,611 
330,749 
350,583 
681,332 
23,974 
54,284 
132,165 
57,326 
267,749 
30,687 
63,736 
47,808 
52,088 
194,319 
35,209 
50,058 
130,855 
55,571 
271,663 
31,983 
75,356 
52,352 
57,047 
216,738 
50,590 
10,434 
263,020 
112,897 
436,941 
139,092 
62,670 
100,181 
109,135 
411,078 
85,487 
38,327 
123,814 
1,147,878 
87,915 
42,024 
129,939 
1,241,102 
173,402 
80,351 
253,753 
2,388,980 
Poverty 
prevalence 
% 
81.9 
80.6 
88.4 
74.2 
62.4 
71.6 
81.3 
79.3 
57.6 
64.3 
79.8 
64.3 
68.5 
88.3 
92.9 
95.6 
61.8 
85.7 
Selection  of  districts.  Within  the  five  provinces,  SACP  will  target  key  urban-rural 
agricultural production and food trading corridors6. This narrows the SACP implementation 
area to the following 18 districts: Matebeleland North Province: Hwange; Binga, Lupane 
4 Zimbabwe 2019 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) Report 
5 IFAD – COSOP. 2020. Republic of Zimbabwe Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 2020 – 2025 
6 The corridors are (i) Beitbridge- Masvingo-Harare; (ii) Beitbridge-Bulawayo-Vic. Falls; (iii) Beitbridge-
Masvingo-Forbes; (iv) Harare-Chirundu; (v) Harare-Nyamapanda; and (vi) Plumtree-Byo-Harare-Forbes 
Border. 
4 
and Nkayi districts; Mashonaland West Province: Chegutu, Mhondoro-Ngezi, Zvimba, and 
Sanyati  districts;  Mashonaland Central Province:  Rushinga,  Mt Darwin,  Muzarabani,  and 
Shamva  districts;  Mashonaland  East  Province:  Goromonzi,  Murehwa,  Mutoko,  and  UMP 
districts;  and  Midlands  Province:  Kwekwe,  and  Chirumanzu  districts.  The  targeted  five 
provinces have a total 39 districts out of which the 18 districts were selected on the basis 
of the following criteria: 
-  Poverty prevalence 
-  Key commodities for smallholder commercialisation 
-  Proximity to major agricultural corridor 
-  Estimated agribusiness potential 
-  Agro-ecological potential 
-  Potential for inclusive VC development. 
-  Potential for private sector value chain development. 
The  districts  in  Midlands  province  overlap  with  IFAD-funded  SIRP  districts,  in  order  to 
promote lesson learning between the two interventions.  
Ward level selection criteria. District level wards were selected based on the presence 
of producer organizations, potential for market integration and high population of youths. 
Specific interventions for each district will be selected to align with government priorities 
and  for  complementarity  with  pipeline and  ongoing interventions  by the  government  or 
other development partners.  SACP will be implemented in 428 out of a total of 1,552 rural 
wards. The selected wards in are described below. 
1)  Mashonaland  Central:  four  out  the  eight  districts  are  selected:  Rushinga  (25 
wards), Mt Darwin (40 wards) Muzarabani (14/29 wards), and Shamva (29 wards). 
A  total  of  108  out  of  123  wards  will be  under  SACP.  Mt  Darwin has the  greatest 
population  with  the  highest  proportion  of  poor  households,  followed  by  Shamva 
district. 
2)  Mashonaland East: Four out of nine districts will be targeted under Mashonaland 
East  province  namely:  Goromonzi  (25 wards),  Murehwa  (28  wards),  Mutoko  (29 
wards)  and UMP (17 wards). All the 99 wards are targeted under SACP. Goromonzi 
has the greatest population and the highest proportion of poor people.   
3)  Mashonaland West: The four SACP districts out of 7 districts in Mashonaland West 
include:  Cheguti  (29  wards),  Mhondoro  Ngezi  (9/16  wards),  Zvimba  (35  wards) 
and Sanyati (18 wards). In total, 91 out of the 92 wards are targeted under SACP.  
Zvimba has the highest population with the corresponding high level of poor people.  
4)  Matebeleland North: Four out of 7 districts are targeted: Hwange (17/20), Binga 
(17/25 wards), Lupane (19/28 wards), and Nkayi (19/30 wards). A total of 72 out 
of 103 wards are targeted under SACP in the 4 districts. The greatest population is 
in Binga which has the highest proportion of poor people.   
5)  Midlands  Province:  Two  out  of  8  districts,  which  are  also  SIRP  districts,  are 
targeted. These are: Kwekwe (33 wards), Chirumanzu (25 wards). All the 58 wards 
are targeted.  Chirumanzu has the highest proportion of poor people. 
Categorisation of Target Area into Value Chain Clusters 
The mechanism for the identification and selection of the SACP-supported value chains will 
come  from  the  call  for  proposals  from the  APG,  microenterprises  and  Lead  Value  Chain 
Agribusinesses. The formation of a cluster will only be feasible after the identification of 
the VC through a call for proposals. The agricultural potential of target area was assessed 
through field level consultations with provincial and district level Agritex staff took place 
and  some  key  commodities  were  identified  which  includes:  traditional  grains  (sorghum 
and  millet),  sunflower,  pecan  nuts,  goats,  sheep,  beef,  horticulture,  macademia  nuts, 
maize, citrus, apiculture, poultry and piggery). Annex 10 gives a wide range of agricultural 
commodities  and  their  nutritional  ranking.    An  initial  eight  clusters  have  already  been 
identified for the target area (see Table 3). The clusters combine wards across the district 
boundaries.  In all the clusters, the smallholder farmers will engage in both commercial 
5 
crop  and  value  chains  for  their  food  and  nutrition  security.    The  selection  of  additional 
clusters  will  take  into  the  same  criteria  as  for  the  selection  of  the  pre-identified  eight 
clusters, which are as follows: 
-  Suitability of climate 
-  Agricultural policy priorities 
-  Historical production trends 
-  Enabling environment 
-  Number of farmers involved in the value chain 
-  Women or youth led value chains 
-  Nutrition Sensitive value chains 
-  Potential value of private sector. 
The  initially  identified  eight  clusters  are  summarised  below,  with  further  data  selection 
rationale and criteria in Table 3 below.  
  Cluster 1 covers wards in Rushinga, Mt Darwin, Muzarabani and Shamva and the 
selection of crops include sesame and traditional grains (sorghum, rapoko, finger 
millet) 
  Cluster 2 covers wards in Rushinga, Mt Darwin, Muzarabani and Shamva and the 
selection of value chains include sheep and goats. 
  Cluster  3  covers  selected  wards  in  Goromonzi,  Murehwa,  Mutoko,  UMP  and  the 
selected  value  chains  include  a  variety  of  horticulture  crops  including  leafy 
vegetables, tomatoes, peas etc. 
  Cluster  4  covers  selected  wards  in  Goromonzi,  Murehwa,  Mutoko,  UMP  and  the 
focus will be on small livestock such as broilers, layers and indigenous chicken 
  Cluster  5  covers  wards  in  Chegutu,  Mhondoro  Ngezi,  Zvimba,  Sanyati  and 
Chrumanzu and the focus will be on maize and citrus  
  Cluster  6  covers  wards  in  Chegutu,  Mhondoro  Ngezi,  Zvimba,  Sanyati  and 
Chirumanzu and the focus will be on poultry and piggery 
  Cluster 7 covers wards in Hwange, Binga, Lupane, Nkayi and Kwekwe districts and 
the value chains selected include traditional grains (sorghum, pearl millet and finger 
millet) 
  Cluster 8 covers wards in Hwange, Binga, Lupane, Nkayi and Kwekwe districts and 
the focus is on beef and goats value chains. 
C.  Targeting and Mainstreaming Strategies 
Project  target  group.  SACP  will  implement  an  inclusive  targeting  strategy  to 
ensure project benefits to a large number of poor smallholder farmers. The main 
benefit flow will be derived through the mobilisation of 800 Agricultural Production 
Groups  (APGs)  from  the  targeted  communities.  Around  24,000  low-income 
smallholder  households  will  be  members  of  these  APGs  and  receive  capacity 
building and financial services from the project to further develop their livelihoods. 
An additional 24,000 labourers will benefit from employment opportunities created 
by  APG  investments.  The  SACP  support  to  MSMEs  and  Lead  Companies  is 
estimated  will  directly  impact  around  15,240  additional  (non-APG  members) 
smallholder  households,  and  13,000  of  the  APG  members,  who  will  be  APG 
members,  will  benefit  from  the  generated  supply  chain  and  employment  and 
opportunities,  through  VC  development  by  MSMEs  and  LVCEs.  Furthermore, 
around 30,000 smallholder households will benefit  from irrigation, water supply 
and  sanitation  infrastructure,  of  which  50  per  cent  will  account  for  direct 
6 
beneficiaries  (15,000  smallholder  households).The  total  SACP  VC  support  is 
projected to cover approximately 78,240 beneficiary households corresponding to 
391,200 household members -  one  beneficiary represents five persons  which is 
the average size of the household in Zimbabwe. Furthermore, SACP indirect target 
group  is  estimated  to  be  45,000  households,  which  includes  in  particular  the 
villagers who live in direct vicinity of the supported agribusinesses and rural road 
construction sites but are not immediately part of the SACP value chain production 
systems.  The  SACP’s  primary  target  group  in  all  project  activities,  including 
matching grants to APGs, will include a minimum of 50 per cent women and 30 
per  cent  youth  (aged  15  to  35  years).  Table  3  provides  details  on  poverty 
categorisation of rural households in Zimbabwe and on the projected number of 
SACP beneficiaries in each household category. In Table 4, the numbers of SACP-
supported  smallholder  farming  households  in  the  target  area  as  well  as  the 
projected number of APGs in each target district. 
7 
Table 3: Poverty Categorisation of directly targeted SACP beneficiaries  
Category 
A 
B1 
B2 
C 
Household 
type 
Chronically  poor 
and unable 
Chronically  food 
and 
insecure 
dependent 
on 
safety 
social 
nets  (e.g.  cash 
transfers) 
Chronically  poor 
but able 
Often chronically 
food 
insecure 
but  capable  of 
becoming 
transitory 
secure 
food 
Characteristics 
SACP interventions   
  Poor households – little or no land  
  No economically actively people 
child 
  Typically, 
or 
elderly-headed 
households  
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions e.g. 
     (nutrition gardens and small ruminants) 
  Community investments 
  Collaborate  with  humanitarian  organisations  (e.g. 
No of 
beneficiaries  
10,940  
(5,470 women) 
  Below the food poverty live 
  Vulnerable  to  nutrition  and  climate 
change impact 
WFP) 
  GALS 
  Infrastructure 
  Poor  households  with  access  to  land  or 
livestock and labour, and often involved 
in farming or livestock rearing and wage 
labour. 
  Typically 1 economically active person 
  Lack  cash  and  resources  to  purchase 
  Infrastructure 
  Empowerment  &capacity  development  &  skills  e.g. 
Training  and  capacity  building  CSA  &agribusiness, 
business skills, diversification of production, access 
to markets, nutrition 
  support to value chains where women are dominant 
inputs and commodities. 
e.g. horticulture 
16,400  
(8,200 women) 
  Below the total consumption poverty line 
Transiently poor 
Transitory 
food 
insecure 
  Emerging smallholder farmers with land 
and  labour  but  cash  constrained  and 
vulnerable to shocks. 
  2-3 economically active people 
  Households can increase productivity to 
achieve  food  and  income  security  and 
become  engines  of  rural  economic 
growth. 
Self-sufficient 
Often 
food 
secure,  with  a 
risk of transitory 
food insecurity 
  Farmers  with  land  and  labour  and  the 
potential  to  enter  into  private  sector 
market 
linkage  arrangements  and 
produce a saleable surplus. 
  Typically 3-4 economically active people 
to  withstand  shocks  without 
  Able 
external assistance. 
8 
  GALS training & Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
  Promote farmer to framer learning in extension 
  Matching grants for APGs 
  Marketing and technical skills 
  Business training 
  Marketing access (out-grower, contract framing) 
  Equipment 
  Nutrition 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
  Contract framing 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  GALS Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
  Business expansion support 
  New technologies to increase production 
  Value addition 
  Innovation to increase production and marketing of 
commodities 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
40,000  
(20,000) women) 
10,900  
(5,450 women) 
Category 
Household 
type 
Women 
Youth 
Total  
No of 
beneficiaries  
39,120  
(included  in  A,  B1, 
B2, C and youth) 
23,472 
78,240 
Characteristics 
SACP interventions   
 
 
 
  Economic and social empowerment 
 
Improved  decision  making  at  HH  and  community 
level 
Improved participation in APG, leadership skills 
reduced workload, improved access to finance 
Improved  well-being  and  nutrition,  resilience  to 
shocks 
improved adoption of CSA 
Improved entrepreneurial skills  
 
 
  Access to matching grants 
  Improved BDS skills 
 
 
  Improved digitalization and adoption of technologies 
improved Agribusiness 
improved Leadership skills 
  Limited decision making  
 
limited  access  to  means  of  production 
(land, inputs, capital, technology, seeds 
etc.)  
  Heavy workload and time poverty 
 
limited  access  to  finance,  vulnerable  to 
nutrition and climate change impact 
  Lack of access to means of production 
  High unemployment 
9 
Table 4: Total population of smallholders in targeted geographic areas by land use and APGs per target district  
Communal 
farmers  
Old 
Resettlement 
farmers 
A1 farmers  
Total  
Targeted 
beneficiaries 
per province 
Agricultural 
Producer 
Groups (APGs) 
APGs per 
targeted 
district 
Matebeleland 
North 
66,303  
(24,683 women) 
183  
(91 women) 
1,607  
(409 women) 
68,093 
(25,183 women)  
17,600 
Mashonaland 
East 
 139,570  
(60,356 women) 
69  
(19 women) 
18,049  
(4,287 women) 
157,688 
(64,662 women) 
17,600 
Mashonaland 
West 
70,797  
(25,339 women) 
7,871  
(4,162 women) 
27,063  
(4,300 women) 
105,731 
(33,801 women) 
17,600 
Mashonaland 
Central 
 104,830  
(27,563 women) 
3,226  
(916 women) 
2,147 
(366 women) 
110,203 
(28,845 women) 
17,600 
Midlands 
99,439  
(25,330 women) 
7,207  
(3,098 women) 
13,538  
(4,112 women) 
120,184 
(32,540 women) 
7,840 
180 
180 
180 
180 
80 
Hwange (45), 
Binga(45) 
Lupape(45)  
Nkayi (45) 
Goromonzi(45) 
Murehwa(45)  
Mutoko(45)  
UMP (45) 
Chegutu (45) Mhondoro 
Ngezi (45)  
Zvimba (45)  
Sanyati (45)      
Rushinga (45)  
Mt Darwin(45) 
Muzarabani (45) 
Shamva (45) 
Kwekwe (40)  
Chirumanzu (40)  
       Source: Adapted from Agritex, MLAWRR 
10 
SACP SOCIAL AND POVERTY TARGETING STRATEGIES 
Appointment  of  the  Social  Inclusion  and  Targeting  Officer.  SACP  will  appoint  a 
Social  Inclusion  and  Targeting  Officer  at  national  JMU  and  one in  each  of  the provincial 
level  PPIU  (see  TORs  in  this  PIM).  They  will  be  responsible  for  the  coordination  and 
implementation of the targeting and social inclusion strategy. 
Partners  that  will  implement  the  targeting  strategy.  SACP  will  hire  a  Social 
Mobilisation Specialist (see TORs in this PIM), to work with the PPIU Targeting and Social 
Inclusion  Officer  and  Agritex  extension  officers  to  implement  the  targeting  strategy.  
Targeting  will  also  be  validated  through  the  local  NGOs,  community  workers  from  the 
Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  Community  and  Small  and  Medium  Scale  Enterprises 
Development,  Community  workers  from  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Child  Welfare, 
Department  of  Social  Welfare,  WFP,  District  officials  under  the  Ministry  of  Local 
Government, Councillors, Religious Leaders, Traditional Leaders,  and School authorities.  
Targeting process. The project targeting approaches includes (i) community targeting 
and (ii) a mixture of self-targeting and menu-based measures. Community based targeting  
allows the communities to select beneficiary group using their own definition of poverty 
and a mixture of self-targeting and menu-based measures, where the community groups 
are informed at a public meeting about SACP objectives, eligibility conditions, application 
process and awarding process.  
Self-targeting. APGs, SMSEs will apply and respond to a call for Expression of Interest 
(EOI)  by  SACP.  The  proposals  are  assessed  and  selected  using  predetermined  criteria. 
Training in financial literacy and business planning, financial literacy, sustainable APG, and 
Business Plan Development Support will be provided. Value chains, which will be selected 
for SACP support, should be suitable for women, youth and other vulnerable groups for 
the  promotion  of  food  and  nutrition  security  needs,  promotion  of  value  addition.  In 
addition, there will be need to select technologies that address women’s labour constraints. 
The promotion of group approaches limits the elite capture since the wealthier households 
are not interested in group activities.  
Direct Targeting. SACP applies a quota system: 50 percent for women and 30 percent 
for youth for both participation in project activities and the representation and leadership 
in  APGs  management  committees.  The  technical  assistance  will  be  targeted  at 
strengthening the capacity of women and youth. Approaches such as participatory wealth 
ranking  by  the  community  themselves,  could  be used in  order  to  rank  the  communities 
into different wealth groups. In approving application forms from a group, SACP will take 
into consideration the number of female-headed households and youths to benefit. 
The following targeting approach will be applied: 
1. A call for proposal for the lead VC enterprises (LVCE) will be made. The expression of 
interest for this call will inform SACP on the key VC to focus on with the APGs. The LVCE 
will indicate the VC and the number of smallholder farmers to be involved.  
2.  The  local  Agritex  extension  officer  will  notify  the  communities  about  the  date  of  the 
SACP  meeting  for  APGs  and  microenterprises  (MEs).  This  will  be  done  through  village 
leadership and the schools, and the notice for the public meeting will be posted at shopping 
centres, public notice boards, and dip tanks. Agritex will also inform the local CBO, other 
NGOs active in the area, as well as government organisations working at community level. 
Meetings  should  be  held  at  convenient  times  and  venues  to  allow  the  participation  of 
women.  
3. The project will hold consultation meeting in the wards for identified clusters and the 
meetings will involve men, women and youth in the identified cluster areas.  The purpose 
of the meeting will be to inform the community about SACP and how to apply to take part 
in  SACP  activities.  Through  these  community  consultations,  SACP  requests  for  APG  and 
Microenterprise EOIs from the communities, whereby the smallholder groups: (i) propose 
investments  in  APG/ME  agriculture  operations,  and  (ii)  explain  potential  linkages  to 
11 
market-oriented value chains. The APG members will be small-scale agriculture producers, 
who  fulfil  the  SACP  targeting  criteria.  The  micro-entrepreneurs  will  be  individual 
community  members  with  the  capacity  to  manage  small  business,  upgrading  the  value 
chains at local level. The APGs and the MEs will be invited to submit an EOI.  
4. The APGs and the MSMEs submit their EOI at the provincial PIU. The EOI should show 
that the APG membership is made up of the project target group composed of the poor 
and meeting the set quota for women and youth. The project will supply forms that will be 
filled  in  by  each  of  the  members  of  the  APG.  The  forms  contain  basic  socio-economic 
information to be able to determine the wealth ranking of the group members according 
to the social categorisation (category A, B1 B2 and C).    
5. The EOI will be screened by the Provincial Technical Committee and the selected long 
list of EOI/APG and microenterprises will be subjected to community validation process. 
The majority of the membership will be in category B1 and B2 for APGs and C will also 
qualify for MEs.  
Category  A  farmers  will  benefit  from  nutrition  sensitive  interventions  as  well  as 
infrastructure under Component 2. In order to qualify, 70 per cent of the group members 
should fall into category B1 and B2 and few in C. After community validation, the APGs 
and microenterprises are shortlisted. The eligibility criteria for the group includes: 
-  Groups (max 30 people) with youth (30 per cent aged 18 to 35 years) and women 
in the majority 
-  Potential inclusion of vulnerable groups e.g. people living with disabilities 
-  Members meeting the poverty group criteria for B1 and B2 poverty categories 
-  Existing groups with track record of investing in their proposed project  
-  Possession of a bank account and financial statement/records 
-  Good record keeping and good governance structures 
-  Have women representation in management and leadership roles  
-  Willingness and ability to contribute 15 per cent to matching grants  
-  Members should already have experience in the chosen value chain 
-  Measures to prevent elite capture. 
Micro-enterprises. SACP will target 200 micro-enterprises. The Project supports MSMEs 
that  (i)  benefit  the  poor,  (ii)  women  and  youth  led  micro-enterprises,  and  (iii) 
microenterprises  that  provide  labour  saving  technologies  to  alleviate  work  burden  for 
women  along  the  value  chain,  e.g.  threshers,  solar  dying  units  among  others.  Eligible 
projects for MSME investments include: 
-  Equipment to improve food safety 
-  Equipment to improve animal welfare 
-  Climate resilient technologies 
-  Tractors for tillage 
-  Milling machines 
-  Tomato puree, juicing machines, cold chains etc. 
-  Cold chains 
-  Proof of tangible benefit to the smallholder farmers 
-  Ability to raise the 30 per cent matching grant contribution. 
The shortlisted APGs and microenterprises will receive technical assistance to develop a 
business  proposal  for  submission  to  the  Provincial  Technical  Committee.  The  PIU, 
community  leaders,  local  CBOs,  district  officials,  Agritex  officers  and  Government 
community  workers  will  visit  and  interview  the  shortlisted  APGs  for  validation.  A  final 
decision on the selected APGs will be carried out based on financial, economic, technical, 
environmental  feasibility.  The  selected  APGs  will  be  notified,  and  funds  released  for 
implementation.  
The  consultative  and  validation  process  ensures  that  the  process  is  carried  out  in  a 
transparent and that the target group is reached to avoid elite capture. The risk that the 
12 
marginalized groups or households within a community can be excluded will be mitigated 
through ensuring that those facilitating the exercise have a thorough understanding of the 
communities and are respected by them.   
Complaints and grievances  of  local  communities  and  other local  stakeholders  will  be 
reported to the local chief and the Agritex extension staff. The communities will also have 
access contact numbers to call the SACP offices. The numbers will be given out at every 
meeting. The project will emphasise on the need for transparency and its anti-corruption 
plan  which  is  in  line  with  IFAD’s  anticorruption  policy7.  The  community  will  report  any 
corruption to the Project or the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Lands Agriculture 
and Rural Resettlement. For each of the community consultation, the participants will fill 
in registration form indicating their ID, full name, gender and age. A record of the minutes 
of the meeting will be made. The community register will also be kept at the local level by 
the Agritex extension officers.  
Empowerment  and  capacity  building  measures.  SACP  will  implement  a  range  of 
capacity building interventions for APGs and SMSEs as well as support institutions working 
with these groups. SACP will provide training in BDS and financial literacy in addition to 
the  development  of  a  business  proposal.  A  community-wide  GALS  training  will  be 
conducted  in  order  to  order  to  better  address  the  underlying  root  causes  to  inequality 
between men and women specific constraints. In addition, IFAD’s empowerment indicator 
using  a  project  level  WEAI  (pro-WEAI)  will  be  conducted  in  order  to  measure 
empowerment, agency and inclusion of women in the agricultural sector. Pro-WEAI seeks 
to identify development obstacles and may be used to track gender equality in relation to 
three domains of empowerment: intrinsic agency (power to), instrumental agency (power 
within) and collective agency (power with) 
Enabling measures. SACP will provide training to the target group and support to Agritex 
which  will  be  working  with  farmers.  SACP  will  also  provide  matching  grants  for  APGS, 
microenterprises  and  the  Lead  Value  chain  enterprises. Technical  assistance is provided 
for the development of business proposals. 
Operational measures. A Targeting and Social Inclusion Expert will be recruited as part 
of  the  PMU  as  well  as  in  each  of  the  four  PPIUs.  The  Expert  will  be  responsible  to  the 
supervision and implementation of the poverty, gender and targeting strategy, and for the 
development of capacity building tools for the implementation of activities under the two 
components and for the provision of leadership, supervision and support capacity building 
and mentoring activities for gender mainstreaming. 
7 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40189363/fraudpolicy_eb86_e.pdf/e2ae80aa-e423-4d7c-a582-
c01c1917b427 
13 
Table 5: Categorization of rural households in Zimbabwe  
Category 
Household 
type 
Characteristics 
Type of support 
A 
B1 
Chronically 
poor 
unable 
and 
Chronically  food 
and 
insecure 
dependent 
on 
safety 
social 
nets  (e.g.  cash 
transfers) 
Chronically 
poor but able 
Often chronicall
y  food  insecure 
but  capable  of 
becoming 
transitory 
secure 
food 
· Poor  households  –  little  or  no 
land  
· No economically actively people 
· Typically,  child  or  elderly, 
female,  widowed,  chronically  ill-
headed households  
· Below the food poverty live 
· Poor households with access to 
land or livestock and labour, and 
often  involved  in  farming  or 
livestock 
rearing  and  wage 
labour. 
· Typically  1  economically  active 
person 
· Lack  cash  and  resources  to 
and 
purchase 
commodities. 
inputs 
· Below  the  total  consumption 
poverty line 
(nutrition gardens and small ruminants) 
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions e.g. 
 
  Community investments 
  Collaborate with humanitarian organisations (e,g WFP) 
  GALS and nutrition sensitive interventions 
 
Infrastructure 
Infrastructure 
 
  Empowerment  &capacity  development  &  skills  e.g 
Training  and  capacity  building  CSA  &agribusiness, 
business  skills,  diversification  of  production,  access  to 
markets, nutrition 
support  to  value  chains  where  women  are  dominant  e.g. 
horticulture 
 
  GALS training & Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
 
  Matching grants for APGs 
Promote farmer to framer learning in extension 
14 
No of rural 
households in 
Zimbabwe 
[No. of persons 
indicated in 
brackets] 
107,500 
322,000 
B2 
Transiently 
poor 
Transitory 
insecure 
food 
· Emerging  smallholder  farmers 
with  land  and  labour  but  cash 
constrained  and  vulnerable  to 
shocks. 
· 2-3 economically active people 
can 
· Households 
increase 
productivity to achieve food and 
income  security  and  become 
economic 
engines  of 
growth. 
rural 
890,000 
  Marketing and technical skills 
  Business training 
  Marketing access (out-grower, contract framing) 
  Equipment 
  Nutrition 
  Matching grants for APGs and microenteprises 
  Contract framing 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  GALS Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
C 
Self-sufficient 
Often 
food 
secure,  with  a 
risk of transitory 
food insecurity 
· Farmers  with  land  and  labour 
and  the  potential  to  enter  into 
private  sector market 
linkage 
arrangements  and  produce  a 
saleable surplus. 
· Typically,  3-4  economically 
active people 
  Business expansion support 
  New technologies to increase production 
  Value addition 
 
Innovation  to  increase  production  and  marketing  of 
commodities 
  Matching grants for APGs and micro-enterprises 
  Out-grower linkages to lucrative value- chains 
  Nutrition-sensitive Interventions 
215,000 
· Able 
without external assistance. 
to  withstand 
shocks 
TOTAL 
1,534,500 
Source: Amended after Table A in AusAID (2011) AusAID Food Security Delivery Strategy for Zimbabwe, 2912-16. Canberra and Harare; in DFID/FAO Livelihoods and 
Food Security Programme (2014 -2018).  
15 
The  target  group  poverty  profiles  include:  Category  A  –  chronically  poor  and  unable 
(10,940  beneficiary  households),  B1  –  chronically  poor  but  able  (16,400  beneficiary 
households), B2 - transiently poor (40,000 beneficiary households) and C – self-sufficiency 
(10,900  beneficiary  households).  The  calculation  on  the  distribution  of  the  beneficiary 
households  based  on  the  country  level  distribution  of  the  poverty  groups  in  shown  in 
Table 6.  
Table 6: Distribution of SACP beneficiaries along poverty categories 
Poverty 
Category 
A 
B1 
B2 
C 
Women 
Men 
Youth 
Total 
(of which 50% 
young women) 
5,470 
5,470 
8,200 
8,200 
20,000 
20,000 
5,450 
5,450 
3,282 
4,920 
12,000 
3,270 
10,940 
16,400 
40,000 
10,900 
Total 
39,120  39,120 
23,472 
78,240 
The total outreach will be 78,240 beneficiary households, which is equivalent to 391,200 
household  members,  since  it  is  assumed  that  one  beneficiary  represents  five  persons, 
which is the average size of the household in Zimbabwe.  
Women:  Interventions  on  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment  will  focus  on 
strengthening  women’s  economic  empowerment,  decision  making  and  achieving  workload 
balance.  At  the  same  time,  the  project  will  strengthen  women’s  voices  in  determining 
household priorities, spending patterns, and in addressing their own well-being. Gender 
roles  and  relations  are  tackled  involving  men  and  women.  In  line  with  IFAD’s  focus  on 
promoting transformation of gender relations, the project will  carry out community Gender 
Action  Learning  Systems  (GALS)  to  address  underlying  cultural  and  traditional  norms, 
attitudes, behavioural systems, as well as gender and age stereotypes. Women will consist 
of  50  percent  of  beneficiary,  which  is  equivalent  to  39,120  beneficiaries.  IFAD’s  
empowerment  indicator  based  on  project-level  Women’s  Empowerment  in  Agriculture 
Index  (pro-WEAI)8  will  be  used  to  identify  constraints  and  opportunities  for  women  with 
regards to production, access to resources, income, leadership and time poverty. Based 
on the outcome, SACP will design appropriate strategies to address the constraints faced 
by women and men. Women will benefit from matching grants under APGs, MSMEs and Lead 
Value  Chain  Enterprises.  Women  will  be  empowered  through  training  in  business 
development, climate smart agriculture, financial literacy training among others.   
Youth: have limited  productive  resources,  skills  and  capital.  SACP  will target the youth 
directly by identifying skilled and unskilled youth interested or already involved in livestock 
or irrigated crop production or post-production activities such as processing, marketing, 
artisanry or casual labour. The APGs will allocate 30 per cent of membership to interested 
youth and will serve as a model for youth mentorship, upskilling and transfer or indigenous 
knowledge.  With  a  target  of  78,240  beneficiaries,  SACP  will  provide  opportunities  for 
23,472 young women and men between the ages of 15 and 35. Value chain analysis will 
be done to identify opportunities for youths disaggregated by age and gender to ensure 
that appropriate opportunities are availed to young men and women of all the age groups 
8 IFAD’s empowerment indicator includes 10 of the 12 dimensions for the pro WEAI dimensions, following those  IFAD 
can  influence  through  its  supported  activities.  The  pro-WEAI  dimensions  are  mapped  with  three  domains  of 
empowerment:  intrinsic  agency  (power  to    -  autonomy  in  income,  self-efficacy  and  attitudes  about  intimate  partner 
violence); instrumental agency )power within – input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, access  
to decisions  on financial services, control and use of income and work balance),  and collective agency (power with – 
group membership, and membership in influential groups) 
16 
(15-24 and 25-35). In addition, youth that are interested in being part of the APGs will 
benefit from technical assistance on business plan development, climate-smart agriculture 
and financial literacy and planning, and technical training related to the specific operations 
of the enterprise.  
Secondary target group. These are critical players in the overall functioning of targeted 
value  chains.  They  will  be  supported  through  capacity  building  and  training.  The 
stakeholders identified include: the small to medium enterprise agro-dealers, rural buyers, 
processors,  and  emergent  farmers  providing  support  services  to  smallholders.  Whilst  a 
significant part of this target group is likely to be non-poor, these services at all levels of 
the value chain are essential for inclusive value chain growth. Public extension officers will 
also be targeted through training and capacity building to sensitise them on gender, youth 
and  nutrition-sensitive  interventions.  Lead  Value  Chain  Agribusinesses  (LE).  This 
category consists of larger businesses and employ staff and workers inside and often also 
outside  the  targeted  provinces/districts.  The  group  can  often  access  credit  from  formal 
financial  institutions  for  funding  SMSEs  operations  as  well  as  buying  new  equipment  to 
replace obsolete machinery. The SACP selection criteria for LEs is based on the tangible 
benefits to the smallholder farmers through, for instance, VC training with market access, 
contract  farming,  employment  creation  for  the  smallholder  farmers,  skills  development 
and fostering enabling environment, and access to infrastructure and other services.  
Indirect target group, in addition to the direct target group, is estimated to be 45,000 
households,  which  includes  in  particular  the  villagers  who  live  in  direct  vicinity  of  the 
supported agribusinesses and rural road construction sites, but are not immediately part 
of the SACP value chain production systems. They will benefit from improved road access 
to  district  centres,  marketplaces,  health  and  education,  as  well  as  long  term  indirect 
benefits of economic development in the targeted villages including indirect job creation 
in services and trade sector. 
Mitigating the risk of elite capture. SACP will mitigate the risk of elite capture in the 
following  ways:  (i)  Making  information  on  beneficiary  selection  and  financing  widely 
available; (ii) Setting up a complaints mechanism and creating a provincial mechanism for 
the resolution of grievances; (iii) Community self-targeting for APGs group membership, 
following  SACP  eligibility  criteria;  (iv)  Adoption  of  government  poverty  classification  for 
target  households;  (v)  verification  by  the  independent  BDS  service  unit  and  project 
monitoring system. This triangulated mechanism will be developed and supported by an 
independent Community Mobilization Specialist. Furthermore, a SACP Anti-Corruption Plan 
will be developed at the project start-up, which will include adequate grievance and redress 
mechanism. 
SACP GENDER STRATEGY 
SACP  will  target  39,120  women  household  members.  SACP  recognizes  that  women  are 
key  to  agricultural  transformation,  but various  obstacles  and  economic  constraints limit 
their  contribution  to  their  households  and  communities.  Women  lack  economic 
empowerment  and  decision-making  power  and  are  faced  with  heavy  workloads.  In 
addition,  they  lack  business  skills  and  have  limited  access  to  markets,  and  face  time 
constraints. Women also have weak representation in decision-making bodies dealing with 
productive  and  economic  issues  due  to  their  traditional  and  social  role.  Due  to  their 
domestic  and  reproductive  roles  and  gender  relations,  women  spend  more  time  doing 
agriculture and domestic work. Female-headed households are amongst the poorest and 
their  economic  progression  is  hindered  by  a  combination  of  social  and  structural 
constraints. Their access to land, knowledge, inputs, finance, high-value agriculture value 
chains is heavily curtailed by traditional gender roles that undermine their participation. A 
50 per cent selection quota will be implemented to prioritize their participation whenever 
possible  and  SACP  implementation  and  management  arrangements  will  be  gender 
sensitive.  
17 
Interventions on gender equality and women’s empowerment will focus on (i) promoting 
economic  empowerment  to  enable  men  and  women  to  have  equal  opportunity  to 
participate in and benefit from profitable activities; (ii) enabling women and men to have 
equal voice and influence in rural institutions and organisations; and (iii) achieve a more 
equitable  balance  in  workload  and  a  sharing  of  economic  and  social  benefits  between 
women and men. SACP will focus on strengthening women’s economic opportunities and 
decision  making.  At  the  same  time,  the  project  will  strengthen  women’s  voices  in 
determining  household  priorities,  spending  patterns,  and  in  addressing  their  own  well-
being. Gender roles and relations are tackled involving men and women  
In line with IFAD’s focus on promoting transformation of gender relations, the project will 
focus  on  addressing  the  root  causes  of  gender  inequalities  through  Household 
methodologies  such  as  Gender  Action  Learning  Systems  (GALS)  to  address  underlying 
cultural and traditional norms, attitudes, behavioural systems, as well as gender and age 
stereotypes. Potential entry points to empower women include:  
Given the above constraints, SACP will implement the following pathways for empowering 
women and promoting gender transformation. These are:  
 
IFAD’s  empowerment  indicator  using  project-level  Women  Agricultural  economic 
Index  (WEAI)  survey.  This  will  be  carried  out  in  order  to  identify  obstacles  to 
women’s empowerment, agency and women’s inclusion in the agricultural sector. 
Gender  analysis  is  necessary  in  transforming  gender  relations  and  social 
inequalities. 
  Development of a SACP Gender Strategy. The PMU Targeting and Social Inclusion 
Specialist shall develop and implement a gender strategy for the project to ensure 
that  gender  concerns  are  mainstreamed  in  all  project  activities  throughout  the 
implementation  period, in  order  to  offer  equal  opportunities under the  project  to 
men, women, women-headed households, youth and other disadvantaged groups. 
Technical Assistance will be hired for one month to assist with the development of 
the strategy. 
  The development of GALs Training Manual will be designed jointly in the first year 
of  the  project  by  the  PMU Targeting  and  Social  Inclusion  Specialist (see  TOR) in 
collaboration  with  gender  focal  persons  in  relevant  government  institutions.  The 
manual is already developed by SIRP.  
  Community  wide  gender  sensitisation.  The  NPMU  Targeting  and  Social  Inclusion 
Specialist  and  Agritex  will  use  the  GALS’  manual  to  carry  out  community  wide 
Gender Sensitization. Encouraging active participation and targeting women in rural 
communities may be sensitive. A way to overcome this is to communicate clearly 
the  expected  benefits  for  the  broader  community  and  its  local  economic 
development. 
  Establishment of quotas to reach women. SACP quota for women could amount to 
50 per cent of the targeted beneficiaries and 30 per cent for the youth. In addition, 
gender  targeting  will  currently focus  on  households instead  of  targeting  only  the 
head of the households, which implies that women are automatically left out.  
  Work with groups versus individuals. Experiences from other projects recommend 
working with formal or informal women’s groups rather than on an individual basis. 
Strengthening  capacities  of  organised  female  groups  have  proven  to  be  less 
sensitive. 
  Stakeholder review meetings to share lessons learnt and best practices in relation 
to mainstreaming youth and gender in micro and small enterprises. 
  Support policy Dialogue on the promotion of women land rights. 
  Promote women leadership across value chain activities. Identify successful women 
within different parts of the value chain and bring them together in for example a 
18 
leadership platform. They can become a source of inspiration for other women and 
in addition they can foster collaboration among value chain actors. A recurrent issue 
raised in  the interviews  was  the need  to improving linkages  within  value  chains: 
farmers to the processors, to retailers, to consumers, etc.  
 
Invest in value addition for women: there are untapped opportunities in capacity 
building in  value  addition. For  example,  currently  during  the  Covid 19 lockdown, 
many communities grow perishable products such as tomatoes which are thrown 
away. If they would have had training in processing, they would have been able to 
still earn money from these crops.   
  Climate smart technologies that reduce labour burden: in order to engage women 
and get them interested in training and adoption of climate smart technologies, it 
is recommended to select those technology that reduces time and labour burdens 
for women.  
  Promote safe working environment. Rural women are often involved in production 
as some other activities along the value chain might not be safe. Safety issues are 
related to female unfriendly facilities, harassment on markets, unfair prices, unsafe 
transportation,  and  travelling  by  night.  If  women  are  to  be  encouraged  to  work 
along the entire value chain, these issues need to be tackled.  
 
Include  men  in  women’s  empowerment  activities.  A  common  phrase  is  that  we 
need  both  women  and  men  to  address  gender  inequality.  Therefore,  an  overall 
recommendation would be to critically analyse for which activities it is effective (or 
necessary) to invite and include both men and women.  
Gender mainstreaming in the project components 
Under Component 1, the participation of women in mobilisation meetings will be promoted 
through ensuring that the notification for the meetings reaches the women on time. The 
meetings  should  be  held  at  venues  and  times  when  the  women  are  free  to  attend.  The 
project  will  deliberately  include  a  selection  of  women  value  chains.  This  will  promote 
acceptability, and at the same time the project will upgrade these value chains in order to 
increase production and income for the women. Where the male-dominated value chains 
are  adopted,  women  will  benefit  from  paid  employment.  For  the  technical  training,  the 
project will ensure that the material is simplified to include local language, role plays and 
practical  examples.  Technical  training  such  as  business  training  and  financial  services 
training should also be run in conjunction with non-technical training such as confidence 
building, prevention of gender-based violence, and reproductive health rights in order to 
attract the participation of women.  
The  provision  of  childcare  facilities  would  also  enable  women  to  attend  the  training.  In 
terms  of  CSA  technologies,  care  should  be  taken  not  to  introduce  technologies  that 
increase the workload for women. However, through GALS, SACP will promote equitable 
work  balance  between  men  and  women.  The  use  of  female  extension  workers  will  also 
promote the participation of women. The technical committee for the selection of eligible 
proposals  will  be  composed  of  a  gender  balanced  membership.  The  project  adopts 
participatory approaches to ensure the participation of men, women and youth.  Women 
will receive mentoring in leadership and will be encouraged to take up leadership roles in 
management  committees  for  APGs.  The  matching  grants  provides  an  opportunity  for 
economic empowerment for the women and women will benefit from matching grants for 
APGs (50%); micro-enterprises (25%) and lead VC enterprises (25%). The provision of 
WASH will address the time poverty for women who have to walk long distances to fetch 
water.  
The M&E system will ensure gender and sex disaggregated data to track gender equality 
and women’s empowerment, agency and women’s involvement in agriculture.  
19 
Community  wide  gender  sensitisation  using  Gender  Action  Learning  System 
(GALS) approach will be adopted for achieving gender transformation. It is a community-
led empowerment methodology that can be complementary to a food system or a value 
chain development approach. Poor women and men are put in the centre of GALS and are 
perceived as drivers and shapers of their own development rather than victims. Through 
participatory processes and simple mapping and diagram tools, men and women jointly 
identify  and  address  obstacles  in  their  environment.  This  enforces  them  to  have  more 
control  over  their  personal,  household,  community  and  organisational  development  to 
improve income, food and nutrition security in a gender-equitable way. Ultimately, GALS 
can promote collaboration between vulnerable and powerful value chain actors.9 
Draft targeting activities during the start-up phase include: 
-  The strategy and implementation plan for targeting poverty groups will be reviewed 
and validated with PMU staff during the start-up workshop.  
-  Potential  participants  from  poverty  groups  will  be  pre-identified  and  reached 
through information and social mobilization campaigns using local languages, radio 
stations, organization of meetings at times of day at which women will be able to 
attend.  
-  Communication  on  radio,  television,  press  by  the  Permanent  Secretary  to 
information  the  public  about  the  project  -are  of  coverage,  the  objectives,  target 
group and expected results.  
-  The  community  mobilisers  together  with  Agritex  and  social  inclusion  officers  will 
hold cluster meetings to inform the APGs about the project  
-  The  start-up  phase  will  be  used  to  identify  the  first  APGs,  microenterprises,  and 
lead  VC  players.  Women  and  youth  will  be  informed  about  the  project  and 
encouraged to participate 
-  The project will design forms needed for beneficiary registration 
-  The team will make a recognisance of the poverty groups to establish if they meet 
the target group criteria.  
-  Design  the  Calls  for  Expression  of  Interest  for  APGs,  microenterprises  and  lead 
value chain enterprises.  
Investment phase 
-  SACP  will  work  in  partnership  with  locally  based  World  Food  Programme  (WFP) 
teams in order to draw lessons and best practices on the way in which they conduct 
their targeting. WFP is present in all districts where there are SACP targeted food 
insecure households. This partnership will contribute in building the capacity of the 
SACP team in poverty targeting. Other partnerships will include: Agritex, Ministry 
of Women Affairs, Community, Small Medium Scale Enterprise, NGOs, CBOs who 
have  the  capacity  to  reach  the  poor,  UNCT,  agribusinesses  and  farmer 
organisations.   
- 
For  the  targeted  poorest  households,  SACP  interventions  will  complement  with 
WFP,  UNICEF  and  other  partners  providing  social  protection  for  this  particular 
group.  
-  The  poorest  will  benefit  from  capacity  building  interventions,  nutrition  training, 
Gender  Action  Learning  System  and  infrastructure.  They  will  also  benefit  from 
increased employment from the main project activities.  
9 Wageningen (2020) 
20 
-  A policy dialogue workshop will be organised to share the experience and lessons 
learned from IFAD to inform quick wins in targeting, scaling up and policy dialogue.  
-  A participatory M&E will be used, including project staff, APGs members, women 
and youth, both recipients and participants. Indicators for quality of  participation 
in infrastructure  (Component  2),  such as  employment  creation  and time  savings 
are developed to assess the benefits provided to the poorest and vulnerable. 
At the end of this section of the PIM, Appendix 1  presents the SACP Targeting Checklist 
and Appendix 2 covers the Gender Checklist. 
SACP STRATEGIES FOR YOUTH INCLUSION 
The  Government  of  Zimbabwe  (GoZ)  recognises  the  demographic  and  socio-economic 
significance of young people between the ages of 15 and 35 and considers them a priority 
for  economic  and  national  development.  The  National  Youth  Policy  (2013)  commits  to 
addressing  the  youth’s  development  and  empowerment  needs  in  social  and  economic 
spheres. The objectives of the first goal of the National Youth Policy identifies the following 
priorities  for  empowering  youth  to  participate  and  contribute  to  the  socio-economic 
development  of  the nation:  (i)  provision  of  opportunities for  sustainable livelihoods  and 
decent  work  for  all young  men  and  women;  (ii)  assisting youth in  attaining knowledge, 
skills  and  experiences  required  to  enable  them  to  effectively  participate  in  national 
development and society as a whole; (iii) promotion of the rights and freedoms of youths 
paying  special  attention  to  empowering  previously  marginalised  sections  such as  young 
women  and  girls, youth  with  disabilities,  youth living  with HIV,  out  of  school youth  and 
youth  living  in  rural  areas;  (iv)  involving  youth  at  the  planning,  decision  making, 
implementation  and  evaluation  levels  of  all  youth  development  programmes;  and  (v) 
promoting  gender  equality  and  equity  among  the  youth,  in  particular,  in  education  and 
training,  socio-cultural,  political,  economic  and  legal  spheres.  SACP  takes  into  account 
these five priorities in its youth inclusion strategies.  
Zimbabwe is a youthful country, with approximately 68 per cent of the population below 
the  age  of  35  years10.  The  population  structure  could  potentially  yield  a  demographic 
dividend,  but  over  80  per  cent  of  the  productive  youth  have  not  been  able  to  access 
employment in permanent paid work11. Although unemployment is high in both urban and 
rural areas, it is much higher in rural areas where about 48.9 per cent of rural male and 
55.2 per cent of rural female youths are unemployed12. The challenge for youth economic 
inclusion is higher in rural areas where agriculture is the main economic sector. To escape 
unemployment and poverty rural youth are migrating to cities and to neighbouring South 
Africa  and  Botswana.  Through  value  chain  development  and  investment  that  improve 
productive capacity of agriculture SACP will unlock rural economies to create inclusive and 
decent employment opportunities for rural young men and women in agriculture and off-
farm activities. SACP will directly target young people in the ages of 15 to 35 years. The 
78,240  beneficiary  households  that  will  be  targeted  will  consist  of  30  per  cent  youths 
(23,470  household  members)  of  which  50  per  cent  will  be  young  females  (11,735 
household members). 
Inclusive value chain development. According to the Pre-design Study conducted by 
the  Wageningen  Centre  for  Development  Innovation  (WCDI),  effective  youth  inclusion 
should be closely linked to the selection of value chains. In order to select value chains 
that meet the youth’s interests and attainable capital and skill requirements, SACP shall 
involve the youth in community-level participatory value-chain development consultations. 
From  the  beginning  of  the  project,  SACP  shall  be  aware  of  the  diversity  of  youth 
populations (gender, age group and VC commodity activity preference) and target value-
10 https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Youth/ZimbabweHRCommission.pdf 
11 Zimbabwe Investment Youth Case Study JMAT August 2016 
12 Zimstat (2019). Labour force and child labour survey  
21 
chain analysis accordingly13 to ensure that appropriate opportunities are availed to young 
men and women of all the age groups and are  aligned to their interests and capacities. 
Thus, the project will provide tailored approaches to the different youth populations.  
SACP  shall  also  involve  young  men  and  women  in  the  Component  1  community 
consultations on value-chain development. The WCDI Pre-design report highlighted that 
youth are often particularly sensitive to the expectations and opinions of those they are 
close to and particularly elders, which can influence their selection of which value chains 
to engage in and in what capacity. Component 1 community consultations shall, therefore, 
be done in an age-disaggregated manner to create an environment where youth can freely 
express their thoughts and ideas without fear of judgement or intimidation. The project 
will use innovative ways to gauge youth interest during value chain development. This will 
include sending out youth-specific calls for proposals to scope the kinds of enterprises that 
youths are interested in within the clusters. Web-based platforms and social media (e.g. 
Facebook, WhatsApp) and local youth forums will be considered for crowdsourcing of ideas 
on the kinds of enterprises that youth in the target areas would be interested in. 
In selection of value chains tailored for youth, SACP will prioritise ventures that have low 
capital and skill requirements, and provide quick and high returns: short cycle crops such 
as  beans,  mobile  processing  units  such  as  peanut  butter  and  maputi  (popcorn)  making 
machines,  mobile  solar  dryers  and  mobile  marketing  services  for  women  and  youth14. 
Youth will be prioritised for projects that promote irrigation development for horticulture 
production as youth like quick-win projects15.  
Access to matching grants and youth specific calls. One of the biggest impediments 
to youth participation in economic activities in agricultural value chains is the lack of capital 
and financial resources. To alleviate this challenge, SACP will provide access to matching 
grants  for  young  women  and  young  men  in  all  three  categories.  APGs  and  enterprises 
applying for matching grants in SACP should have a youth membership of at least 30 per 
cent. In addition, SACP will have some youth specific calls for which APGs should have at 
least  
To ensure that youth are also provided opportunities in off-farm value chain activities, lead 
enterprises applying for matching grants will need to demonstrate youth inclusion in their 
proposals. During short-listing, proposals that show a quota of youth that will get capacity 
building  from  the  venture  will  be  considered  favourably.  About  25  per  cent  of 
microenterprise  matching  grants  will  be  reserved  for  youth  applicants  that  meet  the 
selection  criteria.  SACP  recognises  that  the  majority  of  youth  prefer  off-farm  jobs  that 
have quicker returns and less capital requirements. As such, SACP will avail youth specific 
calls  for  micro-enterprises  operated  my  young  women  and  men  to  apply  for  matching 
grants for purchasing processing units (e.g. mobile solar driers, maputi and peanut butter 
making  units,  etc.)  and  technologies  for  packaging  and  branding  of  value  chain 
commodities,  among  others.  To  facilitate  efficient  operation  youth  will  be  assisted  to 
register their micro-enterprises and to register for financial services such as eco-cash. 
Skills transfer and training of youth. Some of the main drivers of youth unemployment 
in  Zimbabwe  include  a  mismatch  between  skills  and  industry  requirements;  youth  also 
lack  business,  managerial,  technical  and  leadership  skills,  which  would  be  relevant  for 
running SMEs. To empower young men and women to participate effectively in economic 
activities, SACP will place a requirement for all APGs that will be funded under the matching 
grants facility to have a youth membership of at least 30 per cent. This model will allow 
for skills transfer and mentorship of youth. In addition, youth that are interested in being 
part  of  the  APGs  will  benefit  from  technical  assistance  on  business  plan  development, 
13 Bakker et al., (2020). Pre-Design Report “Climate adaptation and mitigation measures for nutrition co-
benefits in IFAD investments in Zimbabwe”. Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation. Wageningen, 
May 2020 
14 Zimbabwe COSOP (2020-2026) 
15 The experience of the Food and Agriculture Organisation in Midlands Province, documented in the Zimbabwe 
Youth Investment Case, 2016. 
22 
climate-smart agriculture and financial literacy and planning, as well as technical training 
related to the specific operations of the enterprise. Additional training will be provided to 
the youth on budgeting, financial management and youth savings groups for peer to peer 
influence to save and build capital for future ventures. Youth specific calls for proposals 
will  require  that  youth  APGs  have  up  to  40  per  cent  adult  membership  for  mentorship, 
skills  and  indigenous  knowledge  transfer  to  youth.  Youth-owned  companies  will  also  be 
considered provided they have had sufficient experience in the targeted agri-businesses 
and demonstrable success. 
Lead  enterprises  will  be  encouraged  to  provide  opportunities  for  work-related  learning 
(attachment for tertiary students) for youth in higher education to acquire industry skills 
and  to  promote  innovation  (e.g.  food  technology  students  can  innovate  on  minimum 
processing  technologies  and  food  preservation  methods  that  can  be  done  at  HH  or 
community  level  with  minimum  resources;  IT  students  can  innovate  with  ICTs  for 
improving logistics, management or marketing in VCs etc.). 
Creation of conditions that foster participation of young women. Gender disparities 
still exist in youth employment in Zimbabwe where young men are more likely to secure 
employment compared to young women. The WCDI Pre-Design Report noted that youth 
will  participate  in  activities  that  are  acceptable  for  personal  safety  and  health. 
Consultations  with  Harvest  Plus16  during the  SACP  remote  design  mission  revealed  that 
Harvest  Plus  experienced  greater  participation  among  married  young  women  who  got 
involved  in  value  chain  activities  together  with  their  spouses  compared  to  single  young 
women. This was noted as possibly arising from safety concerns for the young women by 
their families.  SACP will explore the use of innovative ways to increase the participation 
of single young women by involving them more in women’s APGs more than mixed APGs; 
and  processing/value  addition  facilities/units  that  are  closer  to  their  homes.  Another 
reason  keeping  young  women  away  from  economic  activities  could  be  the  burden  of 
housework  and  other  unpaid  care-work.  The  GALS  methodology  will  be  applied  to 
determine and find solutions to the underlying challenges and concerns that limit young 
women’s participation in value chain activities. 
Youth  role  models  and  mentorship.  Many  studies  and  development  projects  in 
Zimbabwe  have  found  that  very  few  young  women  and  men  have  interest  in  primary 
agriculture production17. In order to make agriculture attractive to the youth, there is need 
to change the face of agriculture from that of old, poor and uneducated people to that of 
young intelligent and successful young men and women. Successful youth in agriculture 
are a powerful model for changing the face of agriculture and attracting other youth. SACP 
will collaborate with the youth desk in the MWACRR to identify and profile successful youth 
in  agriculture  across  the  target  provinces,  to  serve  as  champions  and  to  provide 
mentorship  to  other  youth.  SACP  will  also  explore  opportunities  to  partner  with  young 
celebrities  –  such  as  musicians,  actors,  TV  presenters  –  in  the  country  to  serve  as 
ambassadors for youth in agriculture and to make agriculture  ‘cool’ for the youth. SACP 
will  also  explore  the  opportunity  to  have  annual  youth  excellence  awards  to  encourage 
youth  participation,  innovation  and  excellence  in  agriculture  and  related  value  chain 
activities. 
Knowledge exchange, networking and experience sharing. Youths lack knowledge 
and experience in running successful farm and off-farm enterprises. To help narrow this 
gap, SACP will make use of innovative forms of knowledge exchange and capacity building 
such as youth exchange visits with other projects within the country such as SIRP and the 
Zimbabwe Agricultural Growth Programme; exchange visits with other programmes within 
the Southern Africa Region e.g. SMLP in Eswatini; field days at farms or processing facilities 
run  by  successful  youth,  youth  exhibitions  and  networking  events  at  the  Zimbabwe 
16 Harvest Plus has experienced success with youth inclusion in its iron bean value chain. 
17 https://www.unicef.org/esa/sites/unicef.org.esa/files/2019-04/Investment-Case-for-Youth-in-Zimbabwe-
%282016%29.pdf  
23 
Agricultural Show; youth networking page on the project website and utilisation of social 
media  platforms  such  as  Facebook,  WhatsApp  for  creating  communities  of  practice  and 
youth knowledge-sharing platforms. The Zimbabwe Farmers Union’s Young Farmers Clubs 
will also be important for networking and peer to peer knowledge exchange for SACP young 
farmers. 
Fostering  youth  innovation  and  capturing  the  voice  of  the  youth.  The  WCDI 
Predesign report noted that there is currently low youth participation in rural governance 
and  community  decision  making  with  youth  often  excluded  from  planning  processes. 
Successful youth inclusion in SACP will encompass not only youth participation in value-
chain  activities  but  also  the  active  participation  of  young  women  and  young  men  in 
planning  processes,  governing  bodies, and  decision-making  positions in  APGs and  other 
value chain processes. It is important that the voice of the youth be heard in both local 
value-chain processes and informing policy. Innovations for capturing the voice of young 
men and women in SACP will include, workshops; use of the GALS methodology to give 
young women and men a platform to identify the challenges that limit their participation 
and  draw  solutions;  and  community  theatre  to  address  sensitive issues  and  to  promote 
community social behaviour change with the aim to stimulate greater active participation 
of youth. Youth will also be invited to policy dialogue platforms and given an opportunity 
to engage in policy discourses concerning agriculture, food and nutrition security and rural 
development  policy  issues.  Policy  dialogue  platforms  such  as  the  FNC  platforms  will  be 
leveraged for these purposes.  
Partnerships  for  strengthening  youth  inclusion  in  SACP  will  include  the  following 
organisations.  
The  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  has  relevant  experience  in  targeted 
interventions (focus on women and youth) and models of small scale agro-processing and 
post-harvest  that  could  benefit  smallholder  farmers in  reducing food  wastage  and  post-
harvest losses. SACP will collaborate with ILO on issues of youth knowledge sharing and 
capacity building. 
The  Youth  Desk  in  the  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water,  Climate  and  Rural 
Settlements is currently implementing the National Young Champion Farmer Program to 
develop  a  database  of  young  farmers  in  the  10  Provinces  of  the  country.  SACP  will 
collaborate  with  the  Youth  Desk  for  the  identification  of  youth  in  cropping,  animal 
husbandry, innovation, irrigation and mechanisation, farm infrastructures and ICT.   
Ministry of Youth, Sports and Recreation (MYSR) is responsible for policy on youth 
and empowerment. SACP will collaborate with the MYSR on issues of youth empowerment.  
Youth  Development  and  Employment  Department  is  responsible  for  youth 
employment  and  will  be  an  important  partner  for  the  SACP  which  seeks  to  create 
employment opportunities for the youth; and promote gender equality and equity among 
the youth, in particular, in education and training, socio-cultural, political, economic and 
legal spheres. SACP takes into account these five priorities in its youth inclusion strategies.  
STRATEGIES FOR NUTRITION MAINSTREAMING IN SACP 
Approaches to Improved Nutrition and Food Security. SACP is expected to increase 
marketed  agricultural  output  and  improve  the  target  households’  income  levels.  In 
principle, the increase in income could lead to dietary improvements in the household by 
enabling the purchase of more nutritious and diverse foods, as well as improving access 
to healthcare, better water and sanitation, and better education. However, this link is not 
automatic.  Evidence  shows  that  there  are  a  number  of  factors,  especially  low  nutrition 
awareness and women’s social status that can prevent increases in income from leading 
to  improvements  in  nutrition.  Therefore,  to  ensure  that  an  increase  in  income  leads  to 
24 
improvements  in  nutrition,  SACP  will  mainstream  three  specific  nutrition  related 
approaches into the value chain activities aimed at increasing both availability and demand 
for diversified and nutritious food. 
The first  approach  builds  on increased income to  be  associated with nutrition education 
and Social and Behaviour Change Communication (SBCC) activities, which will boost the 
demand side by stimulating the consumption of more nutritious and healthy foods. Specific 
activities are elaborated hereunder. 
Nutrition  education  and  SBCC.  SACP  will  stimulate  the  demand  and  consumption  of 
nutritious  foods  through  targeted  nutrition  education  and  SBCC  aimed  at  positively 
changing social behaviours among beneficiaries of the project. Component 1 will provide 
annual training on nutrition and its application in nutrition-sensitive value chains (NSVCs) 
to  the  SACP  beneficiaries.  Considering that  SACP is  a value  chain  development  project, 
nutrition education will also raise awareness on the net benefit of consuming rather than 
only selling the nutritious foods18. 
In  2006,  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations  (FAO),  in  close 
collaboration with the Food and Nutrition Council (FNC), the Nutrition Unit in the Ministry 
of Health and Child care (MoHCC) and Agritex in the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water, 
Climate and Rural Resettlement, developed the Healthy Harvest Training Manual as a tool 
for  training  community-based  extension  workers  in  good  nutrition,  including  growing, 
preparing  and  processing  of  nutritious  food.  The  manual  has  been  used  since  its 
publication,  to  train  hundreds  of  government  and  NGO  extension  workers  to  deliver 
nutrition  messaging  to  farmers19.  SACP  will  explore  partnership  with  Agritex  which  has 
well-developed  and  extensive  extension  system  in  the  target  districts,  which  could  be 
capacitated to integrate nutrition education into the sub-project activities of beneficiaries 
while  promoting  wider  similar  effects  to  non-beneficiaries.  Also,  the  MoHCC,  Agritex, 
UNICEF and other UN agencies and NGOs in Zimbabwe currently make use of the MoHCC’s 
care-group  model  for  holistic  impact  and  to  deliver  production,  nutrition  and  WASH 
messaging  to  communities,  with  one voice.  SACP  will  converge  with these  actors  in  the 
SACP target districts for coordinated delivery of extension and nutrition education.  
The second approach focuses on the supply side and aims at making the selected value 
chains  nutrition  sensitive,  by  ensuring  that  investments  in  crops/animal  sourced  foods 
have a nutrition value in addition to being market and cash oriented. On the supply side, 
increased  market  availability  of  nutritious  food  will  also  be  associated  with  community-
based  interventions  to  promote  household  food  production  (green  gardens,  small 
livestock,  forestry  products  for  household  consumption,  etc.).  Below  are  the  detailed 
specific activities. 
Selection  of  value-chain  commodities  with  high  nutritional  impact.  Because  the 
selection  of  the  value  chain  commodities  will  to  a  large  extent  determine  the  project’s 
success on climate and nutrition-related outcomes, the Pre-design Study Report produced 
by  the  Wageningen  Centre  for  Development  Innovation  (WCDI)  identifies  commercially 
viable commodities that are recommended to co-benefit climate and nutrition while also 
enabling  youth,  gender,  and  environmental  considerations  to  be  addressed  through  the 
selected value-chains. The SACP project will make use of the matrix to guide value-chain 
commodity  selection  as  well  as  evaluation  of  matching  grant  proposals  to  be  funded  in 
Component 1. The value chain analysis that will be conducted in Component 1 will identify 
the constraints in the selected value chains that could be addressed by the project to make 
them  nutrition-sensitive  while  increasing  household  incomes.  For  APGs,  Climate-Smart 
Productivity  Enhancement  Technical  Assistance  including  e-extension  solutions  will  be 
systematically  delivered  to  the  established  APGs  and,  among  the  topics  that  will  be 
18I FAD (2019). Mainstreaming Nutrition in IFAD Action Plan 2019-2025. 
19 https://www.g-fras.org/en/world-wide-extension-study/216-nutrition-for-ras-library/training-
resources/1004-healthy-harvest.html 
25 
covered, will be best practices for crop selection, variety selection and nutrition-sensitive 
value-chains. 
Adoption of biofortified/improved crops and livestock can increase the diversity and 
nutritional  value  of  production20.  In  its  selected  value-chains,  among  its  beneficiaries, 
SACP  will  promote  the  adoption  of  drought-tolerant  and  heat-resilient  and  bio-fortified 
varieties  as  well  as  improved  livestock  breeds.  During  the  SACP  remote  design  mission 
consultations, Harvest  Plus indicated keen interest to  partner  with  SACP  and  to  expand 
into SACP target districts to increase production, processing and utilization of commercially 
viable nutrient-rich biofortified staple varieties  – such as vitamin A and zinc maize, iron 
pearl  millet,  vitamin  A  sweet  potato  and  iron  beans  –  and  other  nutrient-rich 
commodities21. The benefits that Harvest Plus would bring to SACP target areas include 
development  of  district-level  farmer-led  seed/vine  multiplication  centres  for  supply  of 
biofortified  seeds  or  vines  to  other  local  farmers.  SACP  will  explore  partnership  with 
Harvest Plus for training on food preparation and processing for nutrient preservation and 
for increasing utilization of diverse nutrient dense and biofortified foods. 
Post-harvest loss management. Poor post-harvest management leads to high levels of 
food loss and waste as well as nutrient losses. Making value-chains more efficient helps to 
reduce  losses  and  waste  of  particularly  nutritious  food,  increases  market  availability  of 
nutritious food and increases producers’ incomes. SACP will therefore minimize food and 
nutrient loss and waste in its value chains as recommended in the WCDI Pre-design report. 
Under Category 1 of Component 1 matching grants, APGs and their members can apply 
for finance to invest in, among other areas, technologies that reduce pre- and post-harvest 
food losses and waste. Examples include bird scaring technologies to reduce pre-harvest 
loss  of  small  grains,  grain  dryers  that  reduce  the  moisture  content  of  maize  to  avoid 
aflatoxins and metal silos that minimize loss due to rodents, pests, water etc. APGs and 
micro-enterprises  can  apply  for  matching  grants  to  invest  in  cold  storage  facilities  that 
reduce loss due to spoilage of highly perishable agricultural commodities. Additionally, in 
Component 1 Climate Smart Productivity Enhancement, SACP will systematically deliver 
agricultural technical assistance and e-extension to established APGs and topics will also 
include effective management of food loss and waste.  
Improving  market  availability  of  nutritious  foods.  It  is  envisaged  that  SACP  will 
improve  market  availability  of  nutritious  foods  through  Component  1  and  Component 2 
investments  that  are  aimed  at  increasing  production  and  marketing  of  nutritious  foods. 
Investments  that  will increase  production  of  nutritious  food include  the improvement  of 
irrigation  water  supply  under  Component  2  and  provision  of  CSA  technical  assistance; 
matching  grants  for  APGs  to  improve  their  production  and  productivity;  and  matching 
grants  criteria  for  selection  of  proposals  that  demonstrate  nutritional  impact  under 
Component  1.  Investments  that  will  increase  marketing  of  nutritious  foods  include  the 
construction/rehabilitation of local level feeder roads under Component 2 to promote both 
production and marketing of large quantities of quality produce and reduce the time and 
cost of transport to the markets. This will also contribute to the reduction of food waste 
due to spoilage. 
Community-based  interventions  to  promote  household  food  production  will 
include the promotion of nutrition gardens, small livestock with a short-production cycle 
and the sustainable harvesting and consumption of forest products such as wild fruits and 
edible insects  (particularly in  Matabeleland  North  and  Mashonaland  central  where  these 
are  commonly  consumed).  It is hoped  that  SACP  will  benefit  from  ASAP+  or  the  Green 
Climate  Fund  resources,  should  that  be  successful  SACP  would  consider  providing  its 
beneficiaries  with  starter  kits  for  development  or  revitalisation  of  nutrition  gardens. 
20 https://www.agtalks.org/documents/38714170/40237450/Scaling+up+note+on+nutrition-
sensitive+agriculture+and+rural+development/b0b49ae7-fc72-4967-9a60-d591ceb9e6af 
21 SACP remote design mission consultations (2020). 
26 
Nutrition  gardens  would  be  supported  by  Component 2  investments  to  improve  village-
level water supply systems for year-round access to safe water for multi-purpose use such 
as domestic, gardening and livestock use. 
Workshops for value chain stakeholders on nutrition issues. Nutrition education in 
SACP  will  not  only  be  limited  to  APGs,  but  will  also  be  provided  to  other  value-chain 
stakeholders through workshops where issues of NSVCs will be deliberated. The workshops 
will provide an opportunity to raise nutrition awareness among all actors in the food value 
chains  including  processors,  handlers,  transporters,  retailers  and  consumers.  In  these 
workshops,  the  value-chain  actors  will  have  an  opportunity  to  identify  nutrition 
mainstreaming opportunities along the supported value chains and to proactively establish 
appropriate  solutions  for  any  challenges  identified.  This  will  also  benefit  the  market 
availability of nutritious foods. 
The third approach relates to women’s empowerment in ways that improve nutrition. This 
consists of different interrelated components, such as women's use of income for food and 
non-food expenditures, the ability of women to care for themselves and their families, and 
women's energy expenditure. Specific activities will include: 
i. 
Investment  in  technologies  that  reduce  women’s  time  and  energy-
demands. Some of the constraints faced by rural women include heavy workload 
and  limited  access  to  clean  energy.  Women  are  more  commonly  associated  with 
on-farm  processes  that  have  high  labour,  time  and  energy  demands,  thereby 
reducing  time  for  self-  and  childcare.  Under  the  Component  1  matching  grants, 
beneficiaries  can  apply  to  be  funded  for  labour-saving  on-farm  and  primary 
processing  technologies  such  as  tractors,  no-till  planters,  threshers,  dehullers, 
shellers  and  grain  cleaning  technologies.  These  would  greatly  reduce  time  and 
energy spent by women doing on-farm work. Also, women often have to travel long 
distances to source water for household use. Under Component 2 (Climate Proofed 
Infrastructure Investments), SACP will also invest in public infrastructure  such as 
small  water  and  energy  projects  (e.g.  solar-powered  boreholes)  to  support  crop 
and livestock production for the targeted value-chains. These will bring safe water 
sources closer to households, thereby reducing the time that women travel to get 
potable water for household use. Furthermore, to minimize the SACP VC, gender 
and nutrition training time demands on women, all training will be carried out close 
to their homes, and the trainings will be scheduled to avoid coinciding with meal 
preparation  times  and  busy  times  in  the  agricultural  calendar.  In  addition, 
alternative childcare arrangements will be made for women with young children so 
that they can attend training with minimal distraction. 
ii.  Women's  use  of  income  for  food  and  other  nutrition  and  health-related 
expenditures. SACP will accompany income generation activities with strategies 
to empower women and men so that household decisions on use of income may 
contribute  to  nutrition.  In  Component 1,  training  shall  also  include  household 
budgeting to benefit women’s decision making on use of income for food and non-
food  expenditures. SACP  will make  use  of  GALS  methodology  to  encourage  joint 
decision making on use of household income. Research has shown that income that 
is controlled by women in more associated with higher household food expenditure 
and nutrient intake than income controlled by men (Thomas, 1997)22. SACP shall 
empower  women  through  BDS  activities  in  Component  1  and  also  make  use  of 
innovative  strategies  that  will  be  identified  though  the  GALS  methodology  to 
increase women’s participation in higher income activities along the value chains in 
order  to  increase  the  amount  of  income  reaching  women’s  hands.  The  SACP 
targeting strategy also makes provisions for women to account for a minimum of 
50  per  cent  of  all  project  beneficiaries.  This  will  increase  women’s  income  for 
22 Thomas, 1997. “Incomes, Expenditures and Health Outcomes: Evidence on Intra-Household Resource 
Allocation’, in L. Haddad, ed., Intra-household Resource Allocation in Developing Countries, Models, Methods 
and Policy, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins university Press. 
27 
iii. 
nutrition-related needs (such as purchase of nutritious foods, seeking health care, 
children’s education) and other household expenditure. 
Increasing  women’s  ability  to  care  for  themselves  and  their  families.  As 
women frequently bear the responsibility of childcare and other unpaid household 
work, it is important to encourage fathers and other household members to share 
the burden of childcare and other household work to enable women to have more 
time  to  care  for  themselves  and  their  families.  Reconfiguring  gender  roles  and 
household  responsibility  can  be  a  sensitive  topic  that  requires  to  be  handled 
carefully.  As  such  SACP  will  make  use  of  the  GALS  methodology  to  enable 
beneficiaries  –  men  and  women  together  –  to  reconstruct  household  norms  on 
distribution of childcare and other household responsibilities. SACP will also employ 
community theatre, a tool proven to be effective in generating dialogue on sensitive 
issues in a manner that invigorates spectators to take action that brings about the 
desired change at household and community levels. Community theatre will allow 
the target group, particularly women to freely and openly talk about the challenges 
they are facing in a non-threatening and non-intimidating manner23. 
More  details  on  the  women’s  empowerment  activities  that  will  co-benefit  nutrition  are 
provided above in this PIM in sections about gender mainstreaming in SACP. 
A growing body of evidence indicates that access to safe drinking-water, sanitation, and 
hygiene  (WASH)  services  has  an  important  positive  impact  on  nutrition24.  Poor  rural 
households  in  Zimbabwe  have  disproportionately  less  access  to  potable  water  and 
sanitation  facilities.  One  fifth  of  households  in  Matabeleland  North  spend  more  than  30 
minutes to fetch water. Matabeleland North has the highest levels of open defecation (more 
than 50 per cent in all its districts), with Binga district having up to 74.3 per cent25. Limited 
access to safe water affects particularly women, as they have to walk long distances to 
fetch  water.  A  large  proportion  of  women  (33  per  cent)  also  experience  challenges 
accessing health facilities due to distance with the highest being in Mashonaland Central 
(49.1 per cent)26. According to the IFAD Upscaling Note on Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture 
and  Rural  Development,  WASH  interventions  are  particularly  important  because 
“consistently unsafe water and unhygienic conditions can lead to repeated bouts of illness 
that  can  affect  the  individual’s  need  for  and  ability  to  benefit  from  food  and  results  in 
chronic undernutrition”. SACP will address WASH through a combination of Component 2 
investments and SBCC.  
The  Component  2  participatory  planning  processes  involving  both  women  and  men 
beneficiaries  for  the  identification  of  SACP-supported  cluster  infrastructure  investments 
will  present  an  opportunity  for  beneficiaries  to  consider  potable  water  and  sanitation 
infrastructure. Component 2 will improve domestic water supply (solar powered protected 
wells/boreholes and springs) and sanitation facilities in wards in the target areas. This will 
increase access to safe drinking water and sanitation in the target communities. To support 
decision making on WASH infrastructure and to promote better WASH practices, SACP will 
pursue partnership with the MoHCC, UNICEF as well as other development partners who 
are  involved  in  WASH  promotion  and  ending  open  defecation  to  support  SACP  project 
beneficiaries with WASH messaging and related services. 
COVID-19 mitigation. The impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic have been experienced on 
a  global  level  and  it  is  not  yet  known  how  extreme  the  ultimate  consequences  will  be 
particularly for developing countries such as Zimbabwe, that have high malnutrition, poor 
food  security,  poor  WASH,  and  a  poor  health  system.  The  SACP  design  provides  for 
potential  mitigation  and  recovery  from  COVID-19  related  shocks  in  the  following  ways: 
23 http://www.ngopulse.org/article/theatre-development  
24 Bakker et al., (2020). Pre-Design Report “Climate adaptation and mitigation measures for nutrition co-
benefits in IFAD investments in Zimbabwe”. Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation. Wageningen, 
May 2020 
25 ZIMVAC (2019). Rural livelihoods assessment report. 
26 Zimbabwe Demographic Health Survey of 2015 
28 
increasing  safe  community-level  water  sources  for  household  use  and  sanitation 
(Component  2);  improving  production,  productivity  and  market  availability  of  nutritious 
foods  (Component  1)  for  improved  nutrition  and  health;  and  localised  value-chain 
development and cluster approach which decreases the need to travel between provinces. 
SACP will assess the COVID-19 situation during implementation and develop appropriate 
adaptation  measures  to  ensure  the  continued  effective  functioning  of  the  value 
chains/clusters.  To  ensure  continued  support  to  the  APGs,  SACP  will  make  use  of  e-
extension  and  mobile  software  applications  such  as  the  Kurima  Mari  app  in  Zimbabwe, 
which is designed to address challenges associated with mobility restrictions and maintain 
social  distancing  rules  by  eliminating  the  need  for  physical  interaction  and  allowing  for 
knowledge transfer through a safe digital channel. The project will also support extension 
workers where possible with resources for mobility (motorbikes and fuels, where feasible) 
to  increase  farmers’  access  to  one-on-one  extension  services,  that  promote  social 
distancing, instead of group extension. 
TA for research to support nutrition mainstreaming in SACP. SACP benefited from 
the multi-country grant funded under ASAP 2 (The Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme,  Phase  II),  entitled  “Technical  support  in  climate  and  nutrition  linkages  in 
IFAD’s  investments”,  implemented  in  collaboration  with  Wageningen  Centre  for 
Development  Innovation  (WCDI).  The  grant  aims  at  increasing  nutrition  co-benefits  for 
poor  smallholder  farmers  and  their  families  while  strengthening  IFAD’s  capacity  of 
addressing  the  bidirectional  relationships  between  climate  and  nutrition  in  IFAD  project 
design. A Pre-design Report “Climate adaptation and mitigation measures for nutrition co-
benefits in IFAD investments in Zimbabwe” was produced in May 2020 to inform the best 
ways to strengthen the integration of nutrition as well as gender equality aspects into CSA 
and productivity enhancement actions of SACP. The identified activities have been included 
in the detailed description of activities above and some of them will be implemented by 
SACP either through ASAP+ or Green Climate Fund grant Resources, to be requested at a 
later stage.  
Coordination  for  nutrition  impact.  Linking  with  country  level  nutrition  coordination 
bodies  is  important  for  lesson  learning,  knowledge  exchange  and  policy  dialogue. 
Important coordination platforms that SACP will link with include the Scaling-Up Nutrition, 
a  global  platform  which  also  has  national  structures  for  sharing  experiences  between 
countries and network partners through its thematic country meetings, regional workshops 
and Annual Global Gatherings. The Food and Nutrition Council (FNC) is the lead agency 
responsible for the multisectoral coordination, of a cohesive national response and national 
dialogue  on  food  and  nutrition  security  in  Zimbabwe  between  the  government  and 
development partners and is a critical partner for SACP country level policy engagement 
on issues of nutrition. The Food and Nutrition Security Committees (FNSC) are institutional 
structures for coordinated multi-sectoral implementation of the Food and Nutrition Security 
Policy  and  programmes,  at  all  administrative levels from  the  national to  the  ward  level. 
SACP will partner with the FNSCs particularly for lesson learning, knowledge exchange and 
capturing the voices of the communities for food and nutrition security country-level policy 
engagement. 
Strategic partnerships. SACP recognises that it does not have the breadth and resources 
to minimize every contributor to malnutrition in the target area. Hence partnerships and 
coordination with other UN agencies, Government departments, NGOs and other relevant 
institutions  will  be  important  for  effective  implementation  of  nutrition  mainstreaming 
strategies in SACP. SACP will explore partnerships with the following organisations, as well 
as others that will be identified during implementation: 
Agritex  a  department  in  the  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water,  Climate  and  Rural 
Resettlement (MLAWRR) has specialist branches, provincial and district offices that provide 
technical  and  advisory  services,  regulatory  services,  farmer  training,  food  technology 
(including post-harvest processing an product development) dissemination of technologies 
and provide market oriented extension for sustainable farming. Currently Agritex is rolling-
29 
out country-wide training of its extension staff on nutrition-sensitive agriculture. It would 
be a strategic partner for the delivery of nutrition education at ward-level and for providing 
extension support to the smallholder farmers.  
The Ministry of Health and Child Care (MoHCC) adopts essential nutrition actions for 
improving maternal, new-born, infant and young child nutrition and health at health facility 
and community levels. Partnership with the MoHCC will be important for ensuring better 
access  of  the  SACP  target  group  to  healthcare  services  as  well  for  delivery  of  nutrition 
education, and for delivery of health services for those suffering from HIV and AIDS. 
Harvest Plus promotes rural nutrition through increased production and consumption of 
bio-fortified  crops.  During  the  SACP  remote  design  mission  consultations,  Harvest  Plus 
indicated keen interest to partner with SACP and to expand into SACP target districts to 
increase  production,  processing  and  utilization  of  commercially  viable  nutrient-rich 
biofortified staple varieties – such as vitamin A and zinc maize, iron pearl millet, vitamin 
A sweet potato and iron beans – and other nutrient-rich commodities. The benefits that 
Harvest Plus would bring to SACP target areas include development of district-level farmer-
led seed/vine multiplication centres for supply of biofortified seeds or vines to other local 
farmers.  Harvest  Plus  also  provides  training  on  food  preparation  and  processing  for 
nutrient preservation and for increasing utilization of nutrient dense biofortified foods.  
The  Zimbabwe  Agricultural  Growth  Programme  (ZAGP)  is  an  EU-supported 
programme focusing on livestock value chains in all 10 provinces of Zimbabwe. Partnership 
with ZAGP will be important for increasing access to small livestock which is important for 
the  livelihoods  of  women  and  for  increased  access  to  animal  source  protein.  ZAGP  is 
developing an Agricultural Extension Training App that will be used by extension staff for 
on-the-job training. SACP can add content on nutrition and other topics to the trainings 
once up and running. 
UNICEF  in  Zimbabwe  works  to  improve  water  and  sanitation  services  as  well  as  basic 
hygiene practices. It is currently leading the initiative to end open defecation in Zimbabwe 
by 2030. It works in 45 districts and would be a strategic partner for the delivery of WASH 
interventions in the SACP project target districts.  
The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) 
a CGIAR organization that conducts agricultural research for development in the drylands, 
focusing on crop and livestock production of relevance to smallholders. ICRISAT would be 
a strategic partner for the supply of seeds for iron-rich millet and other small-grains that 
are of nutritional importance in the SACP project. These seeds will also be of cultivars that 
are drought- and heat-stress tolerant. 
Econet Wireless has a subsidiary, ECOSURE that has a new facility to enable small-scale 
farmers  to  access  cold-chain  facilities  for  enhanced  market  access  and  high-value  crop 
production.  Access  to  such  cold-chain  facilities  by  SACP’s  horticulture  value-chains  has 
potential to reduce post-harvest food loss from spoilage. 
International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  has  relevant  experience  in  targeted 
interventions (focus on women and youth) and models of small scale agro-processing and 
post-harvest  that  could  benefit  smallholder  farmers  in  reducing  food  waste  and  post-
harvest losses.  
Nutrition Mainstreaming Knowledge Management (KM). SACP will employ KM tools 
in  promoting  sharing  of  nutrition  mainstreaming  lessons  learnt,  innovation  and  good 
practices within the project, at national level as well as with other countries in the region 
and globally. For this purpose, SACP will collaborate with WCDI to conduct research related 
to  nutrition  mainstreaming  in  SACP.  This  will  generate  evidence  on  what  works  in 
improving  nutrition  outcomes  through  NSVCs  in  a  unique  situation  such  as  Zimbabwe 
where food prices are ever increasing. There is competition from cheaper imported goods 
and HH already spend about 70 per cent of their income on food but are still malnourished 
and food insecure. Findings will be published and will help to inform implementation, policy 
engagement as well as scaling up. The collaboration with WCDI will also provide an added 
30 
benefit  of  building  the  capacity  of  project  implementers  to  deliver  better  on  nutrition 
mainstreaming in SACP.  
SACP will conduct field technical workshops and exchange visits with other IFAD co-funded 
projects such as the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP) in Zimbabwe 
and the Smallholder Market-Led Project (SMLP) in Eswatini. These will promote sharing of 
lessons  learnt  and  knowledge  exchange  on  nutrition  within  the  Zimbabwe  country 
programme and other country programmes in the IFAD portfolio. 
SACP  will  develop  a  system  for  consistent  capturing  of  stories  from  the  field  including 
engaging a journalist to capture written, video and picture stories from SACP beneficiaries 
and  other  innovative  tools  such  as  community  theatre  for  capturing  the  voices  of 
beneficiaries (particularly women) for the purposes of country level policy engagement to 
inform  nutrition  mainstreaming  considerations in  policy  and  programmes.  SACP  will link 
with the FNSCs to utilise their policy dialogue platforms at district, provincial and national 
levels.  Additionally,  SACP  will  produce  how-to-do  manuals  on  successful  nutrition 
mainstreaming  innovations  from  implementation;  as  well  as  document  and  disseminate 
good practices in nutrition mainstreaming for out-scaling.  
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). SACP recognises the importance of making use of 
IFAD’s  Core  Outcome  Indicators  on  nutrition  in  generation  of  evidence  on  nutrition 
mainstreaming.  SACP  will  therefore  include  the  following  core  outcome  and  output 
indicators in its logical framework: 
  Output  level:  Number  of  households  provided  with  targeted  support  to 
improve their nutrition  
Outcome level: Number of Households with improved nutrition Knowledge Attitudes and 
Practices (KAP). SACP will also conduct a nutrition baseline survey before any value-chain 
activities  commence  to  identify  the  status  of  food  security,  food  consumption  patterns, 
status  of  malnutrition,  childcare  practices  and  WASH  in  the  target  areas  for  informing 
selection  of  value-chain  commodities  and  nutrition-sensitive  interventions  that  are 
contextualized  to  the  target  areas,  and  importantly,  to  provide  baseline  values  for  the 
selected set of nutrition indicators. SACP will also make use of the IFAD’s empowerment  
indicator based on project-level Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (pro-WEAI) 
tool  to  measure  SACP  beneficiaries’  empowerment  in  three  domains27:  decisions  about 
agricultural production; access to and decision-making power about productive resources; 
control of use of income; and leadership in the community and time allocation, which also 
have an impact on household nutritional outcomes and women’s dietary diversity. 
Nutrition mainstreaming strategy. SACP will also develop a nutrition strategy with an 
associated logical framework.  
Implementation  arrangements.  Nutrition  mainstreaming  activities  will  be  financed 
under  Components  1  and  2.  Agritex  will  be  the  main  implementing  partner  which  will 
provide  the important interface  with  beneficiaries  for  provision  of  nutrition  education.  A 
Social  inclusion  and  Nutrition  specialist  will  be  recruited  at  the  SACP  National  PMU 
supported by Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officers at the Provincial PMU. 
27 https://weai.ifpri.info/versions/pro-weai/  
31 
Appendix 1: Targeting Checklist  
Targeting checklist 
Design 
1.  Does  the  main  target  group  –  those 
expected to benefit most – correspond to 
IFAD’s  target  group  as  defined  by  the 
Targeting  Policy  (poorer  households  and 
food-insecure)? 
2. Have target sub-groups been identified 
and described according to their different 
socio-economic  characteristics,  assets 
and livelihoods – with attention to gender 
and  youth  differences  (matrix  on  target 
group characteristics completed)? 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and 
likely uptake of the proposed activities by 
the identified target sub-groups? What is 
the  evidence  (matrix  on  analysis  of 
programme components and activities by 
principal beneficiary groups completed)? 
4.  Does  the  design  document  describe  a 
feasible 
targeting 
strategy in line with the Targeting Policy, 
involving  some  or  all  of  the  following 
measures and methods: 
operational 
and 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on 
poverty  data  or  proxy  indicators  to 
identify,  for  area-based  projects  or 
programmes,  geographic  areas  (and 
within  these,  communities)  with  high 
concentration of poor people; 
4.2 Direct targeting – when services 
or  resources  are  to  be  channelled  to 
specific individuals or households; 
4.3  Self-targeting  –  when  good  and 
services respond to the priority needs, 
resource  endowments  and  livelihood 
strategies of target groups; 
Yes, SACP will target the poor smallholder farmers 
in  the  rural  areas  where  rural  poverty  is  most 
prevalent in communal lands (CL) (79.2 percent), 
followed  by 
resettlement  areas  (both  old 
resettlement and A1) with 76.4 percent. There is 
also  high  food  and  nutrition  insecurity  due  to 
recurring droughts.  
Yes,  target  group  has  been  identified  based  on 
review of literature and includes poor smallholder 
farmers  classified  into  poverty  groups  -Category 
A, B1, B2 and C, including youth and women. The 
matrix  on  target  group  characteristics  has  been 
completed.  
Yes, the value chain and the clusters are based on 
the historical analysis of the value chain that are 
practiced in the areas and hence the framers are 
most likely to adapt to the same value chains.  
Yes,  the  design  describes  a  multi-pronged  and 
inclusive targeting strategy.  
for 
potential 
Yes, SACP targets 5 rural provinces of Zimbabwe 
where  there  is  a  high  concentration  of  the  rural 
poor, in particular women and youths, and where 
there is climate vulnerability and the proximity to 
the  agricultural  corridors.  The  project  will  be 
implemented  in  18  districts  with  high  poverty 
smallholder 
prevalence, 
commercialisation  and  value  chain  development 
and  potential  for  private  sector  value  chain 
development. 
At  least  50  per  cent  of  total  beneficiaries  should 
be female-headed households and another 30 per 
cent  unemployed  underemployed  youth  (young 
men  and  young  women).  Poor  smallholder 
farmers  will  be  identified  through  a  call  for 
proposals  in  the  agricultural  producer  groups. 
However, for eligibility, the APG should have the 
majority of poor farmers.  
SACP provides an opportunity for the participation 
of  poor  farmers,  in  particular  women,  youths  in 
APGs and microenterprises. The greatest amount 
of  the  matching  grant  is  in  APGs.  The  matching 
grant  contribution is low  enough  for  the  farmers 
is  also 
to  afford  and 
considered.  This  ensures  that  the  services 
respond to the needs, endowments  and livelihood 
strategies  of  the  target  group.  The  promotion  of 
group  approaches  are  not  attractive  to wealthier 
groups. 
in-kind  contribution 
32 
information 
4.4  Empowering  measures  – 
including 
and 
communication, focused capacity- and 
confidence-building 
measures, 
organizational  support,  in  order  to 
empower  and  encourage  the  more 
active  participation  and  inclusion  in 
planning  and  decision-making  of 
people  who  traditionally  have  less 
voice and power; 
4.5  Enabling  measures  – 
to 
strengthen stakeholders’ and partners’ 
attitude  and  commitment  to  poverty 
targeting, 
and 
women’s  empowerment, 
including 
policy dialogue, awareness-raising and 
capacity-building; 
equality 
gender 
to 
4.6  Attention 
procedural 
measures – that could militate against 
participation  by  the  intended  target 
groups; 
4.7  Operational  measures 
– 
project/programme 
appropriate 
management  arrangements,  staffing, 
selection  of  implementation  partners 
and service providers. 
5.  Monitoring  targeting  performance. 
Does  the  design  document  specify  that 
targeting  performance  will  be  monitored 
using  participatory  M&E,  and  also  be 
assessed  at  mid-term  review?  Does  the 
M&E 
the 
collection/analysis  of  sex-disaggregated 
data  and  are  there  gender-sensitive 
indicators  against  which  to  monitor/ 
evaluate outputs, outcomes and impacts? 
framework 
allow 
for 
awareness 
community 
GALs will be used to address the underlying root 
causes  for  gender  inequality.  SACP  will  raise 
gender 
level. 
at 
Community  based  targeting  will  be  used  to 
identify  the  poor.  In  addition,  community-based 
consultation  will  be used  for  the  development  of 
infrastructure 
(component  2).  SACP  will 
strengthen  groups  through  BDS,  CSA,  financial 
management  training.  In  addition,  GALS  will 
strengthen women, men and youth in leadership 
as  well  as  reduce  GBV  and  workloads  due  to 
equitable  labour  balance.  SACP  will  disseminate 
information about the project in order to increase 
transparency.  
Component  1  comprises  of  capacity  building  and 
support  for  APGs  in  terms  of  building  their 
capacity  in  CSA  technologies,  BDS  and  financial 
literacy.  SACP  will  carry  oy  gender  sensitive 
training  and  provide  facilitators.  The  project  will 
also  sensitise  project  staff  and  use  participatory 
methodologies for M&E 
The project will liaise with the Ministry responsible 
for SMSE to ensure that the APGs are registered 
at  local  level.  Legal  registration  will  not  be  a 
requirement  for  the  groups.  Groups  will  be 
provided  with  technical  assistance  to  develop 
proposals   
The design includes recruitment of a Gender and 
Youth Expert as PMU staff, Technical Assistance to 
design  a  gender  strategy  and  gender  training 
manual  and  appropriate  budgets  for  involving 
intermediary  organizations  and  service providers 
with  expertise  on  community  development,  for 
the implementation of the targeting strategy   
Yes, the design document specifies that targeting 
performance will be monitored using participatory 
M&E  and  will  be  assessed  through  COI  based 
surveys  conducted  at  baseline,  mid-term  and 
completion. WEAI survey will be conducted as part 
of  baseline  data  and  M&E  systems  will  be 
disaggregated  by  sex  and  gender  and  target 
groups.  Participatory  monitoring  and  evaluation 
systems will be established and gender sensitive 
monitoring  indicators  would  be  used  to  evaluate 
outputs, outcomes and impacts.  
33 
Appendix 2: Gender Checklist  
Gender checklist 
1.  The  programme  design  report  contains  –  and 
programme implementation is based on – gender-
disaggregated  poverty  data  and  an  analysis  of 
gender  differences  in  the  activities  or  sectors 
concerned,  as  well  as  an  analysis  of  each 
programme  activity  from  the  gender  perspective 
to address any unintentional barriers to women’s 
participation. 
2.  The  programme  design  articulates  –  or  the 
programme implements – actions with aim to: 
  Expand  women’s  economic  empowerment 
through access to and control over productive 
and household assets; 
  Strengthen  women’s  decision-making  role  in 
the  household  and  community  and  their 
representation in membership and leadership 
of local institutions; 
  Achieve a reduced workload and an equitable 
workload balance between women and men. 
34 
Design 
Yes,  the  gender  strategy  outlines  the 
strategic  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment  activities  as  well  as 
pragmatic  interventions  to  mainstream 
gender in all project components.  
in 
Yes, activities in component 1 are designed 
ensure  that  women  have  access  to 
matching grants at APGs, microenterprises 
and lead value chain enterprises.  Women 
participation 
the  matching  grants 
include: 50 per cent for APGs, 25 per cent 
for  microenterprises  and  25  per  cent  for 
lead  value  chain  enterprise,  in  addition 
women  will  also  benefit  from  the  training 
on  BDS,  CSA  and  financial  management. 
Through the training in GALS, the women 
and men will start to realise the benefit in 
equitable balance to access and control of 
productive  household  arrests.  In  addition 
to  their  access  and  control  of  assets, 
access to technologies, improved business 
acumen, and income from market access, 
women  will  gain  more  self-  confidence  to 
negotiate 
in  market 
transactions  and  with  service  providers 
and  have  greater  voice  and  influence  in 
management committees.  
confidently 
Yes,  in  Component  1  women  in  APGs  will 
be  encouraged  to  take  up  leadership 
positions in APG management committees 
and  at  household  level  women’s  social 
capital  will  be  strengthened  through  their 
participation  and  voice  in  community 
institutions, particularly the APGs. through 
GALS men and women are encouraged to 
negotiate  equitable  balance  in  decision 
making 
Equitable  workload  balance  between  men 
and  women  will  be  promoted  through 
GALs.  SACP  will  select  CSA  technologies 
that will not add more workload on women. 
Additionally,  the  times  and  venues  for 
training will be in such a way that they are 
suitable  for  women  to  attend.    Value 
addition  infrastructure  will  target  labour 
saving  technologies  to  ease  the  workload 
burden  for  women.  Knowledge  about  the 
benefits  at 
types  of 
technologies could be disseminated during 
the 
association  meetings 
the  different 
by 
or 
3.  The  programme  design  report  includes  one 
paragraph  in  the  targeting  section  that  explains 
what  the  programme  will  deliver  from  a  gender 
perspective. 
4. The programme design report describes the key 
elements for operationalizing the gender strategy, 
with 
relevant  programme 
components. 
respect 
the 
to 
5.  The  design  document  –  and  the  programme 
implements  –  operational  measures  to  ensure 
gender-equitable  participation  in,  and  benefit 
from,  programme  activities.  These  will  generally 
include:  
5.1  Allocating  adequate  human  and  financial 
resources to implement the gender strategy. 
5.2  Ensuring  and  supporting  women’s  active 
participation  in  programme-related  activities, 
decision-making  bodies  and  committees, 
including 
for 
participation. 
specific 
targets 
setting 
that 
Ensuring 
5.3 
project/programme 
management  arrangements  (composition  of 
the  project  management  unit/programme 
coordination unit, project terms of reference for 
staff  and  implementing  partners,  etc.  reflect 
attention  to  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment concerns. 
project/programme 
direct 
5.4 
outreach  to  women  (for  example  through 
appropriate  numbers  and  qualification  of  field 
staff),  especially  where  women’s  mobility  is 
limited. 
Ensuring 
Identifying  opportunities 
5.5 
to  support 
strategic  opportunities  with  government  and 
other 
for 
development 
networking and policy dialogue. 
organizations 
35 
intermediary  institutions.  GALs  will  make 
men  and  women  realise  the  benefit  of 
sharing the workload balance. 
Yes,  an  explicit  gender  targeting  strategy 
is described. 
Yes, the gender strategy outlines strategic 
activities for gender equality and women’s 
empowerment,  and  more  pragmatic 
activities  for  integrating  gender  in  all 
project components.  
The  JMU  will  include  a  staff  member  on 
Targeting and Social Inclusion and one of 
each in the 4 PIU. These will be responsible 
for  gender  mainstreaming  in  all  project 
components  as  well  as  monitoring  the 
implementation  of  the  gender  specific 
empowerment activities.  
Yes,  50  per  cent  of  all  the  project 
beneficiaries will be women. Women will be 
represented  equally 
in  management 
committees in APGs. The components will 
focus  on  promoting  gender  equality  and 
women’s  empowerment.  Gender-sensitive 
activities are proposed for all GALS will be 
carried out at community level in order to 
address  the  root  causes 
for  gender 
inequality.  
The PMU will recruit 5 targeting and social 
inclusion experts as part of the SACP staff. 
they  will  be  responsible  to  design  SACP 
gender strategy and action plan. 
take  place  using 
Women will be active participants in APGs. 
Training  will 
field 
extension staff and community facilitators 
at  local  level.  Women  and  men  will 
participate  in  various  training  such  as 
financial literacy, BDS and financial literacy 
training.  
SACP  will  carry  out  a  pro-WEAI  survey  in 
order  to  identify  the  constraints  and 
opportunities for women empowerment in 
relation to production, resources, income, 
leadership  and  time  poverty.  The  results 
will  inform  the  interventions  in  terms  of 
addressing  areas  where  the  women  are 
disempowered in particular on land rights.  
6. The programme’s logical framework, M&E, MIS, 
and  learning  systems  specify  in  design  –  and 
programme  M&E  unit  collects,  analyses  and 
interprets 
age-disaggregated 
and 
performance  and  impact  data,  including  specific 
indicators  on  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment. 
sex- 
Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  poverty 
targeting,  gender  and  youth  focus  will be 
part of the project’s supervision schedule. 
This  will  include  one  supervision  mission 
and one follow-up mission annually; and a 
Mid-term Review. Progress on these issues 
will  be  reported in  the  project’s  bi-annual 
progress 
reports.  All  people-centred 
indicators will be disaggregated by gender 
and  age  and  enriched  by  qualitative 
information  and  analysis.  Reporting  on 
poverty targeting, gender and youth focus 
will be part of the reporting requirements. 
36 
SACP INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
A.  Project Governance and Management Structures 
Lead Agency and Programme Oversight 
MLAWRR will be the Lead Agency of SACP, with Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry 
as the responsible officer. MLAWRR will establish a Joint Management Unit (JMU) that will 
include the functions of both the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) of the SIRP project and 
the  National  Project  Management  Unit  (NPMU)  of  the  new  SACP.  This  unit  will  be 
responsible for the management of the implementation of SACP. The JMU arrangement is 
expected  to  bring  synergies  and  focus  to  the  implementation  of  the  IFAD  country 
programme  and  provide  broader  and  deeper  expertise  to  tackle  rural  development 
challenges of Zimbabwe.  
A joint Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted for SIRP and SACP, chaired 
by the PS MLAWRR.  The PSC will be responsible for programme oversight and strategic 
guidance. The PSC will be made up of senior representatives of the principal stakeholders 
including  ministries  relevant  to  SIRP,  farmer  organisations,  and  the  private  sector.  to 
(i) provide  strategic  guidance  to  programme  implementation,  (ii)  oversee  programme 
planning, (iii) review the Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) prior to submission to 
IFAD, and (iv) review implementation progress and impact. The PSC shall meet twice a 
year  and  otherwise  when  required.  The  PSC  will  be  chaired  by  the  PS  of  MLAWRR  and 
comprise of the representatives of the following public sector departments/institutions and 
private  sector  organisations  that  are  expected  to  play  key  roles  in  the  SACP  efforts  to 
develop  rural  value  chains  in  Zimbabwe:  Department  of  Strategic  Policy  and  Business 
(DSPPB),  Department  of  Mechanisation  and  Irrigation  (DOI),  and  Department  of 
Agricultural Extension Services Agritex) of MLAWRR; the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development  (MOFED);  Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  Community  and  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprise Development (MWACSMED); Ministry of Environment, Tourism and Hospitality 
(METH); Ministry of Youth, Sports and Recreation (MYSR); and the Chamber of Commerce. 
The PSC will also include two senior members of the WUOs and APGs from the provinces, 
representing SIRP and SACP beneficiaries. The JMU will act as a secretariat for the PSC 
meetings. 
The  membership  of the  PSC  would  be  reviewed  during  programme implementation  and 
there is scope to widen it further or to invite stakeholders depending on the topic under 
review.  The  PSC  will  meet  bi-annually  to  review  and  approve  physical  and  financial 
progress,  assess  management  effectiveness,  decide  on  corrective  measures  where 
appropriate,  review  lessons  learned  and  good  practices,  and  approve  AWPBs  and 
Programme  Procurement  Plan  (PP).  Minutes  of  the  meetings  will  be  included  in  the 
programme’s progress reports for review by IFAD. 
Project Management and Staff  
The JMU staff will consist of a mix of SIRP staff, officers working for both SIRP and SACP, 
and specialists specifically hired or seconded to manage the new SACP activities. The JMU 
and the NPMU of SACP will be based in Harare close to the MLAWRR premises.  
The  SACP  National  Coordinator,  Senior  Value  Chain  and  Agribusiness  Advisor,  Senior 
Climate  Smart  Agriculture  Advisor,  Chief  Accountant  and  Procurement  Officer  will  be 
recruited from the market for the duration of the project. The M&E and Planning Specialist 
will be recruited from the market for the initial 3 years to assure a proper set up of the 
system,  and  thereafter  replaced  by  secondment  for  3,5  years.  The  overlapping  period 
37 
between  recruited  persons  and  seconded  ones  will  assure  capacity  building  through  an 
appropriate  on-the-job  learning  process.  While  several  specialists,  particularly  the  key 
ones,  are  dedicated  to  only  project,  SACP  shares  an  Office  Secretary,  Senior  Social 
Inclusion Specialist and KM/Communication Specialist with SIRP. 
To manage the field operations, SACP will establish four Provincial Project Implementation 
Units (PPIU), covering Matebeleland North, Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East  and 
Mashonaland  West.  The list  of  all  NPMU  and  PPIU  officers in  the  four  SACP  provinces is 
provided in Table 1 below.  Their draft TORs are presented in this PIM at the end of this 
Section. Implementation for Kwekwe district in Midlands province will be the responsibility 
of  the  Matebeleland  North  PPIU  while  Chirumanzu  will fall under  the  Mashonaland  West 
PPIU.  
At  the  district  level,  the  implementation  will  be  carried  out  through  Agritex  extension 
network,  who  form  implementation  teams  in  18  SACP  districts  covered  by  SACP.  The 
districts level field operations will be supported by SACP-resourced staff from other public 
institutions  and  private  sector  service  providers.  The  SACP  budget  includes  adequate 
resources for field staff mobility and good telephone and internet connectivity to facilitate 
easy outreach to the SACP-supported communities and to improve the chances of reaching 
the  SACP  implementation  targets  in  an  effective  manner.  The  illustration  of  the  full 
organisation of SACP is shown in Figure 1 below.  
Table 1: SACP Staff Composition28 
Position 
National Project Coordinator  
Chief Accountant 
Secondment or Recruited 
Recruited 
Recruited  
Senior  Value  Chain  and  Agribusiness 
Advisor  
Senior  Climate  Smart  Agriculture 
Advisor  
Senior Infrastructure Specialist 
50%  Senior  Social  Inclusion  Specialist 
(with SIRP) 
M&E and Planning Specialist 
M&E and Planning Specialist (after mid-
term) 
50% KM and Communication Specialist 
(with SIRP) 
Procurement Officer 
Recruited 
Recruited 
Secondment 
Secondment 
Recruited for the first 3 yrs  
Secondment for 3,5 yrs 
Secondment 
Recruited  
Financial Accountant (officer) 
Assistant Value Chain and Agribusiness 
Officer 
50% Office Secretary (with SIRP) 
Procurement assistant/clerk  
Driver/Office Assistant 
Secondment 
Secondment 
Secondment 
Secondment  
Secondment 
Provincial PPIUs 
Senior  Value  Chain  and  Agribusiness 
Specialist/ Provincial Coordinator (4)  
Climate Smart Agriculture Specialist (4)  Secondment 
Secondment 
Infrastructure Officer (4) 
M&E and Planning Officer (4) 
Secondment 
Social  Inclusion  and  Nutrition  Officer 
(4) 
Secondment 
Secondment 
28 The contracting method of some of the individual positions is under discussion with the Government of Zimbabwe 
38 
Position 
Junior Procurement Officer (4) 
Driver/Office Assistant (4) 
Secondment or Recruited 
Secondment 
Secondment 
Total  
36 staff members 
District level 
2  Agricultural  Extension  officers  per 
district (total 32) 
Secondment 
39 
40 
B.  Facilitation for Effective SACP Start-up  
Initial  Start-Up  Operations.  The  SACP  Financing  Agreement  (FA)  makes  available  a 
start-up budget of US$ 400,000 in respect of expenditures incurred before the completion 
of the disbursement conditions. Priority conditions precedent to withdrawals under the FA 
include:  (i)  opening  of  the  designated  account  by  MOFED;  (ii)  opening  of  Programme 
Operations Account by MLAWRR; (iii) recruitment and secondment of  key NPMU staff29; 
(iv) finalisation of PIM for approval; and (v) procument and installation of a fully functional 
accounting software. Other start-up activities include the (i) setting up of the Programme 
Steering  Committee;  (ii)  setting  up  of  the  Technical  Assessment  Committees;  (iii) 
establishment  of  office  space  for  NPMU  (iv)  identification  of  office  space  for  PPIUs  (v) 
procurement of goods and services as well as vehicles for NPMU and PPIUs and (vi) initial 
mobilisation  and  preselection  of  target  groups.  The  National  Project  Coordinator,  Chief 
Accountant, Agricultural Value chain and Agribusiness Specialist, CSA specialist, the M&E 
and Planning Specialist   and KM and Communication Officers will start work from three to 
one  month  in  advance  in  order  to  coordinate  the  start-up  activities  and  to  meet  the 
disbursement conditions prior to the establishment of the NPMU.   
Once the NPMU is in place, it will coordinate the following start-up activities in collaboration 
with the relevant implementing partners: (i) the finalisation of the AWPB for the first year; 
(ii)  finalisation  of  the  Procurement  Plan  for the  first 18 months;  (iii)  finalisation  of  PIM; 
(iv) organising of the National Start-up Workshop; (v) training workshop for project staff 
and key staff of implementing agencies to coincide with National Start-up Workshop; (vii) 
holding  four  provincial  information  meetings;  (viii)  conducting  district  information 
meetings  (ix)  conducting  ward  level  information  workshops  and  (x)  designing  the 
questionnaires for socioeconomic baseline, pro-WEAI and the nutrition baseline survey.  
Designated and Operations accounts. Two SACP accounts will be opened. MOFED (the 
Recipient)  will  open  a  single  Designated  Account  denominated  in  US$  (the  “Designated 
Account”)  at  the  Bank  agreeable  to  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe,  through  which  the 
proceeds of the loan shall be channelled. The Lead Programme Agency (MLAWRR) shall 
open one Project Operations Account denominated in US$ (the “Operations Account”) at 
a commercial bank acceptable to the Fund to receive and  hold the financing transferred 
from the Designated Account. The accounts need to be opened on a priority basis to allow 
for the receipt of the start-up facility. Subsequently the accounts can continue as regular 
dedicated  and  operating  accounts  for  the  periodic  disbursements.  MOFED  will  submit 
account names, banks together with bank names and designations of signatories to IFAD 
prior to submission of any withdrawal application. 
Submission of start-up budget. For the release of the start-up financing (prior to the 
first  disbursement),  a  work  plan  and  budget  and  a  procurement  plan  are  a  prerequisite 
and need to be submitted to IFAD for its no-objection by NPC. The NPC will work with the 
various  technical  departments  and  the  Department  of  Finance  and  Administration  in 
MLAWRR to finalise the start-up budget and submit to PS MLAWRR for approval. The PS 
MLAWRR will submit the budget, procurement plan and the request for the disbursement 
of start-up funds to IFAD through MoFED.  
Recruitment and Secondment of key PMU staff. This activity will be the responsibility 
of the MLAWRR Human Resources Department and the focal person in the Department of 
Agricultural Economics and Markets. Staff will be competitively recruited and competitively 
seconded and will all get performance-based contracts. As indicated above, this draft PIM 
29 National Programme Coordinator, Chief Accountant, Procurement Officer and Senior Value Chain and 
Agribusiness Advisor 
41 
includes Terms  of Reference  and  specifies  required  qualifications  for  all  SACP  positions. 
The following steps are foreseen: 
  The  MLAWRR  Human  Resources  Department  will  advertise  the  positions  for: 
National  Project  Coordinator;  Chief  Accountant,  Senior  Value  Chain  and 
Agribusiness Advisor, M&E and Planning Specialist, and Procurement Officer. The 
applicants will be given two weeks to respond. 
  MLAWRR’s Human Resources Department will establish a panel of five interviewers 
with  representation  from  the  technical  departments,  i.e.  Departments  of: 
Irrigation, Agricultural Extension and Agricultural Economics and Markets, MLAWRR 
Finance  and  Administration  Department,  MOFED  and  the  Accountant  General’s 
Office, to be part of the interview panel. The panellists will meet for two days to 
shortlist  applicants,  come  up  with  interview  questions  and  selection  criteria. 
MLAWRR  Human  Resources  Department  will  invite  the  shortlisted  candidates  for 
interviews that will be held over two days. After the interviews, the panellists will 
meet to select the candidates for the various positions. 
  MLAWRR Human Resources Department will document the process and attach the 
CVs  and  draft  contracts  for  the  selected  candidates  before  submitting  these 
documents for IFAD’s No Objection via MOFED. The recruitment of all key PCU staff 
is subject to IFAD’s No Objection.   
  Following receipt of IFAD’s “No Objection”, MLAWRR Human Resources Department 
will notify all the winning and losing candidates in writing. After the expiry of two 
weeks following this notification, candidates will commence duty. MLAWRR Human 
Resources Department will prepare contracts for staff to be signed between the PS 
MLAWRR and key staff members for respective duration of the programme and also 
following Public Service Commission regulations.  
  The  rest  of  the  PMU  staff  will  be  competitively  seconded  by  government.  The 
positions will be advertised, and interviews carried out, and the seconded staff will 
resume their government position on expiry of the project duration. The seconded 
staff will continue to receive the government salary and a top up from the project. 
The  PS  MLAWRR  will  ensure  that  all  steps  as  are  carried  out  timely  and  in  a 
transparent  manner.  All  staff  shall  be  selected  competitively  according  to  the 
Recipient’s  applicable  procedures  acceptable  to  the  Fund  and  the  hiring  and 
termination of the contracts shall be subject to the Fund’s “No Objection”.  
Establishment of the Programme Steering Committee (PSC). MLAWRR will establish 
the PSC for SACP (see description above). The MLAWRR drafts a letter, to be signed by 
the Permanent Secretary of MLAWRR, inviting nominations for PSC membership at senior 
position level. After confirmation of the names, MLAWRR will inform IFAD and the first PSC 
meeting will be organised to coincide with the establishment of the NPMU of the project. 
Establishment of Technical Assessment Committees (TAC). MLAWRR will establish 
the TACs to provide technical support to the NPMU on Component 1 implementation. There 
are TACs at two levels, one at national level and one at each SACP province. The TAC at 
national level will be responsible for the screening of Expression of Interests (EOI) and the 
business  proposals  from the lead  value  chain  enterprises,  while  the  provincial TACs  will 
screen the EOI and business proposals from the APGs and microenterprises against the 
set criteria. 
Office facilities for SACP NPMU. The MLAWRR will avail sufficient office space for SACP 
NPMU to be housed in in a building near MLAWRR for the full duration of the Project. The 
office should have good internet connectivity. The office will accommodate all the NPMU 
staff and its operations, as well as supervision missions of the Project. 
42 
Offices for Provincial PIUs. The Department of Finance and Administration in MLAWRR 
will deploy two of its staff per province to identify office space for each of the four Provincial 
PIUs  in  the  four  SACP  provinces.  Offices  will  be  secured  through  the  Provincial 
Administrator.  Depending on the condition of the offices, resources from start-up budget 
will be required for their appropriate refurbishment, including internet installation. 
Finalisation of Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The NPMU will organise a 
workshop to review and finalise this PIM and will submit the final version to IFAD for 
approval. The timeline for the finalisation of the PIM is presented in the Table below: 
Action 
Circulate the draft PIM to 
implementing agencies and 
PMU staff 
Deadline 
April 2021 
Submission of written 
comments on PMU 
April 2021 
Review comments submitted 
and incorporate in the PIM 
May 2021 
Responsibility 
NPMU Project Coordinator 
Implementing partners and 
NPMU, PPIU staff, NPMU, PC, 
M&E Specialist, supported by 
Chief Accountant and Director, 
Agricultural Economics and 
Markets 
NPMU, PC, M&E Specialist, 
supported by Chief Accountant 
and Director, Agricultural 
Economics and Markets 
Submit draft. PIM for PSC 
approval 
Submit draft for IFAD NO 
objection 
May 2021 
PSC 
June 2021 
NPMU Project Coordinator 
Initial Salary for NPMU staff. After the NPMU is established, it will require a maximum 
of three months to finalise the start-up activities before effectiveness of the programme. 
For this reason, a provision has been made from the start-up facility for a salary budget 
for  selected  NPMU  staff  during  start-up  phase.  SACP  staff  on  secondment  will receive  a 
top-up on salaries.  
Finalisation  of  First  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  and  18-months 
Procurement Plan. The NPMU – once established – will submit to IFAD for prior review 
its first 18-Month Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and its 18-month Procurement 
Plan (PP). The approved AWPB and PP are conditional to the release of the initial advance.  
National Start-up Workshop. Assuming adequate progress in the above project start-
up activities, a national start-up workshop is expected to take place around April 2021. 
The objective of the workshop is to obtain a full buy in from all stakeholders. The workshop 
will be organised by the NPMU together with MLAWRR. In addition to launching the project, 
the workshop will be used to: 
  Take stock of preparatory activities carried out 
 
  Explain the scope, the policy framework and the activities and role of stakeholders 
Introduce the Project to its key stakeholders to raise awareness 
in the project 
43 
  Confirm  the  section  criteria  for  beneficiaries  and  area  for  SACP  components  and 
activities 
  Present,  explain  and  discuss  the  implementation  procedures,  as  captured  in  the 
PIM, to SACP staff and key implementation partners. 
As a result of the workshop, the SACP staff and its stakeholders are expected to have a 
shared view of:  
  SACP objectives, activities and projected results within the framework of national 
and sectoral policies of Zimbabwe 
  Roles in and responsibilities in the implementation of SACP 
 
  Administrative and financial procedures underpinning SACP management.  
Implementation and coordination mechanisms of the Project  
C.  Other Implementing Agencies and Partnerships  
When  implementing  its  components  and  activities,  SACP  will  work  closely  with  the 
following national and local GoZ-related implementing agencies/partners: 
  Department of Agricultural and Extension Services (Agritex) is responsible 
for  agricultural  extension,  dissemination  of  agricultural  market  information, 
monitor  crop  and  livestock  trends,  collate  agricultural  information,  provision  of 
capacity building to farmers in BDS, marketing and CSA.  
  Ministry  of  Women  Affairs,  Community,  Small  and  Medium-Scale 
Enterprises  is  responsible  for  the  registration  of  the  microenterprises  and  the 
APGs at local level. Capacity building for GALs. 
  Rural  District  Councils  are  the  custodian  of  the  communal  land  and  attend  to 
complaints and redress mechanisms in the case of disputes. 
  Environmental  Management  Authority 
(EMA) 
ensures 
adequate 
environmental safeguards are met in the targeted area. 
  Water User Organisations (WUOs) will participate in the participatory irrigation 
design. 
  Climate  Change  Management  is  responsible  for  coordination  of  all  climate 
related policy in Zimbabwe. 
  Catchment Councils are responsible for the issuance of water permits. 
  Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA) is responsible issuance of water 
permits.  
  District  Development  Fund  (DDF)  are  responsible  for  the  rehabilitation  and 
maintenance of rural infrastructure including feeder roads. 
  Department of Mechanisation is responsible for post-harvest technologies and 
soil and water conservation. 
  Department  of  Irrigation  (DOI)  is  responsible  for  irrigation  infrastructure 
development and rehabilitation. 
In addition in implementation partnerships, SACP will provide an opportunity to strengthen 
the overall implementation of the IFAD-supported SIRP and to harmonize the approaches 
in particular in market and value chain development and the mainstreaming topics such 
as  nutrition  and  food  security.  Further,  SACP  will  benefit  from  SIRP’s  partnership  with 
Harvest Plus for increased production and consumption of bio-fortified crops.  
44 
It is also expected that SACP will collaborate with World Food Programme (WFP) in several 
areas  related  to  resilience,  food  security  and  nutrition.  Other  possible  implementation 
partners include (i) International Labour Organization (ILO) on youth employment, (ii) the 
Environmental  Management  Agency  (EMA)  on  compliance  with  national  regulations  and 
the  SECAP  issues  in  SACP  implementation,  (iii)  the  Climate  Change  Management 
Department  (CCMD)  on  incorporation  of  climate  change  adaptation  measures  and 
monitoring their effectiveness, (iv) UNICEF on the delivery of WASH interventions in the 
SACP  project  target  districts,  and  (v) the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Child  Care  on  nutrition 
education  through its  care  group  model  and  on  the  delivery  of health  services  to  boost 
maternal and child nutrition. Finally, Wageningen University has provided support for the 
SACP  design  as  regards  the  definition  of  the  nutrition  and  climate  resilience  strategy. 
Further linkages  with  Wageningen  will be  explored  during implementation.  In the  Table 
below, SACP’s overall partnership strategies are further presented. 
SACP Co-Financing and Implementation Partnership Approach 
Partnering Functions   Partners/Networks/  
Platforms  
Mobilizing 
financing  
co-
MoFED, 
MWACSMED  
MLAWRR, 
OPEC Fund 
Specific  Results  and 
Outcomes 
from 
Partnership  
Agreed  co-investment 
plan; 
finance 
and 
monitoring 
repayments 
arrears 
counterpart 
contributions 
and 
settlement; 
Expansion  of SIRP  co-
and 
financing 
other 
potentially 
operations 
Justification for  
Partnership   
 Borrower and 
 delegated 
 agencies 
Expansion of 
IFAD/OFID co-
financing 
GCF 
Increase  co-financing 
for climate resilience 
Mobilisation of climate 
funds 
In-kind 
beneficiaries 
from 
Commitment 
ownership 
and 
 Sustainability 
Strengthening 
private 
engagement  
sector 
Chamber 
Commerce 
of 
Banks and Insurance 
Selected  retailers  and 
process industry (goat 
dairy, 
premium 
veggies) 
Government 
Zimbabwe Executive 
of 
Engaging  in  policy 
influencing 
and 
development 
agendas  
Understanding 
comparative 
advantages  of  specific 
Value 
commodity 
Chain 
to 
(emerging) 
smallholder farmers 
aspects 
Understanding 
comparative 
advantages  of  specific 
tools and instruments, 
incl. e-banking 
Value-adding 
and 
securing  markets  for 
beneficiaries 
Dual nature of SOs 
and projects under 
this COSOP 
Reduced vulnerability 
and enhanced 
resilience at country 
and farmer levels 
Securing remunerative 
value chains 
Dialogue  to  support 
transformative policies 
and CBs on gender and 
Pro rural poor policies 
operationalised 
45 
Partnering Functions   Partners/Networks/  
Platforms  
 RBA 
Justification for  
Partnership   
Complementary united 
positioning for 
strength leaving space 
for IFAD mandate 
Specific  Results  and 
Outcomes 
from 
Partnership  
youth;  Mitigate  risks 
specified in main text 
Mobilize information to 
support 
transformative policies 
on  gender  and  youth; 
Mitigate risks specified 
in  main 
text.  Co- 
finance 
International 
Women day and Rural 
Women’s day 
Enabling 
coordinated 
country-led 
processes   
Farmer and Women or 
Youth  Organizations, 
and 
Unions 
Associations 
Catalysing  the  role  of 
F/W/YOs 
rural 
transformation  policy 
setting and monitoring 
in 
Ultimate 
accountability 
framework in action 
Government 
Zimbabwe Executive 
of 
Country  ownership  in 
ambitious 
rural 
transformation 
Ultimate rationale 
NGO sector 
ZUNDAF 
Groups 
Working 
Provide 
a  neutral, 
protected  bargaining 
space 
Inform  partners  on 
and 
progress 
inform 
challenges; 
policies and operations 
Ultimate rationale 
Ultimate rationale 
46 
D.  TOR for Key SACP Staff 
Below, the draft TOR for all SACP professional staff in NPMU and PPIUs and the contracted 
private service providers are presented. 
47 
Draft Terms of Reference: National Project Coordinator 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund and the 
Government of Zimbabwe. SACP supports the transformation of smallholder agriculture in 
Zimbabwe  through  private  sector-led  value  chain  development.  The  Project  operates  in 
the  five  provinces  of  Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland  East,  Mashonaland  West, 
Matebeleland North and Midlands. It consists of three interlinked components: Inclusive 
Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and 
Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional Support  and  Project  Coordination.  SACP is in  the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU) in 
the field, to manage and coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the 
project is Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), 
all SACP activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the 
farming community, small and medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: National Project Coordinator 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
The Project Coordinator (PC) will head the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) and 
as such will have overall responsibility for management and coordination of SACP with the 
objective to achieve an increased smallholder participation in market-oriented and climate-
smart value chains in the project area. 
The  PC  assures  that  the  SACP  is  implemented  along  the  guidelines  provided  by  the 
financing  agreement,  design  report, implementation manual  and  following  the  guidance 
given by the lead ministry MLAWRR, steering committee and supervision missions. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  To promote efficient coordination within the Joint Management Unit (JMU) and seek 
synergies  and  complementarities  with  the  Smallholder  Irrigation  Revitalisation 
Programme (SIRP), implemented under the same unit, assuring, jointly with SIRP 
National  Director,  in  particular  the  efficient  use  of  shared  assets  and  human 
resources;  
  To  ensure  an  optimum  use  of  SACP  resources  in  achievement  of  the  agreed 
objectives of the project; 
  To  expedite  and  coordinate  the  timely  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB) 
process at all levels, and ensure that these are developed in a fully participatory 
manner, learning from previous years 
  To direct project implementation in accordance to agreed plans and to report on 
progress and outcomes in a methodological manner, including technical reports and 
financial reporting; 
  To  ensure  the  project  adheres  to  social,  environmental  and  climate-related 
safeguards and contributes to gender equity, women’s empowerment and inclusive 
development; 
  To ensure full functioning of the project’s Monitoring and Evaluation system  that 
captures and analyses  disaggregated data on gender and social inclusion and make 
use of the system as a management tool; 
48 
  To ensure accurate knowledge management of the project, including information 
dissemination about project implementation progress and lessons learned; 
  To  ensure  proper  financial  management,  including  timely  disbursements  and 
comprehensive reporting on expenditures and expenditure forecasts; 
  To ensure efficient procurement in line with the Procurement Plans;  
  To ensure a strong sense of teamwork within the NPMU and wider JMU and to foster 
constructive engagement among the partners involved in Project implementation;  
  To direct NPCU staff both at Head Office and add provincial level, as well as hired 
service providers and consultants, to carry out their agreed duties in a way aimed 
at achieving the Project objectives; 
  To  maintain  liaison  with  provinces  and  districts,  their  leadership  and  their 
representatives in the project area; 
  To develop, negotiate and implement agreements with project partners, including 
communities,  private  sector,  government  entities  and  non-government 
organisations; and others as deemed necessary; and 
  To represent the project to all external stakeholders. 
Qualifications and Competences 
A Master’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or other relevant 
discipline related to Agricultural Development. 
Required Work Experience 
  15-years’  experience  in  rural  development  in  Zimbabwe,  of  which  five  in  a 
managerial position; 
  Experience  in  Project  administration,  financial  management  and  reporting, 
preferably using systems of international institutions; 
  An  existing  network  of  relations  pertaining  to  community  planning,  smallholder 
agriculture; value chains and financial inclusion; 
  Experience  in  collaborating  across  government  ministries  and  in  public-private 
dialogue; and 
  Strong leaderships skills, including the ability to delegate responsibility within the 
team and to implementing partners. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited for the total duration of the project, initial contract for 3 years (with possibility 
of extension based on performance) 
49 
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund and the 
Government of Zimbabwe. SACP supports the transformation of smallholder agriculture in 
Zimbabwe  through  private  sector-led  value  chain  development.  The  Project  operates  in 
the  five  provinces  of  Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland  East,  Mashonaland  West, 
Matebeleland North and Midlands. It consists of three interlinked components: Inclusive 
Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and 
Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional Support  and  Project  Coordination.  SACP is in  the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU) in 
the field, to manage and coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the 
project is Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), 
all SACP activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the 
farming community, small and medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Reporting to the National Project Coordinator, the Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor will 
lead  the  SACP  overall  effort  to identify and  develop enterprise-led  smallholder-inclusive 
value chains in the project target provinces and districts. The SACP target over project life 
is to provide TA and matching grants to 40 lead enterprises, 200 microenterprises and 800 
Agriculture Producer Groups. Also access to financial services is promoted at all beneficiary 
levels.  
The  Advisor  ensures  the  technical  quality  of  the  SACP  value  chain  implementation 
according to the guidelines provided by the Financing Agreement, project design report, 
and  the  PIM  and  following  the  guidance  by  the  Project  Coordinator,  the  lead  ministry 
MLAWRR, the SACP Steering Committee and IFAD supervision missions. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Lead project development and strategic support across all 5 provinces in the area 
of Value Chain and Agribusiness development; 
  Coordinate  the  overall  implementation  of  the  BDS  services  to  Lead  Enterprises, 
Microenterprises  and  to  Agricultural  Producer  Groups,  following  the  detailed 
guidance  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual,  paying  special  attention  to  the 
needs of men, women ; 
  Coordinate  the  overall  delivery  of  Matching  Grants  to  Lead  Enterprises, 
Microenterprises  and  to  Agricultural  Producer  Groups,  following  the  detailed 
guidance in the Project Implementation Manual; 
  Liaise with the Financial Institution in charge of the Lead Enterprise Credits, and 
ensure coordinated targeting between Matching Grants and Credit Line according 
to the PIM; 
  Ensure all APG/ME/LE Technical Assistance and Financial Support are appropriately 
planned  for,  prepared  and  implemented,  following  the  guidance  in  the  PDR  and 
PIM; 
50 
  Support and coordinate the work by Provincial and District level SACP specialists 
and staff implementing value chain development activities; 
  Coordinate  and  supervise  the  activities  implemented  by  BDS  service  provider 
consultants; 
  Facilitate  market  driven  linkages  between  agribusiness  producers,  wholesalers, 
processors, and markets within the project areas; 
  Meet and liaise with relevant ministry staff, other agriculture/business development 
projects in the country, the private sector, and other donors working in agriculture 
to ensure synergies are created and resources are leveraged; 
  Attend  relevant  meetings,  technical  working  groups,  conferences,  etc.  to  share 
knowledge, coordinate programmes, and promote SACPs work; 
  Coordinate with SIRP to identify synergies and potential areas of collaboration; 
  Provide capacity building support and mentoring to relevant SACP staff at all levels; 
  Provide  the  agribusiness/VC  development  perspective  vision  and  inputs  to  the 
development of the AWPBs; 
  Draft the agribusiness/VC sections of the SACP annual progress reports; 
  Contribute to SACP M&E activities from VC and Agribusiness point of view, including 
sex and age disaggregated  data collection and reporting in coordination with the 
M&E team. 
Qualifications and Competences 
A Master’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or MBA. 
Required Work Experience 
  15-years’ experience in rural development in Zimbabwe; 
  Experience  in  value  chain  development,  smallholder  development,  agribusiness, 
agriculture finance, international institutions; 
  An existing network of relations pertaining to agribusiness, smallholder agriculture, 
value chains and financial inclusion; 
  Strong leaderships skills, including the ability to delegate responsibility within the 
team. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited for the total duration of the project, initial contract for 3 years (with possibility 
of extension based on performance) 
51 
Draft Terms of Reference: Assistant VC and Agribusiness 
Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund and the 
Government of Zimbabwe. SACP supports the transformation of smallholder agriculture in 
Zimbabwe  through  private  sector-led  value  chain  development.  The  Project  operates  in 
the  five  provinces  of  Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland  East,  Mashonaland  West, 
Matebeleland North and Midlands. It consists of three interlinked components: Inclusive 
Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and 
Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional Support  and  Project  Coordination.  SACP is in  the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU) in 
the field, to manage and coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the 
project is Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), 
all SACP activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the 
farming community, small and medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Assistant VC and Agribusiness Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Reporting to the Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor, the Assistant VC and Agribusiness 
Specialist will assist the Senior VC/Agribusiness Advisor in overall SACP effort to identify 
and  develop  enterprise-led  smallholder-inclusive  value  chains  in  the  project  target 
provinces and districts. The SACP target over project life is to provide TA and matching 
grants to 40 lead enterprises, 200 microenterprises and 800 Agriculture Producer Groups. 
Also access to financial services is promoted.  
The Assistant Specialist supports the SACP value chain implementation according to the 
guidelines provided by the Financing Agreement, the design report, the PIM and following 
the guidance by the Project Coordinator and the Senior VC/Agribusiness Advisor. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Support  the  VC/Agribusiness  Senior  Advisor  in  the  area  of  Value  Chain  and 
Agribusiness development; 
  Support  the  overall  implementation  of  the  BDS  services  to  Lead  Enterprises, 
Microenterprises  and  to  Agricultural  Producer  groups,  following  the  detailed 
guidance in the Project Implementation Manual and paying special attention to the 
needs of women and men; 
  Support 
the  overall  delivery  of  Matching  Grants  to  Lead  Enterprises, 
Microenterprises  and  to  Agricultural  Producer  Groups,  following  the  detailed 
guidance in the Project Implementation Manual; 
  Support  all  APG/ME/LE  Technical  Assistance  and  Financial  Support  with  the  aim 
they  are  appropriately  planned  for,  prepared  and  implemented,  following  the 
guidance in the PDR and PIM; 
  Support  the  work  by  Provincial  and  District  level  SACP  specialists  and  staff 
implementing value chain development activities; 
  Support the activities implemented by BDS service provider consultants; 
52 
  Facilitate  market  driven  linkages  between  agribusiness  producers,  wholesalers, 
processors, and markets within the project areas; 
  Attend  relevant  meetings  and  technical  working  groups  to  share  knowledge, 
coordinate programs, and promote SACPs work; 
  Coordinate with SIRP to identify synergies and potential areas of collaboration; 
  Support the SACP team in including the agribusiness/VC development aspects in 
AWPBs; 
  Provide inputs to the agribusiness/VC sections of the SACP annual progress reports; 
  Work  closely  with  the  SACP  M&E  team  to  capture  VC  and  Agribusiness  progress 
related data and results in the M&E system and reports. 
Qualifications and Competences 
A Bachelor’s degree in Agribusiness, Agricultural Economics, Management, or MBA. 
Required Work Experience 
  5-years’ experience in rural development in Zimbabwe; 
  Experience in value chain development, smallholder development, agribusiness; 
  Strong team and interpersonal skills, including the ability to perform independently 
as well as a team player. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Seconded. Initial contract for 3 years (with possibility of extension based on 
performance) 
53 
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior CSA Advisor 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund and the 
Government of Zimbabwe. SACP supports the transformation of smallholder agriculture in 
Zimbabwe  through  private  sector-led  value  chain  development.  The  Project  operates  in 
the  five  provinces  of  Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland  East,  Mashonaland  West, 
Matebeleland North and Midlands. It consists of three interlinked components:  Inclusive 
Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and 
Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional Support  and  Project  Coordination.  SACP is in  the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU) in 
the field, to manage and coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the 
project is Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), 
all SACP activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the 
farming community, small and medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain. 
Position: Senior CSA Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Reporting  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  the  CSA  Specialist  will  lead  the  work  on  climate 
change adaptation related activities in the project and overall coordination of the CSA and 
Productivity Skills Enhancement under Sub-Component 1.2. The specialist will also support 
policy  dialogue,  institutional  coordination  and  local  level  capacity  building  in  CSA  and 
productivity  skills.  S/he  will  work  in  close  collaboration  with  the  other  members  of  the 
NPMU  and  supervise  the  PPIU  CSA  Specialists  and  the  CSA  Service  Provider  that  will 
support the implementation of the relevant activities in SACP.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The  CSA  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  providing  technical  expertise  in  the  three 
objectives of CSA: (a) sustainably increasing agricultural productivity, (b) building climate 
change resilience and (c) reducing green house gas emissions within the context of SACP. 
More specifically, the CSA Specialist will perform the following tasks: 
a)  Provide  technical  inputs  and  guidance  in  the  implementation  of  the  sustainable 
agriculture production and climate change adaptation activities under SACP; 
b)  Provide technical guidance to ensure the minimisation of green house gas emissions 
resulting from SACP activities;  
c)  Provide inputs for measuring climate change resilience and improved  agricultural 
productivity  among  the  target  men  and  women  beneficiaries  of  SACP  within  the 
project’s disaggregated data on gender and social inclusion in the  Monitoring and 
Evaluation system, in close consultation with the SACP M&E staff;  
d)  Ensure  the  inclusion  of  climate  change  resilience  and  environmental  and  natural 
resources management data collection in the baseline studies to be undertaken as 
part of SACP; 
54 
e)  Liaise with the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement and Ministry 
of Environment, Water and Climate counterparts and with the Project Coordinator, 
and engage in ongoing national and regional level policy dialogue; 
f)  Undertake  the  technical  review  of  CSA  case  studies,  maps  and  technical  papers 
being produced under SACP; 
g)  Identify the appropriate dissemination channels for the case studies, vulnerability 
maps and other publications to be produced as part of the SACP; 
h)  Participate  in  the  screening  of  business  plans  produced  by  the  APGs  to  ensure 
integration of feasible CSA practices; 
i)  Provide  training  to  fill  the  knowledge  and  capacity  gaps  of  the  various  project 
stakeholders including service providers and the project team in the understanding, 
planning and implementation of CSA measures; 
j)  Provide  strategic  orientation  in  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  stages 
through periodic field visits to project intervention areas; 
k)  Liaise  with  Environmental  Management  Agency  officials  to  coordinate  the 
development and implementation of environmental and social management plans 
for  the  agricultural  productivity  activities  as  required  by  the  Environmental 
Management Act; 
l)  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB; 
m)  Contribute to reporting structures as laid out in the SACP documentation; 
n)  In collaboration with the other NPMU members, ensure the recruitment for the CSA 
Service  Provider,  including  the  development  of  specific  terms  of  reference, 
preparation of detailed work plans, as well as defining and agreeing on the exact 
nature and timing of the deliverables with the Service Provider; and  
o)  Undertake any other duties (related to SACP activities) as may be assigned by the 
Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A  Master’s  degree  in  agronomy,  climate  change  adaptation  or  natural  resources 
management.  
  Thorough  knowledge  of  the  institutional  setting  in  Zimbabwe  with  a  specific 
reference to CSA and climate change adaptation as well as familiarity with all the 
governmental and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved in the policy 
dialogue on CSA and climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  Thorough knowledge of the legislative and regulatory framework on agriculture and 
climate  change  as  well  as  ongoing  projects  and  initiatives  focusing  on  CSA  in 
Zimbabwe. 
  Good  knowledge  of  GIS  systems  with  relevant  spatial  skills  for  mapping  project 
areas. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, Microsoft office 
packages etc.). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
55 
Required Work Experience 
At least six years of experience in the field of Climate Smart Agriculture or Agronomy with 
strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Renewable performance-based contract with an initial duration of one year. 
56 
Draft Terms of Reference: Chief Accountant 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund and the 
Government of Zimbabwe. SACP supports the transformation of smallholder agriculture in 
Zimbabwe  through  private  sector-led  value  chain  development.  The  Project  operates  in 
the  five  provinces  of  Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland  East,  Mashonaland  West, 
Matebeleland North and Midlands.  It consists of three interlinked components: Inclusive 
Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and 
Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional Support  and  Project  Coordination.  SACP is in  the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU) in 
the field, to manage and coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the 
project is Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), 
all SACP activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the 
farming community, small and medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: Chief Accountant 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work  
Reporting  directly  to  the  National  Project  Coordinator  with  technical  responsibility  to 
Director  of  Finance  MLAWRR,  the  Chief  Accountant  is  a  key  member  of  staff  in  SACP 
responsible  for  the  overall  financial  management  aspects,  implementing  financial 
management  policies  and  strategies  in  line  with  IFAD  and  Government  of  Zimbabwe 
requirements and international standards. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
a)  Overall responsibility of the financial management function in SACP 
b)  Implementation and maintenance of the grant module of the PFMS ensuring that 
the  chart  of  accounts  and  reporting  system  thereof  provides  information  to  link 
between project activities by category, component and funding source. 
c)  Timely input of budget data into the accounting system and production of monthly 
and  quarterly  reports  regarding  aspects  of  project  financial  monitoring,  bringing 
out variances and advising technical specialist as to the limits of expenditure. 
d)  Prepare half-yearly consolidated statements of project accounts as an integral part 
of  the  Management  Information  System  to  be  submitted  to  the  Project  Steering 
Committee, and subsequently to IFAD. 
e)  Prepare  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  International  Public  Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS) - Accrual basis with the prerequisite disclosures for 
non-cash items and liaise with external auditors to audit the SACP accounts to meet 
the required submission dates by IFAD.  
f)  Oversee tax matters of the Project, ensuring that tax exemptions and tax refunds 
for  the  procurement  of  goods  and  services  for  the  Project  are  secured  at  the 
appropriate time. 
g)  Provide training and guidance to  project beneficiaries and implementing partners 
for  AWPB  activity  preparation,  including  gender  sensitive  budgeting  and 
submissions and participate in the development and implementation of plans, and 
procedures  for  budget  request  submission  activities  to  ensure  that  project 
objectives are achieved in accordance with prevailing government practices which 
are acceptable to IFAD.  
57 
h)  Calculate the cost of services and associated analyses and propose actions to be 
taken to improve cost-efficiency of services, without affecting quality. 
i)  Process documentation and follow up on disbursements from the government and 
IFAD  to  ensure  that  releases  are  not  delayed.  Ensure  that  funds  for  project 
implementation are disbursed in a timely manner to enable project interventions 
to be carried out on time. 
j)  Prepare and submit regular withdrawal applications to IFAD and follow up to ensure 
that the project does not run short of liquidity. 
k)  Follow  up  on  all  project  funds  released  to  implementing  entities  and  technical 
partners for timely retirement and proper utilization. 
l)  Ensure that statements of expenditure (SOEs) are carefully checked for eligibility 
with relevant financial agreements. 
m)  Maintain effective internal control environment for the project by ensuring that: 
i. 
ii. 
All  SACP  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  financing 
agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  only  for  the 
purposes for which the funds were provided; 
Counterpart  funds  have  been  provided  and  used  in  accordance  with  the 
conditions  of  the  financing  agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and 
efficiency, and only for the purposes for which they were provided; 
iii.  Goods  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in  accordance  with  the 
financing agreement and in accordance with government and IFAD’s rules and 
procedures; 
All necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect 
of all project activities, with clear linkages between the books of account and 
the financial statements presented to the financiers; 
iv. 
v.  Designated  accounts  are  maintained in accordance  with  the  provisions  of the 
financing  agreement  and  in  accordance  with  the  financier’s  rules  and 
procedures; 
Provide any support to the Procurement Unit to assist in procurement for the 
SACP in accordance with procedures laid down by Financing Agreements of IFAD 
and OFID. 
vi. 
n)  Ensure  that  fixed  assets  are  well  accounted  for  and  annual  verification  is 
undertaken of the condition of assets and their location. 
o)  Ensure the effective and efficient operation of administrative aspects of the SACP. 
p)  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
 
 Bachelor’s degree in business management or finance, and a professionally qualified 
accountant with Membership of the Zimbabwe Institute of Chartered Accountants.  
  Strong  managerial  skills  and  demonstrated  capacity  to  manage  people  and  interact 
with a wide range of private sector partners and government representatives.  
  Strong organisational skills. Versatility, ability to multi task and meet deadlines. 
  Excellent organisational and analytical skills. 
  Excellent  computer  skills  and  well-versed  in  the  use  of  Excel,  Word  and  accounting 
software. 
  Good communication skills and ability to interact with a wide range of private sector 
partners and government representatives. 
Required Work Experience 
  At least eight years of relevant work experience, including at least four as a financial 
manager or accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Preparing withdrawal applications for external funding agencies.  
  Audit management experience in donor funded program. 
58 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited for the total duration of the project, initial contract for 3 years (with possibility 
of extension based on performance) 
59 
Draft Terms of Reference: Financial Accountant 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project (SACP) is a six-year development project financed 
jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), OPEC Fund and the 
Government of Zimbabwe. SACP supports the transformation of smallholder agriculture in 
Zimbabwe  through  private  sector-led  value  chain  development.  The  Project  operates  in 
the  five  provinces  of  Mashonaland  Central,  Mashonaland  East,  Mashonaland  West, 
Matebeleland North and Midlands. It consists of three interlinked components: Inclusive 
Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and 
Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional Support  and  Project  Coordination.  SACP is in  the 
process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project  Management 
Unit (NPMU) in Harare and in the four Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIU) in 
the field, to manage and coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the 
project is Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), 
all SACP activities include pro-active co-operations with the private sector, including the 
farming community, small and medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing 
companies in key agricultural value chain. 
Position: Financial Accountant 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work  
Reporting to the Chief Accountant, the Financial Accountant supports the Chief Accountant 
to achieve result-oriented objectives of SACP financial management. Under the supervision 
of the Chief Accountant, the financial accountant will take responsibility for all accounts 
and finance transactions of the SACP and for maintaining all accounting documentation in 
good order. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
a)  Support in the preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB), including 
gender sensitive budgeting 
b)  Analysing  payment  requests  and  reconciliation  with  approved  documentation 
including purchase orders and contracts 
c)  Posting  payment  invoices  into  financial  management  systems  in  line  with 
approved work plans. 
d)  Assist in preparation of half-yearly consolidated statements of project accounts 
as an integral part of the Management Information System to be submitted to 
the Project Oversight Committee, and subsequently to IFAD. 
e)  Ensure  that  fixed  assets  are  well  accounted  for  and  regular  verification  is 
undertaken of the condition of assets and their location. 
f)  Ensure that supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of 
all project activities, with clear linkages between the books of account and the 
financial statements presented to the financiers; 
g)  Preparing bank reconciliations for the project accounts.  
h)  Assisting in review of invoices and supporting documents before any payments 
are processed. 
i)  Following up on outstanding advances both to staff and service providers. 
j)  Assisting  in  ensuring  budgetary  controls  to  ensure  that  no  payment  is  done 
unless there is sufficient budgetary provision. 
k)  Ensuring systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounting records. 
l)  Prepare the SOE’s and the WA Application to IFAD for timely replenishment. 
m)  Participating in the  Audit exercises  providing  auditors  will  all information  and 
documentation they require 
60 
n)  Follows up accountabilities of funds advanced at the level PMU and with other 
implementing partners. 
o)  Ensure systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounts records. 
p)  Ensure that salary and tax deductions are remitted in timely way and that all 
acknowledgement of receipt is documented. 
q)  Withholding Tax is recovered from payments, remitted and Tax Certificates are 
issued to suppliers. 
r)  Any other duties as may be assigned by the Chief Accountant. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor’s degree in business or finance, and an affiliate professional accountant. 
  Advanced quantitative and analytical skills. 
  Excellent  computer  skills  and  well-versed  in  the  use  of  Excel,  Word  and  accounting 
software. 
  Good communication skills; Fluency in written and spoken English.  
Required Work Experience 
  At  least  four  years  of  relevant  work  experience,  including  at  least  two  years  as  a 
financial manager or accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Preparing withdrawal applications for external funding agencies. 
  Working with colleagues in geographically separate locations.  
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Seconded GoZ staff. The total duration of the contract is six years and is subject to 
satisfactory annual performance reviews.
61 
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior Infrastructure Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.    It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Senior Infrastructure Specialist 
Duty Station: NPMU 
Overall Scope of Work 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Reporting to the National Project Coordinator, support Implementing Agencies in 
infrastructure project identification and development ranking. 
Support  Implementing  Agencies  in  preparing  TORs  for  Feasibility  Studies  & 
Detailed Designs and other short-term consultancies. 
Conduct  feasibility  studies  together  with  Implementing  Agencies  for  selected 
projects, taking into account gender and social inclusion needs. 
Review feasibility studies and/detailed designs at every stage of the project cycle. 
Build  the  capacities  of  Implementing  Agencies  through  Training  of  Trainers  on 
planning,  preparation  of 
feasibility  studies  &  detailed  designs,  contract 
management, supervision of services and works and operation and maintenance. 
Prepare  training  materials  for  use  by  beneficiaries  and  Implementing  Agencies 
staff. 
Ensure, in collaboration with the respective technical experts, that national, IFAD 
and OFID environmental and social safeguards are adhered to during development 
of irrigation schemes.  
Follow up agreed action points of IFAD supervision mission.  
Support the NPMU in all technical matters. 
Deliverables 
  Guidelines for project identification & development ranking. 
  TORs for feasibility studies and detailed designs. 
  Feasibility study reports for all infrastructure. 
  Site management handbook. 
  Contract management handbook. 
  Operation and maintenance manuals for all infrastructure developed under the 
project.  
62 
Qualification and Experience 
The Senior Engineer should demonstrate the following qualifications and experience: 
  A Master’s Degree in Engineering or equivalent. 
  At least fifteen years recent experience in rural infrastructure development and project 
implementation  focusing  on  sustainability  related  aspects  such  as  establishing/ 
strengthening user groups, social aspects and value-chain linkages;  
  Proficiency in spoken and written English. 
  Excellent interpersonal skills and team spirit. 
  Experience  of  projects  involving  multiple  and  diverse  stakeholders  including 
Government agencies, private sector, and end users.  
  Registered with a recognized engineering professional board or institution. 
  Computer literacy with  proficient knowledge  of  Microsoft  Office  (Word,  Excel, Power 
Point)  and  conversant  with  modern  engineering  design  software  like  AUTOCAD, 
IRRICAD, GIS etc. 
Contract 
The duration of the contract will initially be for a period of 60 months. 
63 
Draft Terms of Reference: M&E and Planning Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  for 
International  D  evelopment  (OFID)  and  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the 
transformation of smallholder agriculture in Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain 
development. The Project operates in the five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland 
East,  Mashonaland  West,  Matebeleland North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three interlinked 
components: Inclusive Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain 
Infrastructure and Component 3: Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. 
SACP  is  in  the  process  of  recruiting  officers  and  service  providers  for  its  National  Project 
Management Unit (NNPMU) in Harare and in the four Provincial Project Implementation Units 
(PPIU) in the field, to manage and coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency 
of  the  project  is  Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water  Climate  and  Rural  Resettlement 
(MLAWRR),  all  SACP  activities  include  pro-active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector, 
including the farming community, small and medium enterprises and larger processing and 
marketing companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: M&E and Planning Specialist at NPMU  
Duty Station: Harare, with frequent travel to project area 
Overall  Scope  of  Work:  Reporting  to  the  Project  Coordinator,  the  M&E  and  Planning 
Specialist  will  have  overall  responsibility  for  the  coordination  of  the  timely  establishment, 
operation and maintenance of the project M&E system; for the generation of knowledge and 
evidence; and for the communication of project activities, achievements and lessons learned.  
Main Tasks and Responsibilities 
The specific tasks of the M&E and Planning Specialist will include: 
i. Set up the M&E system for SACP: 
●  Revise the project logframe matrix and include gender sensitive indicators. 
●  Assist in developing the results oriented-AWPB. 
●  Develop the overall framework for the project M&E. 
●  Guide the process of reporting against the project key indicators. 
●  Prepare and M&E matrix. 
ii. Set up an MIS system that entails: 
●  Development  of  formats  (for  data  collection,  analysis  and  interpretation)  to  track 
project  inputs  and  its  results:  production,  consumption,  sales  and  income  of  the 
producers and traders/buyers at household, group and value chain/cluster level. 
●  Coordinate with other project staff, especially planning and M&E staff, to ensure MIS 
system  is  appropriately  designed  and  implemented  such  that  they  enable  data-rich 
knowledge  management,  captures  and  analyses  disaggregated  data  on  gender  and 
social inclusion. 
●  Define requirements for use of software for a web-based online MIS and off-line tablet-
based devices. 
64 
iii.  Provide  technical  assistance  to  recruit,  guide  and  supervise  organisations  or  individuals 
contracted  to  implement  surveys  and  studies  required  for  evaluating  project  effects  and 
impacts. E.g. Rolling baseline survey, Annual Cluster Tracking Survey, etc. 
iv. Develop a capacity-building plan on M&E for the project staff at NPMU and provincial level 
and for business skills and Gender Action Learning System (GALS) mentors from Agritex on 
the cascade training approach: 
●  Development of training modules for different stakeholders and partners; 
●  Development of operation manuals/guidelines on M&E processes; 
●  Use of software for MIS and GIS required for the functioning of the MIS system; 
●  Train M&E staff at national and local levels (Training of Trainers); and  
●  Set  up  a  cascade training  mechanism  for  Extension  Officers  seconded  fulltime to  the 
project, Social Mobilizers and Business Skills Mentors and GALS Social Mentors. 
v. Assist the Project Manager in consolidating gender sensitive project progress reports. 
vi. Advise the Senior Management by identifying areas of concerns that might justify a review 
of the project M&E system and/or implementation arrangements, including adverse effects on 
target  groups      as  a  result  of  project  implementation,  and  suggest  remedial  measures  if 
necessary. 
vii.  Undertake  regular  field  visits  to  follow-up  recommendations  made  from  previous 
supervision missions and support the project implementation in other ways as requested by 
the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences:  
●  Master’s  degree  in  Agriculture,  Economics,  Statistics,  M&E,  Development  Studies, 
Rural Development, Planning or a related field  
●  Solid knowledge of participatory M&E approaches and techniques. 
●  Strong knowledge in the development of performance-based indicators. 
●  Demonstrated experience in the techniques of data collection, data entry, data analysis 
and design of management information systems to facilitate the planning and decision- 
making processes within the institution/s 
●  Working knowledge of written and spoken English  
●  Excellent analytical and report writing skills. 
●  Excellent spoken and written English.  
●  Strong knowledge of computer applications, particularly MS Excel, Word, Access and 
Powerpoint,  STATA  and  other  software  packages  for  data  analysis  and  technical 
reports. 
Required Work Experience: At least 8 years of work experience with (a) M&E Design, (b) 
planning  and implementation  of  the  M&E  systems,  (c)  data  management  and analysis,  (e) 
capacity building and training in M&E development and implementation, (f) use of Geographic 
Information Systems technologies, and (g) knowledge management strategy development. 
Mode  and  Duration  of  Contract:    The  contract  will  be  three  years,  renewable  based  on 
performance.  
65 
66 
Draft Terms of Reference: KM and Communications Specialist  
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers  and  service  providers  for its  National  Project  Management Unit  (NNPMU) in  Harare 
and in  the four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units (PPIU) in  the field,  to manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-active 
co-operations with the private sector, including the farming community, small and medium 
enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: KM and Communication Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare  
Overall Scope of Work: Reporting to the Project Coordinator, the KM and Communication 
Specialist will have overall responsibility for the knowledge management activities of SACP, 
in  particular  for  the  generation  of  evidence  -based  knowledge  products  and  for  the 
communication  of  project  activities,  achievements  and lessons learned  to  stakeholders  and 
the wider public. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
Specific tasks of the KM and Communication Specialist will include: 
a)  Develop and coordinate project KM and Communication strategies and annual action 
plans  to  ensure  systematic,  continuous  learning  and  knowledge  sharing  about  the 
SACP activities and achievements. 
b)  Design, at the project start-up, a SACP communication strategy, geared towards the 
target  group  and  stakeholders,  project  implementers,  and  to  a  wider  public,  both 
within Zimbabwe and outside. 
c)  Develop  a  functional  approach  for  prioritising  and  implementing  Knowledge 
Management  activities  and  for  developing  and  disseminating  knowledge  tools  and 
products. 
d)  Coordinate  and  coach  the  project  staff  at  NPMU  and  regional  hub  level  on  KM  and 
communications. 
e)  Facilitate Knowledge Management and Communication Platform between the SACP and 
with other projects in the same field. 
f)  Develop and implement processes to ensure that lessons learned, and good practice, 
including information of gender issues, are captured systematically, shared, and used 
to improve project implementation, including in the development of the AWPBs. 
g)  Support advocacy efforts through providing evidence of impact gathered through the 
M&E system, closely linked to knowledge management and communication activities. 
67 
h)  Provide technical backstopping and guidance to implementing partner staff on KM&L. 
i)  Develop  or  adapt  an  internet  based  and  other  relevant  tools  and  processes  for 
implementing  staff  to  collect,  process/analyse,  store  and  share  information  and 
knowledge, and ensure relevant staff have the capacity to use them. 
j)  Advise  the  senior  management  of  SACP  by identifying  areas  of  concerns  that might 
justify review of the KMC Strategy and/or implementation arrangements. 
k)  Ensure  that  innovative  experiences,  learning  and  good  practices  are  captured, 
synthesized,  documented  and  shared  continuously  within  the  project  and    with  in-
country partners, IFAD and other regional and international partners, through a project 
website and other media. 
l)  Coordinate  the  preparation  of  the  work  plans  and  budgets  and  progress  reports  for 
knowledge management and learning activities. 
m)  Coordinate with graphic designers, subcontractors, researchers, other team 
members and partners and clients to establish workflows and timelines for 
production of KM and communications materials.  
n)  Ensure timely implementation and monitor assigned activities against work plans.   
o)  Assist the M&E and Planning Specialist in consolidating the project progress reports. 
p)  Undertake  regular  field  visits  to  follow-up  recommendations  made  from  previous 
missions and support the project implementation. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor’s  Degree  Media  in  Media  Studies,  Rural  Development,  Planning  or  a 
related field, with preference to candidates with a Master’s degree preferred 
  Ability to solve technical, managerial or operational problems and evaluate options 
information,  resources,  well-rounded  experience,  and 
based  on  relevant 
knowledge.  
  Demonstrated  ability  to  communicate  clearly  and  concisely,  both  orally  and  in 
writing, and lead presentations, training courses, and effective meetings.  
  Experience/knowledge of website and social media technologies and applications.  
  Strong knowledge of MS Office applications.  
  Ability to work both independently and as part of a team.  
  Excellent writing and presentational skills.  
Required Work Experience:   
  8 years working experience, with at least 3 years in KM in donor-assisted projects  
Mode and Duration of Contract:  The seconded contract for 3 years, renewable based on 
performance.  
Draft Terms of Reference: Senior Social Inclusion Specialist 
Background: The Project 
68 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.    It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Senior Social Inclusion Specialist 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work: The Senior Social Inclusion Specialist will be based at the National 
PMU and will report to the National Project Coordinator. The responsibility of the Senior Social 
Inclusion officer is to support gender mainstreaming social inclusion activities for the SACP. 
She/he is expected to provide strategic and analytical inputs intended to guide integration of 
socio-economic,  targeting,  youth  and  gender  issues  in  any  project  activity  focusing  on 
targeting and social inclusion, participatory performance assessments and capacity building 
and mentoring.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Provide strategic and day-to-day guidance to projects to integrate gender issues, social 
inclusion and Participatory Performance Assessments cross-cutting themes throughout 
the project cycle.  
  Develop and implement a capacity strengthening programme for IPs on gender, PPA 
and social inclusion, and gender transformative and integrated approaches. 
  Provide training on GALs in order to promote gender transformation in SACP 
  Work in close coordination with and support technical staff in the NPMU and PPIUs to 
ensure that targeting strategy is implemented in line  with project requirements and 
also responds to emerging needs. 
  Ensure that  all  surveys,  policy  dialogues  and  studies include  a  focus  on  gender  and 
youth across relevant socioeconomic strata. 
  Conduct  gender  analysis  studies  and  develop  plans  of  action  that  identifies 
opportunities and entry points for mainstreaming gender into the project.  
  Ensure that the plan of action for gender mainstreaming mirrors the project’s log frame 
and include the development of gender specific project components, gender responsive 
targets, indicators and timelines. 
  Lead  the  implementation  of  gender  and  social  inclusion  AWPB  activities  and  ensure 
targets are met within stipulated time frames.  
  Support  monitoring  and  evaluation  efforts  to  gather  disaggregated  data  for 
beneficiaries  of  different  socio-economic  groups,  gender  and  ensure  that  data 
summaries are used to inform project strategies.  
69 
  Ensure  that  project  level  AWPBs  reflect  the  relevant  Project´s  targeting  and  social 
inclusion strategy. 
  Review all MOUs/Contracts/TORs to ensure that issues related to gender, youth and 
targeting are adequately integrated, including indicators and information, informed by 
relevant project´s Log frame and project design document.  
  Lead documentation of lessons learnt, success stories on social inclusion and gender 
mainstreaming and exchange of knowledge on an on-going basis. 
  Foster  and  build  relationships  with  partners  and  networks  and  other  government 
entities that promote gender equality and empowerment and mainstream their work 
in project targeted beneficiaries. 
  Support the Project Management Unit during Implementation Support Missions  
  Perform other related duties as may be requested by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Advanced degree in Rural Sociology, Gender Studies, Rural Development, Agricultural 
Economics or other Social Sciences with a focus on gender or social inclusion.  
  Strong familiarity with agriculture, food systems, food security and rural development 
and  their  relationship  with  gender  equality,  women’s  empowerment  and  youth  of 
different socioeconomic categories. 
  Experience  in  organizing  and  facilitating  community-based  training  and  learning 
policy 
together  with 
practical 
learning 
linking 
field 
and 
exchanges 
analysis/development. 
  Sensitivity to cultural, ethnic and gender differences. 
  Demonstrated experience in managing/effectively working with multidisciplinary teams, 
governments and international development partners. 
  Proficiency in written and spoken English and conversant with local languages 
is an added advantage. 
Required Work Experience 
  At  least  10  years  of  relevant  professional  experience  in  gender  mainstreaming  and 
promotion of gender equality, women’s empowerment and working with youth in rural 
development interventions.  
  Experience in working with Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) 
Mode  and  Duration  of  Contract:  The  duration  of  the  position  is  for  the  duration  of  the 
project, based on performance. 
70 
Draft Terms of Reference: Procurement Officer 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Procurement Officer 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Under the general supervision of the Project Coordinator, the NPMU Procurement Officer will 
support  the  day-to-day  project  procurement  activities  as  agreed  with  IFAD  for  SACP. 
Additionally,  S/he  will  be  responsible  of  supervision  of the  execution  of  work  by  the  Junior 
Procurement Officers in the Provincial PIUs of the project. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  S/he will take full responsibility on the procurement activities of the project, conducting, 
overseeing, and supporting the project procurement in accordance with IFAD procurement 
procedures and the Project Implementation Manual; 
  S/he will be responsible for preparing and updating the project procurement plans in line 
 
with the Annual Work and Budget Plan (AWBP); 
 S/he  will  prepare  the  solicitation  documents  for  all  SACP  purchases  in  line  with  the 
Procurement  Plan  and  the  AWBP  for  goods,  service  and  works  using  standard 
documentation agreed with IFAD; 
  S/he  will  assist  and  advise  the  evaluation  committee  members  in  matters  related  to 
evaluation of tenders and recommendation for the selection and award; 
  S/he  will  liaise  with  the  various  project  stakeholders’  and  provide  input  in  preparing 
various Project Management Reports (PMR) to be submitted to IFAD; 
  S/he will provide support and guidance to the Junior Procurement Officers in the Provincial 
Districts to ensure compliance with IFAD procedures; 
  S/he  will  review  cases  and  all  support  documents  received  from  Provincial  District  and 
advise accordingly; 
  Monitor contractors’ performance (goods, works and services) and ensures timely delivery 
and quality of services, expedites delivery as appropriate; 
  Act as a point of reference for all SACP procurement related matters. 
71 
Qualifications and Competences 
Advanced  university  degree 
management, business administration or related field. 
in  procurement, 
financial  management,  supply  chain 
A  professional  qualification  from  a  recognized  institution  such  as  CIPS  Professional 
certification (minimum level 3) or equivalent in Procurement and or supply chain operations 
will be considered an asset. 
Excellent  knowledge  and  understanding  of  public  procurement  and  contract  management. 
Excellent experience in the usage of computers and office software packages (MS Word, Excel, 
etc.).  Good  data  analysis  skills.  Good  organizational  skills.  Excellent  interpersonal 
communication  skills  and  relationship  builder.  Fluency  in  written  and  oral  English  is  a 
requirement.  
Required Work Experience 
5 years of experience in procurement or supply chain management. 
Familiarity with a donor-funded project, such as UN system, World Bank or AfDB will be 
considered an asset. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited for the total duration of the project, initial contract for 3 years (with possibility of 
extension based on performance) 
72 
Draft Terms of Reference: Procurement Assistant/Clerk 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Procurement Assistant 
Duty Station: Harare 
Overall Scope of Work 
Under the general supervision of the Procurement Officer at NPMU, the Procurement Assistant 
will assist in the day-to-day project procurement activities and support the Procurement Unit 
in conducting procurement-related operations of SACP.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Assist the Procurement Officer in preparing solicitation documents for the various project 
procurement activities both at the NPMU and Provincial/District levels; 
  Assist through coordination and support the procurement evaluation teams as necessary; 
  Organize and maintain computerized records for procurement and contracts both online 
and paper-based; 
  Provide operational support and capacity development to the various project staff; 
  Maintain and update the project contract register; 
  Carry out any other procurement-related duties as requested by the Procurement 
Officer. 
Qualifications and Competences 
Minimum Diploma degree in procurement, supply chain management, business administration 
or related field. 
A professional qualification from a recognized institution such as CIPS Professional 
certification or equivalent in Procurement and or supply chain will be considered an asset. 
Fluency in written and oral English. 
73 
Required Work Experience 
  2 years of experience of relevant administrative positions 
  Excellent experience in the usage of computers and office software packages (MS Word, 
Excel, etc.). 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
A seconded contract for three years. 
74 
Draft Terms of Reference: Provincial PIU: Senior VC and 
Agribusiness Specialist/Provincial Coordinator 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Provincial Project Coordinator / Senior VC and Agribusiness Specialist 
Duty Station: Four Province Project Implementation Units 
Overall Scope of Work 
The Provincial Project Coordinator (PPC) will head the Provincial Project Implementation Unit 
(PPIU)  and  as  such  will  have  overall  responsibility  for  coordination  and  implementation  of 
SACP with the objective to achieve an increased smallholder participation in market-oriented 
and climate-smart value chains in her/his respective province. 
The PPC assures that the SACP is implemented along the guidelines provided by the Financing 
Agreement, project design report, the PIM and following the guidance given by the National 
Project  Coordinator,  the  lead  ministry  MLAWRR,  the  SACP  Steering  Committee  and 
supervision missions. 
As a Senior VC and Agribusiness Specialist, the PPC will directly manage the identification and 
development of enterprise-led smallholder-inclusive value chains in the province and its SACP 
target districts. The SACP target per province, over project life, is to provide TA and matching 
grants  to  50  microenterprises  and  200  Agriculture  Producer  Groups.  The  NPMU  will 
furthermore engage 40 Lead Enterprises to the value chain investments and upgrading, which 
will be coordinated by the PPC at province level. Also access to financial services is promoted. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
As Province Project Coordinator 
  Direct the SACP PPIU staff and provide oversight to all SACP-hired service providers 
and  consultants  operating  in  the  province,  ensuring  that  all  carry  out  their  agreed 
duties professionally and efficiently ensuring the achievement of the SACP objectives; 
  Ensure efficient coordination within the PPIU and seek synergies with other agriculture 
and economic development projects implemented in the same province; 
75 
  Ensure strong sense of teamwork within the PPIU and provide technical backstopping 
and coordination of this team; 
  Lead and support the district network of extensionists that are engaged to implement 
SACP; 
  Ensure  an  optimum  use  of  SACP  provincial  resources  in  achievement  of  the  agreed 
objectives of the project; 
  At provincial level, expedite and coordinate the timely Annual Work Plan and Budget 
(AWPB)  process  at  all  levels,  and  ensure  that  these  are  developed  in  a  fully 
participatory manner involving men and women, learning from previous years; 
  Lead the provincial inputs to annual AWPBs and to the Annual Progress Reports; 
  At provincial level, direct project implementation in accordance to agreed plans and to 
report  on  progress  and  outcomes  in  a  methodological  manner,  including  technical 
reports and financial reporting; 
  Oversee  at  province  level  that  the  project  adheres  to  social,  environmental  and 
climate-related safeguards and contributes to gender equity, women’s empowerment; 
  Oversee at province level the full functioning of the project’s Monitoring and Evaluation 
System and make use of the system as a management tool; 
  Ensure proper financial management at province level, including proper planning and 
comprehensive reporting on expenditures and expenditure forecasts; 
  Ensure efficient procurement in line with the Procurement Plans;  
  Meet  and  liaise  with  relevant  provincial  authorities,  district  authorities,  other 
agriculture/business  development  projects  in  the  province,  the  private  sector,  and 
other donors working in agriculture to ensure synergies are created and resources are 
leveraged for a coherent provincial economic development; 
  Attend  relevant  meetings,  technical  working  groups,  conferences,  etc.  to  share 
knowledge, coordinate programs, and promote SACPs work; 
As Senior Value Chain and Agribusiness Specialist: 
  Lead SACP’s Value Chain and Agribusiness development efforts in the province; 
  Coordinate the provincial implementation of the BDS services to Microenterprises and 
Agricultural  Producer  Groups,  following  the  detailed  guidance  in  the  Project 
Implementation Manual; 
  Lead the provinces delivery of Matching Grants to Microenterprises and to Agricultural 
Producer  Groups,  following  the  detailed  guidance  in  the  Project  Implementation 
Manual; 
  Ensure  all  APG/ME/LE  Technical  Assistance  and  Financial  Support  are  appropriately 
planned  for,  prepared  and  implemented,  following  the  guidance in  the  PDR  and  the 
PIM; 
  Support and coordinate the work by District level SACP extensionists; 
  Coordinate and supervise the activities by BDS service providers in the province; 
  Facilitate  market  driven  linkages  between  agribusiness  producers,  wholesalers, 
processors, and markets within the project areas; 
  Provide capacity building and mentoring to SACP staff in the province and its districts; 
Qualifications and Competences 
A  Master’s  degree  in  Agribusiness,  Agricultural  Economics,  Management,  or  other  relevant 
discipline related to Agricultural Development. 
76 
Required Work Experience 
  10-years’  experience  in  rural  development  in  Zimbabwe,  including  managerial 
experience; 
  Experience in project administration, financial management and reporting, preferably 
using systems of international institutions; 
  An  existing  network  of  relations  pertaining  to  community  planning,  smallholder 
agriculture; value chains and financial inclusion; 
  Experience  in  collaborating  across  government  ministries  and  in  public-private 
dialogue;  
  Strong leaderships skills, including the ability to delegate responsibility within the team 
and to implementing partners. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Recruited, 3 years (with possibility of extension) 
77 
Draft Terms of Reference: Provincial PIU: CSA Specialist 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain. 
Position: CSA Specialist 
Duty Station: PPIUs in the four SACP Provinces 
Overall Scope of Work 
The  CSA  Specialist  will  lead  the  work  on  climate  change  adaptation  related  activities  at 
Provincial  level  to  contribute  to  CSA  and  Productivity  Skills  Enhancement  under  Sub-
component  1.2.  The  specialist  will  also  support  institutional  coordination  and  local  level 
capacity  building  in  CSA  and  productivity  skills  at  provincial  level.  S/he  will  work  in  close 
collaboration with the other members of the PPIU and supervise the CSA Service Provider that 
will support the implementation of the CSA and productivity enhancement activities in each 
Province of SACP.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The CSA Specialist will be responsible for providing technical expertise in the three objectives 
of  CSA:  (a)  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity,  (b)  building  climate  change 
resilience  and  (c)  reducing  green  house  gas  emissions  within  the  context  of  SACP  in  each 
Province. More specifically, the CSA Specialist will perform the following tasks: 
p)  Provide  technical  inputs  and  guidance  in  the  implementation  of  the  sustainable 
agriculture production and climate change adaptation activities under SACP; 
q)  Provide technical guidance to ensure the minimisation of green house gas emissions 
resulting from SACP activities;  
r)  Identify indicators for reporting on the CSA activities and ensure the inclusion of these 
indicators in the M&E system with disaggregated data on gender and social inclusion;  
s)  Participate in the screening of Business Plans for the APGs and provide guidance on 
CSA options and technologies; 
78 
t)  Undertake the technical review of CSA case studies, maps and technical papers being 
produced under SACP in the particular Province; 
u)  Provide  training  to  fill  the  knowledge  and  capacity  gaps  of  the  various  project 
stakeholders including service providers and the PPIU in the understanding, planning 
and implementation of CSA measures; 
v)  Provide  strategic  orientation  in  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  stages 
through periodic field visits to project intervention areas; 
w)  Liaise  with  Environmental  Management  Agency  Provincial  officials  to  coordinate  the 
development and implementation of environmental and social management plans for 
the agricultural productivity activities as required by the Environmental Management 
Act; 
x)  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB; 
y)  Contribute to reporting structures as laid out in the SACP documentation; and 
z)  Undertake  any  other  duties  (related  to  SACP  activities)  as  may  be  assigned  by  the 
Senior CSA Specialist or Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A Master’s degree in agronomy, climate change adaptation or environment and natural 
resources management.  
  Thorough knowledge of the institutional setting in Zimbabwe with a specific reference 
to CSA and climate change adaptation as well as familiarity with all the governmental 
and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved in the policy dialogue on CSA 
and climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  Thorough  knowledge  of  the legislative and  regulatory framework  on  agriculture  and 
climate  change  as  well  as  ongoing  projects  and  initiatives  focusing  on  CSA  in 
Zimbabwe. 
  Good knowledge of GIS systems with relevant spatial skills for mapping project 
areas. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good  knowledge  of  communication  tools  and  technologies (internet,  Microsoft office 
packages etc.). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
Required Work Experience 
At least four years of experience in the field of Climate Smart Agriculture or Agronomy with 
strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Seconded, renewable performance-based contract with an initial duration of one year. 
79 
Draft Terms of Reference: Provincial PIU: Infrastructure Officer 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Provincial Infrastructure Officer 
Duty Station: Provincial PMUs (4) 
Key tasks 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Supporting  Implementing  Agencies  in  gender  sensitive  infrastructure  project 
identification and development ranking at Province level. 
Conducting  feasibility  studies  together  with  Implementing  Agencies  for  selected 
projects, taking into account the needs of men and women.. 
Reviewing  feasibility  studies  and/detailed  designs  at  every  stage  of  the  project 
cycle, before submission to the NPMU. 
Building the capacities of the Implementing Agencies through Training of Trainers 
on  planning,  preparation  of  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs,  contract 
management, supervision of services and works, and operation and maintenance. 
Preparing  training  materials  for  use  by beneficiaries  and  Implementing  Agencies 
staff. 
Ensuring, in collaboration with the respective technical experts, that national, IFAD 
and OFID environmental and social safeguards are adhered to during development 
of irrigation schemes.  
Supporting the provincial PMU in all technical matters. 
Deliverables 
  Guidelines for project identification & development ranking. 
  TORs for feasibility studies and detailed designs. 
  Feasibility study reports for all infrastructure. 
  Timely and effective construction supervision implemented. 
  Timely and convenient contract management implemented. 
  Operation and maintenance manuals for all infrastructure developed under the 
project, in the province.  
80 
Qualification and Experience 
The  Provincial  Project  Engineer  should  demonstrate  the  following  qualifications  and 
experience: 
  A Master’s Degree in Engineering or equivalent. 
  At least five years recent experience in rural infrastructure development and project 
implementation  focusing  on  sustainability  related  aspects  such  as  establishing/ 
strengthening user groups, social aspects and value-chain linkages.  
  Proficiency in spoken and written English. 
  Excellent interpersonal skills and team spirit. 
  Experience  of  projects  involving  multiple  and  diverse  stakeholders  including  the 
Government agencies, private sector, and end users.  
  Registration with a recognized engineering professional board or institution. and 
  Computer literacy with  proficient knowledge  of  Microsoft  Office  (Word,  Excel, Power 
Point)  and  conversant  with  modern  engineering  design  software  like  AUTOCAD, 
IRRICAD, GIS etc. 
Duration 
The duration of the contract will initially be for a period of 60 months. 
81 
Draft Terms of Reference: Provincial PIU: M&E and Planning Officer 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-active 
co-operations with the private sector, including the farming community, small and medium 
enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value chain.   
Position: M&E and Planning Officer 
Duty Station:  Provincial Implementation Units in Mashonaland East, West, Central and 
Matebeleland North  
Overall  Scope  of  Work:  The  M&E  and  Planning  Officers  will  be  based  in  SACP  Provincial 
Implementation Units  and work under the supervision of the provincial PIU Agricultural Value 
Chain and Agribusiness Specialist, who in the head of the provincial implementation unit. The 
M&E officer will also work closely with the M&E and Planning Specialist in the National PMU. 
S/he  will  take  responsibility  for  data  collection,  database  management  and  assist  with 
provincial data collection and entry into MIS. The M&E Officer will perform data and reporting 
support  functions  and  will  overall  be  in  charge  of  ensuring  the  project  databases  in  the 
province are regularly updated.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The Monitoring & Evaluation Officer’s duties and responsibilities include the following: 
●  Populate and maintain the project databases and MIS, ensuring disaggregation by sex 
and age 
●  Support Business Skills Mentors and GALS Mentors in data entry into MIS on tablets  
●  Carry out data collection activities in a sex and age disggregated manner 
●  Produce summaries of the data entered to inform management 
●  Produce project maps 
●  Support other Provincial staff and implementing partners in ensuring completeness of 
their routine reports 
●  Provide technical backstopping to in preparation of activity-based annual work plans 
and budgets to ensure compliance with the project’s implementation approach. 
Qualifications and Competences 
●  Bachelor's  degree  in  Economics,  Statistics,  Agricultural  Economics,  Development 
Economics, Business Administration, Social Sciences or a related field 
●  Post graduate Diploma/Training in M&E is an added advantage 
●  Post graduate training in Statistics is an added advantage  
82 
●  Training and/ or demonstrated evidence in the use of Geo-spatial technologies (GIS) 
●  Good reporting and report writing skills  
●  Good knowledge of computer applications (particularly MS Excel, Word, Access and  
●  Powerpoint, STATA)  
●  Working knowledge of written and spoken English. 
Required Work Experience 
●  At least 2 years’ experience in data collection, data entry and data analysis, preferably 
at least partly in a development project. 
Mode and Duration of Contract: The duration of the position is for the duration of the 
project, based on performance. 
83 
Draft Terms of Reference: Provincial PIU: Social Inclusion and 
Nutrition Officer 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer 
Duty Station: Provincial Project Implementation Units  
Overall Scope of Work: The Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer will report to the NPMU 
Senior Social Inclusion Specialist and the Programme Coordinator and be responsible for the 
successful poverty, social, gender, youth and nutrition targeting in the project area covered 
by his/her province.  
Main  tasks  and  Responsibilities:  The  Social  Inclusion  and  Nutrition  Officer  will  be 
responsible for the following tasks:  
  Develop  and  supervise  the  implementation  of  the  multi-pronged  gender  targeting 
strategy  to  ensure  effectiveness  and  foster  social  inclusion,  gender  equality  and 
effective poverty targeting. 
  Develop  and  supervise  the  implementation  of  a  forward-looking  and  transformative 
gender  strategy,  detailing  specific  gender  actions  the  project  that  will  undertake  to 
promote  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment,  and  engaging  with  men  and 
local leaders. 
  Contribute  to  the  development  of  a  nutrition  mainstreaming  strategy  including 
information,  education  and  communication  (IEC)  materials  and  coordinate  effective 
roll-out and monitoring. 
  Provide  technical  expertise  and  facilitate  development  of  a  plan  to  promote 
consumption of diverse foods. 
  Ensure nutrition is adequately integrated in project activities and documents, including 
Annual Work Plan and Budget, progress reports and M&E system. 
  Assess the effectiveness of the nutrition education activities by visiting households and 
interacting with households and farmer groups. 
  Ensure  that  nutrition  indicators  (particularly  KAP)  are  tracked,  data  adequately 
collected and reported on regular bases, in close liaison with the M&E officer.  
84 
  Establish and maintain working relationships with local government bodies (Provincial 
Food & Nutrition Committees) to support implementation of the activities and technical 
assistance and establish local partnerships on nutrition (SUN, UN agencies, etc.). 
  Carry out community-wide gender and nutrition sensitisation using the Gender Action 
Learning Systems (GALS). 
  Adapt the SIRP GALS manual and provide training to GALS mentors. 
  Furnish the GALS Mentors with tablets to monitor gender equality, nutrition-sensitive 
interventions and women’s empowerment.  
  Design instruments for the collection of gender-disaggregated data; that would provide 
baseline and monitoring data on gender differences in the participation in, and benefits 
from,  project  activities,  performance  towards  the  project  strategic  objectives  on 
women’s  economic  empowerment,  community  empowerment  and  participatory 
processes.  
  Coordinate the design of the pro-WEAI and nutrition baseline survey to be carried out 
by a hired consultant.  
  Develop tailored nutrition education training materials and coordinate capacity building 
and  training  sessions  aimed  at  project  staff,  implementers  and  extension  workers 
(AGRITEX) on nutrition education. 
  Develop  a  training  roll-out  strategy  for  use  by  AGRITEX  extension  staff  for  further 
provision of nutrition education to SACP beneficiaries. 
  Develop  a  practical  field  manual  for  facilitating  (large)  group  discussions  and 
participatory problem analysis/Participatory Rural Appraisal. 
  Design gender, nutrition, youth and socio-economic specific studies to be conducted 
during the project cycle to gather in-depth qualitative and/or quantitative data, and 
disseminate lessons learnt/ stories/reports at project level, and in knowledge sharing 
events,  on  what  works  for  targeting,  gender  mainstreaming,  youth  inclusion  and 
nutrition mainstreaming in SACP.  
  Design and conduct a training project for AGRITEX in the procedures mentioned above.  
  Systematically capture, document and disseminate lessons learnt, success stories and 
innovations for informing implementation, policy engagement and upscaling.  
  Organise  exposure/exchange  visits  and  workshops 
for 
lesson 
learning  and 
collaboration. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Master’s  or  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Sociology,  Gender  Studies,  Development  Studies, 
Social Sciences or a related field.  
  Proven  experience  in  developing  strategies  for  effective  gender  and  nutrition 
mainstreaming (with the production of training manuals). 
  Good  knowledge  of  community  health/nutrition  education  and  knowledge  of  global 
nutrition  frameworks,  food  and  nutrition  security  stakeholder  networks  and  multi-
sectoral platforms at country, regional and global levels.  
  Working  knowledge  of  land  and  water  management,  nutrition-sensitive  agriculture, 
FFS, Community development, agriculture and value chain development.  
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills, with very good command of English. 
  Creative, innovative system thinker, with ability to catalyse change. 
Required Work Experience 
  Five or more years of relevant professional experience. 
  At least 2 years’ experience in working on nutrition, and GALS.  
85 
Mode and Duration of Contract: Three-year seconded contract, renewable based on 
performance. 
86 
Draft Terms of Reference: Provincial PIU: Junior Procurement Officer 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Position: Junior Procurement Officer 
Duty Station: Provincial PIU 
Overall Scope of Work 
Junior Procurement Officer supports the Procurement Officer and Procurement Assistant in 
the conduct of any procurement activities under the Provincial PIU, in which she/he is 
stationed.  
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
  Provide administrative support to the National Procurement Officer in preparing 
various solicitation documents and in collecting and reviewing materials related to 
procurement operations in his/ her respective operational area in the PPIU. 
  Assist in the development, publication and management of solicitation documents, 
clarification of bidder’s enquiries, and receipt and evaluation of offers. 
  Carry out administrative tasks related to maintaining the procurement documents 
and files launched for his/ her respective area. 
Qualifications and Competences 
Bachelor’s or other similar degree in procurement, supply chain management, business 
administration or related field. 
A professional qualification from a recognized institution such as CIPS Professional 
certification or equivalent in Procurement and or supply chain will be considered an asset. 
Fluency in written and oral English. 
Required Work Experience: 2 to 4 years of work experience in procurement, or supply chain 
management. 
87 
Mode and Duration of Contract: A seconded contract is for the duration of the Project, 
based on performance. 
88 
Draft Terms of Reference: BDS Service Providers 
Draft ToR: Business Development Service (BDS) Provider 
Background 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Purpose and Objectives of the Assignment 
The purpose of this consultancy is to develop and implement an action plan for the Business 
Development Services of SACP, jointly with the project implementing teams at the provinces 
and  districts  covered  by  SACP.  This  activity  will  support  the  smallholder  agriculture 
transformation strategy of the project and help the Agricultural production Groups (APGs) and 
Microenterprises (ME) to successfully prepare business plans and implement them with SACP’s 
Matching  Grant  support.  The  BDS  Provider  will  be  an  institution  with  experience  and 
professional capacity in Agribusiness Development and Finance. 
The SACP target over project life is to provide TA and matching grants to 200 microenterprises 
and 800 Agriculture Producer Groups. The BDS Provider (or providers covering 1-2 provinces 
each)  will  transfer  Business  Planning  Skills  first  to  SACP  project  implementation  teams  at 
province  and  district levels.  Thereafter,  jointly  with the  SACP  teams,  the  BDS provider  will 
train  and  coach  the  SACP’s  targeted  value  chain  stakeholder  APGs  and  MEs,  following  the 
SACP Matching Grant (MG) criteria and templates. During this process the APGs and MEs will 
complete their own business plans, so they are able to apply for MGs and implement them 
efficiently. Also access to financial services is promoted by the SACP, and the consultancy will 
ensure  that  Business  Planning  templates  are  in  accordance  with  those  of  the  Financial 
Institutions’ requirements in the Rural Finance sector of Zimbabwe. 
Specific Tasks 
Key tasks of the assignment include: 
a)  Review the Project Design Report (PDR) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to 
understand the SACP’s overall approach and the role that the BDS plays in the project. 
Based on the information in the PDR and PIM, discuss and agree with the SACP senior 
staff the appropriate approach and contents of the planned BDS programme, the best 
delivery methods and the timing of this capacity building input, to ensure full harmony 
with the other activities of the project and the participation of men and women. 
89 
b)  Preparation.  Design,  based  on  the  Service  Provider’s  already  developed  service 
packages,  the  structure  and  contents  of  the  BDS  support  programme  targeting  the 
APGs and their members as well as the MEs supported by SACP. This programme would 
include both basic (for most APGs) and more advanced (for better performing APGs 
and for the Microenterprises) Business Planning modules, covering among other the 
subjects: 
  General introduction on the importance of production/business plan,  
  Project farmer grant opportunity through SACP, and requirements 
  Business Plan suitability for access to bank finance 
  Business model selection and description 
  Production improvement and volume planning 
  Costs and benefits 
  Marketing and sales 
  Efficient purchase of input materials, investment items and their transport 
  Production Plan 
  Business Plan 
  Procurement Plan. 
c)  TOTs.  Based  on  the  modules,  conduct  a  Training  of  Trainers  workshop(s)  for  the 
province and district SACP teams. 
d)  ME  BDS.  Based  on  the  modules,  implement  the  BDS  workshops  with  all 
Microenterprises.  The  BDS  service  provider  leads  technically  the  implementation  of 
these  workshops,  with  assistance,  facilitation  and  support  by  SACP  province  and 
district teams. 
e)  APG BDS. Based on the modules, co-implement with the SACP province and district 
teams in the APG BDS workshops. The BDS service provider will lead minimum 2 days 
for each APG workshop, and provides backstopping for the overall process. 
As result of both ME and APG BDS workshops, as criteria for successful workshop closing, at 
least  80  per  cent  of  participants  will  have  appropriate  business  plans  for  matching  grant 
application. 
Consultant’s qualifications and experience 
  The Service Provider will provide consultants to carry out the assignment mainly from 
its own its own staff specialised in smallholder and microenterprise business planning.  
  The Service Provide is expected to have at least 15 years of experience in agribusiness, 
smallholder and commercial value chain development and finance. 
  The service provider is expected to have already developed BDS training modules that 
will fit or can be modified to be used in SACP BDS service. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The  consultancy  will  be  carried  out  by  the  selected  Service  Provider  with  experience  of 
operations  with  the  smallholder  community in  the  SACP  project  area.  The  Service  Provider 
will provide qualified staff for the operations, potentially using different implementation teams 
in  different  provinces.  The  final  operational  approach  and  the  delivery  timeline  will  be 
developed following the selection of the value chains for the SACP support.   
Duration of the Assignment 
The duration of the Service Provider’s contract is planned for the first four years of the 
project implementation. 
90 
Draft Terms of Reference: CSA Service Providers 
Background: The Project 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture  and  Rural  Resettlement  (MLARR),  all  SACP  activities  include  pro-active  co-
operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and  medium 
enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value chains.   
Position: CSA Service Provider 
Duty Station: The four SACP provinces 
Overall Scope of Work 
The  CSA  Service  Provider  will  support  the  implementation  of  the  activities  for  CSA  and 
Productivity  Skills  Enhancement  under  Sub-component  1.2.  The  Service  Provider  will  work 
under the supervision of the CSA Specialist and undertake the  capacity building in CSA and 
productivity skills for the APGs and MSMEs in each Province of SACP.   
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
The  CSA  Service  Provider  will  be  responsible  for  providing  technical  expertise  and  building 
APG  capacity  in  the  three  objectives  of  CSA:  (a)  sustainably  increasing  agricultural 
productivity,  (b)  building  climate  change  resilience  and  (c)  reducing  green  house  gas 
emissions  within  the  context  of  SACP  in  each  Province.  More  specifically,  the  CSA  Service 
Provider will perform the following tasks: 
aa) Provide  technical  inputs  and  guidance  in  the  implementation  of  the  sustainable 
agriculture production and climate change adaptation activities based on the APG and 
MSME business and investment plans; 
bb) Provide technical guidance to ensure the minimisation of green house gas emissions 
resulting from the APG business and investment plans;  
cc) Collect  the  relevant  data  based  on  the  identified  gender  sensitive  indicators  for 
reporting on the CSA activities and contributing to the SACP M&E system;  
dd) Develop CSA case studies and maps to capture the benefits of CSA and agricultural 
productivity in each SACP Province; 
ee) Provide training to fill the knowledge and capacity gaps of the APGs and MSMEs in the 
understanding, planning and implementation of CSA measures; 
91 
ff)  Support  the  implementation  of  environmental  and  social  management  plans  for  the 
agricultural productivity activities as required by the Environmental Management Act; 
and 
gg) Provide monthly and quarterly reports to feed into the SACP reporting structures. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  A  team leader  with  a  Master’s  degree in  agronomy  or  climate  change  adaptation  or 
natural  resources  management.  Team  members  with  relevant  experience  in 
agriculture, CSA technologies, and community mobilisation and capacity development.  
  A team leader with thorough knowledge of the institutional setting in Zimbabwe with 
a specific reference to CSA and climate change adaptation as well as familiarity with 
all the governmental and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved in the 
policy dialogue on CSA and climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  A team leader with thorough knowledge of the legislative and regulatory framework 
on agriculture and climate change as well as ongoing projects and initiatives focusing 
on CSA in Zimbabwe. 
  At least one team member with good knowledge of GIS systems with relevant spatial 
skills for mapping project areas. 
  A  team  leader  with  excellent  and  proven  presentation,  facilitation  and  negotiation 
skills. 
  A team leader with good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, 
Microsoft office packages etc.). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
Required Work Experience 
A team leader with at least six years of experience in the field of Climate Smart Agriculture 
or Agronomy with strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Renewable performance-based contract with an initial duration of one year. 
92 
Draft Terms of Reference: Financial Literacy Service Provider 
Background 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Purpose and Objectives of the Assignment 
The  purpose  of  this  consultancy is  to  develop  a  develop  a  strategy  and  action  plan for  the 
financial  service  literacy  support  of  SACP  and  implement  the  action  plan  with  the  key 
beneficiaries  of  the  project  in  the  districts  covered  by  SACP.  This  activity  will  support  the 
smallholder  agriculture  transformation  strategy  of  the  project  and  help  the  Agricultural 
production Groups (APGs) and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) to successfully 
implement  their  SACP-supported  projects.  The  Financial  Literacy  Service  Provider  will  be  a 
financial institution that will carry out its SACP-financed financial literacy operations as a part 
of its overall strategy for the provision of banking services in rural areas. 
Specific Tasks 
Key tasks of the assignment include: 
f)  Review the Project Design Report (PDR) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to 
understand the SACP’s overall approach and the role that the financial literacy support 
plays in the project strategy. 
g)  Based on the information in the PDR and PIM, discuss with the SCP senior staff about 
the appropriate approach and contents of the planned financial literacy support, the 
best  delivery  methods  and  the  timing  of  this  capacity  building  input,  to  ensure  full 
harmony with the other APG and MSME support actions of the project. 
h)  Design, as much as possible based on the Service Provider’s already developed service 
packages, the structure and contents of the financial literacy support project targeting 
the  APGs  and  their  members  as  well  as  the  MSMEs  supported  by  SACP.  This 
programme would include both basic and more advanced financial literacy modules, 
covering among other subjects: 
the benefits of opening a bank account for a farmer, group and an MSME 
 
  benefits of business planning and record keeping in a household or an MSME 
 
  available rural lending products for rural producers and MSMEs, including both working 
the basics of the “Saving for a Purpose” approach 
capital loans and investment loans and their terms and collateral requirements  
  group saving and lending practices 
93 
  money transfer transactions and payment services 
  modes and benefits of mobile and digital banking in rural areas. 
i) 
 Implement the agreed financial literacy support programme in the field with the APGs 
and MSMEs based on time schedules agreed with SACP, following the overall timeline 
developed for the SACP value chain support activities. 
j)  Review  continuously  the  progress  and  results  achieved  with  the  financial  literacy 
support and develop the modules and their delivery methods accordingly. 
k)  Through the contacts created with the APGs, their members and the MSMEs through 
the capacity building operations, aim at increasing their financial linkages and inclusion 
in a sustainable way as saving and borrowing clients either with the Service Provider 
itself or with other financial institutions operating in the SACP area.    
Consultant’s qualifications and experience 
  The Service Provider, a financial institution, will provide consultants to carry out the 
assignment  mainly  from  its  own  its  own  staff  specialised  in  operations  with 
smallholders and MSMEs.  
  The Service Provide is expected to have years of relevant professional experience in 
working with the SACP target group. 
  The  service  provider  is  expected  to  have  already  developed  rural  finance  training 
modules that will fit or can be modified to be used in SACP financial literacy training. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The consultancy will be carried out by a Zimbabwean financial institution with operations with 
the  smallholder  community  in  the  SACP  project  area.  The  Service  Provider  will  provide 
qualified staff for the operations, potentially using different implementation teams in different 
provinces. The final operational approach and the delivery timeline will be developed following 
the selection of the value chains for the SACP support.   
Duration of the Assignment 
The duration of the Service Provider’s contract is planned for the first four years of the project 
implementation. 
94 
Draft Terms of Reference: Gender, Youth, Nutrition Service Provider 
Background 
Smallholder  Agriculture  Cluster  Project  (SACP)  is  a  six-year  development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe.  SACP  supports  the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in 
Zimbabwe through private sector-led value chain development. The Project operates in the 
five provinces of Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland 
North  and  Midlands.  It  consists  of  three  interlinked  components:  Inclusive  Value  Chain 
Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure and Component 3: 
Policy and Institutional Support and Project Coordination. SACP is in the process of recruiting 
officers and service providers for its National Project Management Unit (NPMU) in Harare and 
in  the  four  Provincial  Project  Implementation  Units  (PPIU)  in  the  field,  to  manage  and 
coordinate SACP project activities. While the lead agency of the project is Ministry of Lands, 
Agriculture, Water Climate and Rural Resettlement (MLAWRR), all SACP activities include pro-
active  co-operations  with  the  private  sector,  including  the  farming  community,  small  and 
medium enterprises and larger processing and marketing companies in key agricultural value 
chain.   
Purpose and Objectives of the Assignment 
The  purpose  of  this  consultancy  (firm  or  local  NGO)  is  to  come  up  with  targeting,  gender, 
nutrition  and  social  inclusion  strategy  and  action  plan  that  will  guide  gender,  nutrition 
targeting and youth mainstreaming in the SACP.  In addition, the Service Provider will train 
Agritex and the Social Inclusion and Nutrition Officer of SACP. The Service Provider will also 
be  responsible  to  carry  out  independent  targeting  to  ensure  that  the  project  interventions 
reach the SACP target group.  
Specific Tasks 
Key tasks of the assignment include: 
l)  Review the Project Design Report (PDR) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to 
understand  the  content  of  targeting  and  gender,  youth  and  inclusion  strategies  in 
terms  of  the  profile  of  target  group,  targeting  strategy  and  operational  measures, 
analysis  of  gender  issues  thematic  areas,  and  human  and  financial  resources  for 
supporting the implementation of analysis. 
m) Based on the information in the PDR and PIM, identify gaps for additional information 
required to develop full targeting, gender and youth inclusion strategies. Gather more 
information to gain a better understanding of the poverty, youth, nutrition and gender 
dimensions  of  the  project,  through  reviewing  additional  documentation  (PRAs, 
Feasibility, reports, etc.) and/or by conducting socioeconomic assessments in the field. 
n)  Develop a draft targeting, gender, nutrition and strategy and action plan for SACP. The 
strategy should define the target group, the objectives for reaching the target group, 
any  lessons  learned  so  far,  principles  for  identifying  and  reaching  the  target  group 
(such  as  poverty  and  food  insecure  and  marginalised  groups,  women  and  women 
headed households, youth participation and partnerships etc) as well as  mechanisms 
for reaching the target group for the different activities. The strategy should be clear 
on how the project plans to support the different target groups within the framework 
of SACP.  
95 
o)  Discuss  the  draft  strategy  with  gender  specialists,  key  implementing  partners  and 
service  providers  to  strengthen  the  relevance  of  the  strategies  to  overall 
implementation  of the  project  and to  ensure  buy-in.  This  will help establish  realistic 
action  plans,  identify  any  training  needs  and  secure  the  allocation  of  necessary 
resources. 
p)  Incorporate  the  comments  from  the  discussions/workshop  and  finalise  the  strategy 
and action plan.  
q)  Carry  out  community  mobilisation  workshops  with  Agritex  and  train  community 
mentors who will be provided with tablets for monitoring gender, youth nutrition and 
targeting in the project.   
r)  Document lessons learnt and success stories. 
Methodology  
The consultant shall propose his/her methodology to achieve objectives of the assignment. 
This methodology should include the following 
Interviews with key government implementing agencies 
  Desk review of key project documents and other relevant documents 
 
  Questionnaire on socioeconomic analysis 
  One day stakeholder workshop. 
Deliverables and timeframes 
i. 
Inception report: to be submitted to PIU within 7 working days after the signing of the 
contract. The Inception report should detail understanding/interpretation of the TORs, 
the methodology of carrying out the assignment and detailed work plan  
ii.  Gap analysis report based on review of PDR and PIM  
iii. 
iv.  Draft  Targeting,  Nutrition,  Gender  and  Youth  Strategy  and  Action  Plan  within  the 
Socioeconomic analysis report  
v. 
vi. 
framework of SACP 
Stakeholder workshop report  
Final  Targeting,  Gender,  Nutrition  and  Youth  Strategy  for  SACP  with  the 
following content:  
  Context  
  Rationale  
  Targeting strategy  
  Rationale for gender, youth and nutrition mainstreaming  
  Targeting,  gender,  nutrition,  youth  inclusion  mainstreaming  within  project 
components  
  Gender mainstreaming at the organizational level  
Implementation arrangements and time frame 
 
  Costs and financing  
  Action Plan 
  Documentation of lessons learned  
  Adapting the SIRP GALS manual for use in SACP training of Agritex and GALs 
mentors 
  Training of Agritex and SACP field staff and GALS Mentors on GALS. 
  Validating the lists of all targeted people at ward level to ensure that the project 
intervention is reaching the target group (twice a year) 
  Together  with  Agritex,  conducting  community  wide  gender  sensitisation  ant 
community level using GALS.  
96 
Consultant’s qualifications and experience 
  The Service Provider will provide consultants with Master’s degree in Sociology, Gender 
Studies, Nutrition social sciences or similar fields  
  Ten or more years of relevant professional experience; 
  Proven experience in developing strategies for effective gender-mainstreaming (with 
the production of training manuals and at least one Gender Strategy); 
  Working  knowledge  of  community  development,  agriculture  and  value  chain 
development, and land and water management;  
  Excellent oral & written presentation skills, with very good command of English; 
  Creative, innovative system thinkers, with ability to catalyse change. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The consultancy will be carried out by a firm or a local NGO. The Service Provider will provide 
qualified staff in targeting and social mobilisation, and nutrition training, gender and youth 
development interventions. The Service Provider will implement the assignment with Agritex 
and will withdraw after two years after capacitating Agritex and the GALS mentors to carry 
out their training.  
Duration of the Assignment 
The duration of the consultancy will initially be for a period of two years, renewable subject 
to performance. 
97 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: COMPONENT 1: INCLUSIVE 
VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT 
Overall Component Purpose and Structure  
Although the skills level and agricultural sector potential in Zimbabwe are among the highest 
in  Africa,  the  country’s  gaps  in  smallholder-based  value  chain  organization  result  in  low 
productivity.  Challenges  persist  in  commercial  smallholder  production  systems,  and  the 
financial  sector  is  unable  to  channel  urgently  required  financing  for  investments  by 
smallholder farmers and agribusinesses. Component 1 of SACP is designed to address these 
challenges through the following sequence of key activities: 
a)  Call for VC Lead Enterprise Expressions of Interest 
b)  Identification of SACP Production Clusters within the target districts 
c)   Mobilization of Agricultural Producer Groups and Agribusinesses for VC upgrading 
d)  Technical services to APGs and Agribusinesses for upgraded production capacity 
e)  Business planning and competitive selection of matching grant recipients 
f)   APG and Agribusiness investments to upgrade the VCs. 
Below,  the  detailed  sub-component  and  activity  descriptions  are  provided,  as  well  as  the 
implementation guidelines for each activity. These are followed by the presentations of activity 
and decision-making workflows for the key operations of Component. At the end of the PIM 
for Component 1, two Appendices are attached. These cover detailed implementation manuals 
for two core activities of the component: (a)  APG and Microenterprise Support Manual, and 
(b) Lead Enterprise Matching Grants Manual.    
Detailed  Sub-component/Activity  Descriptions  and  Implementation  Guidelines 
Component  1  activities  are  organized  under  three  inter-linked  sub-components:  1.1: 
Expressions of Interest, Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization, 1.2: Technical Services for 
APGs and Agribusinesses, and 1.3: Financing for Inclusive Value Chain Investment. 
Sub-component 1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization.  
This sub-component’s expected results are: (i) 8 smallholder production clusters  identified, 
(ii)  800  farmer  groups  mobilized  and  organized,  (iii)  200  microenterprises  and  40  VC  lead 
enterprises identified and mobilized. 
VC  Lead  Enterprise  Identification.  A  competitive  call  for  Expressions  of  Interest  for 
Agribusinesses is announced at the project start-up and thereafter every six months during 
the project years 1-4. Through the call, SACP identifies potential VC lead enterprises30 from 
provincial  and  national  levels,  to  invest  into  agribusiness  with  smallholders  in  SACP  target 
areas.  From  among  received  Expressions  of  Interest,  a  shortlist  is  made  against  agreed 
criteria: (i) technical and financial viability, (ii) gender- and youth-inclusive poverty reduction 
potential, (iii) climate change adaptation potential, and (iv) nutritional development potential 
among smallholder communities. 
30 As background analysis, the SACP design team identified and collected details of 22 potential partner enterprises 
for SACP value chain upgrading. It was found that in Zimbabwe the agribusiness sector remains diversified, has high 
recovery potential, and the companies confirmed their interest to expand their operations and outreach with SACP 
support. The trading statistics confirm that agriculture production including for export are picking up after the slump 
of last decade. See more details below at the Appendix 3, in the end of this Section of the PIM. 
98 
With the knowledge of Agribusinesses’ Expressions of Interest, SACP priority commodities are 
selected, and Smallholder Clusters can be mobilized. 
Smallholder Cluster Identification. Within the 16 SACP-targeted districts, the project identifies 
at  least  8  agriculture  production  clusters,  which  will  each  have  high  potential  to  develop 
smallholder-inclusive  and  nutrition  sensitive  value  chains.  The  received  Agribusiness 
Expressions  of  Interest  inform  SACP  teams  regarding  the  most  potential  commodities  for 
commercialization.  The  clusters  will  enable  economies  of  scale,  through  significant 
aggregation of smallholder production and marketing. Each production cluster will be located 
within  the  boundaries  of  1-3  districts, and  the  clusters  will  be  the  geographic  locations for 
SACP implementation on the ground. The detailed cluster selection criteria are presented in 
the PIM. 
APG  and  Microenterprise  mobilization.  To  stimulate  “Farming  as  Business”  and  to  develop 
agriculture and nutrition sensitive value chains, the Project will hold community consultations 
involving men, women and youth in the identified cluster areas. The venue and the timing of 
the meetings should allow women to attend, considering the heavy workload of women in the 
communities.  Through  these  community  consultations,  SACP  requests  for  APG  and 
Microenterprise  Expressions  of  Interest  from  the  communities,  whereby  the  smallholder 
groups: (i) propose investments in APG/ME agriculture operations, and (ii) explain potential 
linkages to market-oriented value chains. The APG members will be small-scale agriculture 
producers, which fulfil the SACP targeting criteria. The Micro-entrepreneurs will be individual 
community  members  with  the  capacity  to  manage  small  businesses,  upgrading  the  value 
chains at local level. 
SACP will pro-actively promote women and youth participation in APGs and MSMEs, including 
formation  of  women  only  APGs  and  encourage  women  to  take  up  leadership  and  decision-
making roles in APG. Detailed gender and youth targeting strategies of SACP are described 
above the Targeting Section of this PIM.  
Sub-component 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Microenterprises.  
The expected results of this sub-component are: (i) 800 APGs received BDS and are able to 
complete bankable climate smart business plans, (ii) 200 Agribusinesses received BDS and 
are able to complete bankable business plans, which comply with Environmental, Social and 
Governance  (ESG)  standards,  and  (iii)  800  APGs  implement  CSA  practices.  The  technical 
services will target APGs and Agribusinesses identified through Subcomponent 1.1. A balanced 
gender inclusion will be ensured in the targeting of services, and special attention will be given 
to the rural youth. 
Manual  Development  and  TOTs.  At  pre-start-up  phase,  the  project  will  develop  gender-
sensitive  manuals  and  templates  for  (i)  APG  and  Microenterprise  Business  Planning,  in 
consultation  with  MFIs,  banks  and  ESG  specialists,  and  (ii)  Climate  Smart  Agriculture,  in 
consultation with CCA and agricultural development organizations.31 The manuals will include 
options for climate change adaptation for each of the prioritised value chains for the clusters.  
After SACP start-up, gender-balanced ToTs are organized for the province and district teams 
to familiarise them with the BDS and CSA manuals. 
Business  Development  Services  (BDS).  Following  the  TOTs,  the  BDS  services  for  APGs  are 
implemented  by  the  province  and  district  level  SACP  teams,  jointly  with  recruited  BDS 
consultant  groups32.  For  Microenterprises,  the  recruited  BDS  consultants  directly  lead  the 
service delivery. The BDS consultants are from NGO- or private sector. The BDS follows an 
activity-based method  and  Business  Planning  templates.  Topics  will include  group/business 
management,  operational  planning,  financial  management,  procurement  and  marketing. 
31 See draft Table of Contents for each manual in the attached PIM 
32 The BDS consultants will be either from NGOs or the private sector. The recruitment of these is subject to IFAD’s no-objection. 
99 
During the BDS sessions, the APGs and Microenterprises will complete their business plans. 
The  BDS is  practical  and  does not include  general theory. From  among the  business  plans, 
those with most potential are selected for Matching Grant financing (C1.3 below). The APG 
business  plans  will  also  identify  public  infrastructure  needs,  for  possible  investments  by 
Component 2  of  SACP.  Following  the  Matching  Grant  disbursements,  the  SACP  district/ 
province teams and the recruited BDS consultants will provide additional services to the APG 
groups  and  the  Microenterprises, 
for  the  project 
implementation, (ii) monitoring of the disbursements and utilization of the Matching Grants, 
and (iii) facilitation of access to markets and financial services 
including  (i)  technical  support 
CSA  and  Productivity  Skills  Enhancement.  CSA  technical  assistance,  including  e-extension 
solutions (such as Kurima Mari used in Zimbabwe33), will be delivered by Agritex Commodity 
Specialists and the SACP district/province teams. The service will reach out to all APGs that 
have  expressed  their  interest  to  join  in  project  activities  and  meet  the  project  targeting 
criteria. The objective of the CSA trainings is to promote climate smart production models and 
increase  farm  productivity.  Topics  will  include  best  practices  for  crop  selection,  variety 
selection, commodity production techniques, climate-smart agriculture solutions, integrated 
soil  fertility  management,  food  loss  and  waste,  nutrition  sensitive  value  chains,  production 
standards,  labour  saving  technologies  that  reduce  the  time  and  burden  for  women,  and 
national and international certifications. The CSA best practices will be included the Business 
Plans of each APG and cover also improved technologies for gender and nutrition optimal food 
crops. 
Financial  Literacy  Services.  Local  Financial  Institutions  are  mobilized  to  provide  financial 
literacy workshops for each APG, implemented with facilitation by the SACP province/district 
teams. The service includes opening of bank accounts for smallholders and for the groups, 
and training on basic banking skills and concepts such as “saving for a Purpose”, borrowing, 
interest rates, collateral, bank transactions, payments, and use of mobile and digital banking. 
District extensionist award mechanism. At the end of each project year, for each successfully 
trained APG, the accountable district extension officer receives an award equal to 15 per cent 
of  their  annual  government  salary,  with  the  maximum  of  150  per  cent.  The  success  is 
measured by completed Climate Smart Business Plans that qualified to receive matching grant 
financing from SACP.  
Nutrition  and  Food  Security.  Under  Component  1,  SACP  will  actively  pro-promote  nutrition 
and food security aspects in CV development. Detailed nutrition and food security promotion 
strategies of SACP are described above in this PIM in the Targeting Section. 
Sub-component 1.3: Financing for Inclusive VC Investment.  
SACP will co-finance, through a competitive selection process, privately owned and managed 
investments by smallholders and agribusinesses for VC upgrading.  Matching Grants (MG) will 
be made available in three categories, whereby the expected results include: (i) Category 1: 
US$ 16 million  of  competitive  co-investments  carried  out  with  800  APGs;  (ii)  Category 2: 
US$ 5 million  of  competitive  co-investments  financed  with  200  rural  microenterprises;  and 
(iii)  Category  3:  US$ 2.5 million  of  competitive  co-investments  financed  with  40  VC  Lead 
Enterprises. In addition, a US$-denominated Credit Line of US$ 2.5 million will be established 
at  a  selected  financial  institution,  to  initiate  access  to  commercial  bank  finance  by  those 
SACP’s partner VC Lead Enterprises that operate in the export sector. 
Category 1 MG objectives. Co-financing will be provided to the APGs and their members with 
the  objective  of  improving  their  productivity  and  building  their  climate  change  resilience. 
Smallholders will invest in (i) productivity and product quality; (ii) nutrition and food security; 
33 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=zw.co.kurimamari&hl=en 
100 
(iii)  food  loss  and  waste;  (iv)  storage;  (v)  pre-processing;  (vi)  market  linkages;  and  (vii) 
environmental/working standards.  
Category 2 and 3 MG objectives. Category 2 targets local microenterprises, and Category 3 
provincial and national VC lead enterprises. Co-financing is provided to develop agribusiness 
activities in  targeted  smallholder-inclusive  VCs, including investments in: (i) input  material 
supply; (ii) service supply; (iii) transport services; (iv) storage; (v) processing; (vi) marketing 
and  sales;  (vii)  farmer  training;  (viii)  climate  resilient  technologies;  and  (ix)  supply  chain 
coordination. For VC lead enterprises, the MG financing will be made available exclusively for 
investments/costs  related  to  business  operations  involving  smallholders,  both  women  and 
men, in SACP target areas. 
The MG budget, targets, eligibility criteria and conditions are detailed in the Table 1 below. 
Table 1: Matching Grant conditions and eligibility in three grant categories 
IFAD Budget 
Target group  
Specific 
objectives  
Max. US$ 
thresholds 
Category 1: APG Climate Smart 
Co-Investments 
US$ 16 million 
Category 2: Local MSME Co-
investments 
US$ 4.4 million 
Category 3: VC Lead Enterprise 
co-investments 
US$ 2.5 million 
Single  commodity  APGs  and  the 
APG members 
Local  private  sector  MSMEs 
based in the SACP clusters 
Registered 
sector 
Agribusinesses  with  min.  2  years 
operations and financial records. 
private 
Smallholder 
resilience and commercialization 
climate 
change 
VC upgrading at local level and 
climate proofing 
Upgraded  business  models  with  VC 
smallholders 
Max. US$  25,000  to  APGs  with  30 
members 
Max. US$ 30,000 per MSME 
Max  US$  75,000  per  VC  Lead 
Enterprise  (VC  LE)  (plus  access  to 
max  US$ 150,000  SACP-financed 
bank credit) 
Aver. US$ 
US$ 20,000 per APG 
US$ 22,000 per MSME 
US$ 62,500 per VC LE 
Targeted 
overall number 
of 
beneficiaries 
800 APGs 
24,000 SH households 
24,000 seasonal work HHs 
240,000 individuals 
200 MSMEs 
1,000 worker HHs 
10,000 supplier HHs 
56,000 individuals 
40 VC Lead Enterprises 
1,000 worker HHs 
16,000 supplier HHs 
85,200 individuals 
Gender and 
youth incl. 
Min. 50% of overall APG members 
women, 30% youth 
Min.  25%  of  beneficiaries 
women, 30% youth 
Min.  25%  of  beneficiaries  women, 
30% youth 
CSA and ESG 
All  APG  investments  adopt  CSA 
technology solutions 
All  MSME  investments  follow 
minimum ESG guidance 
All VC LE investments follow full ESG 
standards and norms 
Nutrition and 
food security 
Commodities  with  proven  positive 
nutritional impact are preferred 
Commodities  with 
proven 
positive  nutritional  impact  are 
preferred 
Commodities  with  proven  positive 
nutritional impact are preferred 
Counterpart 
contribution 
Minimum 10% in cash and 10% in 
kind by APG 
Minimum 25% in cash and 25% 
in kind by MSME 
Minimum 50% in cash by VC LE 
Total 
investment 
US$ 20 million 
US$ 8.8 million 
US$ 5 million 
All MGs will be disbursed in US$, through bank transactions, and a financial institution34 will 
be  engaged  to manage  these transactions.  In  addition,  the financial institution will lead  on 
the financial literacy training to Component 1 beneficiaries (refer to C1.2). Digital payments 
will be promoted for all end-users of the MG investments, to facilitate smooth transactions. 
To ensure overall transparency of the Matching Grant mechanism among the target groups, 
public  dissemination  events  for  periodic  batches  of  successful  matching  grants  will  be 
organized. This will ensure social monitoring of the investments, improve knowledge on SACP 
among target communities, and disseminate best practices among VC stakeholders. 
34 The design mission assessed the physical presence of financial institutions in target areas, and identified 
potential partner banks. The assessment is available in the design package. 
101 
The MG proposals will be scored against following weighed criteria: (i) technical feasibility, (ii) 
financial viability and sustainability, (iii) benefits to smallholders, (iv) demonstrated poverty 
reduction  impact,  (v)  nutrition  outcomes,  (vi)  green  solutions,  (vii)  demonstrated  youth 
employment  impact,  (viii)  women  led  enterprises  and  women  employment,  and  (ix)  ESG 
standards. A model of a scoring template is available in the PIM in Annex 8. For the first and 
second category, the principle acceptance criteria are commercialisation and climate change 
resilience. For the third category, VC lead enterprises, as principle acceptance criteria the MG 
financing  needs  to  directly  involve  smallholders  in  SACP  target  areas.  The  scoring  and 
selection are made by established committees as described below in the procurement section 
and in the PIM Matching Grant manuals. 
Special Credit Line for Export Sector VC Lead Enterprises 
Purpose and Overall Approach 
As a part of Component 1 VC financing support, in addition to the matching grants, a US$-
denominated  Credit  Line  of  US$  2.5  million35  will  be  established  at  a  selected  financial 
institution, to  initiate  access  to  commercial  bank  finance  by  those  SACP’s  partner  VC  Lead 
Enterprises that operate in the export sector and earn a major part of their revenues in foreign 
currency. This intervention responds particularly to three concerns of the GoZ in rural value 
chain development: (a) the need to effectively revitalise the operations of smallholder-based, 
export  oriented  rural  value  chains,  (b)  the  need  to  establish  a  pilot  US$-denominated 
commercial  borrowing  window  in  a  financial  market,  in  which  practically  no  forex  liquidity 
exists and no donor-supported refinancing options are operational, and (c) the need to include 
in the SACP support to VC Lead Enterprises an instrument, through which a part of the IFAD 
loan can eventually be repaid in foreign currency. 
After the start-up of the project operations, the SACP-financed credit line will be established 
in a financially sound commercial/development bank through a subsidiary loan agreement to 
be signed between the selected bank and the GoZ. The selected bank is expected to use this 
refinancing injection as a part of its overall strategy to develop new products and serve new 
markets in rural areas.  
Credit Line Implementation Arrangements 
Key Principles. The following key principles will guide the financing activities and operational 
procedures of the credit line of SACP for VC Lead Enterprises: 
  US$-denominated  loans  can  be  provided  to  Lead  Enterprises  only  for  purposes  that 
are directly related to the development of smallholder-based agricultural value chain 
that has been qualified for the SACP support. 
  To  qualify  as  borrowers  from  the  credit  line,  the  VC  Lead  Companies  need  to 
demonstrate that  their  projected  forex revenues  from the  VC  operations  provide  an 
adequate financing base for the repayment of the loans. 
  Before they apply for a credit line-financed loan from the selected partner bank, the 
Lead Enterprises need to have been selected as SACP Matching Grant recipients, and 
thereby have passed the assessment of SACP’s Technical Assessment Committee to 
indicate that they meet the development and impact criteria of the project. 
35 The relatively small LoC amount in comparison with the Matching Grant facility is due to the extreme Forex instability in 
Zimbabwe, and the consequent requirement that that all LoC transactions and repayments are made in US$. Therefore the 
enterprises need to earn adequate US$ revenues to be able to repay their loans. This limits the LoC target group to export 
oriented lead enterprises. 
102 
  Al disbursements from loans to the VC Lead Enterprises will be made in US$, either to 
the US$-denominated bank accounts of the companies in the partner bank or directly 
to suppliers of goods procured with the borrowed funds.  
 
In its credit line-refinanced lending operations to SACP’s Lead Enterprises, the partner 
bank carries the full credit risk and therefore uses its own criteria when assessing the 
bankability of the proposed projects, as well as its own terms and practices for interest 
rates, collaterals, and repayment and grace periods.  
As the credit line operations for the Lead Enterprises are planned to take place predominantly 
in Harare, the requirement of the bank’s presence in all SACP provinces does not apply to this 
financing activity. 
Credit Line Start-up Activities  
the 
As a part of the SACP design process, following initial inquiries by IFAD/MLAWRR about the 
interest of banks to partner with SACP in the Line of Credit implementation, a national banking 
consultant  conducted 
leading  Harare-based 
institutional  assessments  of 
commercial/development  banks  that  are  active  in  or  have  interest  to  expand  to  the  agri-
business finance. These banks included CBZ Bank Ltd, ZB Bank Ltd, NMB Bank Ltd, Steward 
Bank  Ltd  and  Agribank.  The  purpose  of  the  institutional  assessment  was  to  evaluate  the 
financial and institutional position and product portfolio of the financial institutions as well as 
their readiness to implement the SACP Credit Line for Export Sector VC Lead Enterprises. The 
full SACP Potential Partner Bank Assessment Report is included as a supportive document in 
the SACP Design Document Package.  
five 
The  outcome  of  the  assessment  was  that  three  of  the  reviewed  banks  had  the  financial 
strength, the required technical capabilities and experience to partner with SACP. These were 
CBZ Bank, NMB Bank and Agribank.  
After the effectiveness of SACP, the NPMU will organise a full assessment of these three banks 
and  their  appropriateness  to  implement  the  credit  line  activity.  IFAD  will  provide  technical 
support to this financial institution assessment operation. The key issues to be covered during 
this institutional assessment include: 
  The  financial  soundness  of  the  financial  institution  and  its  technical  capacity  to 
efficiently and transparently manage the credit line 
  The plans of the bank to use the credit line to develop its strategy and products to 
serve new markets in rural areas 
  The independence of the bank of political interference and its ability charge interest 
rates that allow full cost recovery 
  The  quality  of  the  bank’s  MIS  system  and  its  ability  to  submit  the  required 
performance  indicators  to  the  NPMU  regularly  during  implementation  and 
supervision 
  The key terms proposed by the bank in US$-denominated credit line operations with 
VC Lead Enterprises. 
Based  on the  results  of this  comprehensive  review,  the  NPMU  will make  a  proposal for  the 
selection of the partner bank for the SACP credit line implementation. An IFAD No-Objection 
103 
is  required  for  this  selection,  before  the  NPMU  presents  it  for  final  decision  making  to  the 
SACP Steering Committee. 
When an agreement is reached on the selection of the implementing financial institution,  a 
subsidiary loan agreement will be signed between the selected bank and the GoZ on the credit 
line  operation.  IFAD  will  provide  models  of  such  an  agreement,  used  for  similar 
implementation  partnerships  in  other  countries  of  the  region.  After  the  signing  of  the 
subsidiary  loan  agreement,  the  bank  will  nominate  a  senior  officer  to  be  in  charge  of  the 
operation in the bank and a counterpart to the SACP Project Coordinator in issues related to 
these financing operations with export oriented VC lead Enterprises.  
To start the actual financing operations, the partner bank will open in the partner bank a US$-
denominated bank account called “SACP Credit Line Account”. SACP/GoZ will transfer an initial 
payment to this account, reflecting the projected total disbursements to the borrowers from 
the credit line during the first 6 months of the lending operations. The implementing bank will 
request for replenishments to the SACP Credit Line Account from the NPMU of SACP based on 
(a) the remaining balance of SACP Credit Line Account, and (b) the projected disbursements 
of the credit line loans in the next 6 months. 
For  the  principal  repayments  by  the  borrowers  on  their  credit  line-financed  loans,  another 
US$-denominated account called “SACP Credit Line Revolving Fund Account” will be opened 
in the partner bank. All principal repayments by the credit line borrowers will be deposited in 
full on this account. At a part of the MTR of SACP, the GoZ and IFAD will agree on the use of 
the  repaid  credit  line  funds  during  the  remaining  repayment  period  of  the  IFAD  loan.  One 
appropriate option would be to continue to use the credit line funds to support other similar 
VC development efforts with these funds, preferably under new IFAD-financed initiatives in 
smallholder-based value chain development. 
The  loan  administration  preparations  and  requirements  for  the  partner  bank  on  the  SACP 
credit  line  operations  are  relatively  light,  as  the  number  of  borrowing  companies  is  not 
expected to exceed 25. Loans from the credit line will be identified in the bank’s MIS with a 
special code that facilitates for easy and systematic follow-up and reporting. The coding and 
the related on-line reporting will also support the effective audit of the credit line operations.   
Terms on Loan from Credit Line  
As  indicated  above,  the  selected  partner  bank  carries  the  full  credit  risk  of  the  SACP-
refinanced  lending  operations.  Therefore,  the  bank  uses  its  own  criteria,  staff  and 
methods/formats/templates when processing the loans and assessing the bankability of the 
proposed investment projects. Furthermore, when a project is approved for financing by the 
bank, it decides on its key lending terms on each loan, including the interest rate, collateral, 
and  repayment  and  grace  periods.  The  margins  should  be  sufficient  to  cover  the  bank’s 
transaction costs, profit margin and provide adequate cover for potential default risk. From 
the project side, the key pre-conditions/terms on the SACP refinanced loans are: 
  The  maximum  loan  size  for  loans  to  Lead  Enterprises  from  the  SACP  credit  line  is 
US$ 150,000 (with the average loan projected at US$ 100,000). 
  The whole loan must be used for the development of the SACP-supported smallholder-
based value chain. 
104 
  Before applying for credit line loan, the Lead Enterprise needs to have been selected 
as a SACP Matching Grant recipient, to indicate that it meets the development and 
impact criteria of the project. 
In same kind of credit line operations elsewhere in the region, the lending rate from the GoZ 
to the partner bank has often been close to the rate of IFAD service charge on its loan to the 
Government  (with  potentially  a  small  margin  to  cover  the  risk  for  the  Government  of  the 
collapse  of  the  partner  bank).  The lending  rate in  US$  to  the  VC  Lead  Companies  and  the 
collateral  policy  applied  will  largely  depend  on  the  bank’s  perception  on  the  default  risk  in 
these operations in the Zimbabwe market.  
After concluding the negotiations to select a partner bank for SACP credit line implementation, 
the  NPMU,  with  technical  support  from  IFAD,  will  complete  the  final  version  of  the 
implementation  guidelines  for  the  SACP  credit  line  operations,  including  then  also  the  key 
terms of the loans. This will be a key document to be used when informing the market of the 
SACP services and when identifying partner Lead Enterprises for VC development under the 
project.  
Use of Credit Line Funds after Closing of SACP 
The progress and success of the SACP credit line operations to  stimulate smallholder-based 
VC  development  and  especially  the  export  oriented  VC  operations  will  be  reviewed  during 
annual  supervisions  and  at  the  MTR,  when  adjustments  to  the  selected  implementation 
approach and the terms of the operations can be made. As a part of completion activities of 
the  project  at  the  end  of  the  project  period,  a  comprehensive  performance  and  impact 
assessment on the operation will be carried out. 
Component 1 Workflow  
Component 1  implementation  progress  and  workflow  are  best  described  based  on  the 
different  phases  of  the  community  and  enterprise  mobilisation  and  support  (Table  2).  The 
implementation process consists of the following key phases: (1) SACP calls for Expressions 
of  Interest  (EoI);  (2)  Agribusinesses  and  APGs  submit  their  EoIs;  (3)  SACP  national  EoI 
committee reviews the submissions and shortlists eligible VC Lead Enterprise candidates; (4) 
APGs and microenterprises receive comprehensive training packages (see C1.2 above); (5) 
VC LEs, Microenterprises and APGs submit their Full Investment Proposals; (6) MG Technical 
Assessment  Committees  (TAGs,  including  members  from  a  Private  Accounting  Firm,  a 
Financial  Institution,  and  the  SACP)  evaluate  the  proposals  received  and  make  MG 
recommendations; for smaller APG and MSME grants, the approval of grants is made by the 
Provincial TAGs; (7) For Lead Enterprise Category, IFAD No Objection is required, followed by 
the  National  Level  Investment  Committee’s  final  decision  on these large  grants;  (8)  Grant-
financed  project  implementation,  reporting  and  M&E.  The  reporting  on  the  grant-financed 
project implementation will allow the monitoring of specific indicators such the amount of land 
under climate resilient agriculture and adoption of CSA practices, and (9) establishment and 
implementation of the Credit Line for VC Lead Enterprise support. 
Matching grant screening for SECAP Compliance 
Prior to the formal screening process the IFC exclusion list will be applied to identify matching 
grant activities that are eligible for SACP financing.  The second step will be the screening of 
the  infrastructure  proposals  to  ensure  adherence  to  Category  B  particularly  for  the  road 
lengths, which should not exceed ten kilometers of continuous stretch and irrigation scheme 
sizes should be below 100ha in size. The scope of works for the infrastructure will determine 
the  depth  the  environmental  and  social  risk  analysis.  The  next  step  will  be  to  utilize  an 
105 
environmental and social screening checklist, see Appendix 3. In summary, the SACP negative 
list encompasses matching grants with any of the attributes listed below:  
•  potential  for  significant  conversion  or  degradation  of  natural  habitats  without 
appropriate mitigation of anticipated impacts; 
•  activity with potential to emit pollutants to water, air and land and  degrading forests;  
•  activity that will be implemented on disputed land or will result in the displacement of 
people or requires resettlement;  
•  activity with potential for significant damages to cultural property;  
•  activity  involving  the  procurement  of  pesticides  not  allowable  under  national 
guidelines;  
•  activity that does not meet the legal requirements of the country, including gazetted 
environment, health and safety legal requirements;  
•  activity that will involve use of child labour. 
106 
Table 2: SACP Component 1 Implementation Workflow 
Steps 
Lead Enterprise Investments 
Timing  
(6 Months) 
Steps 
Smallholder/Microenterprise Investments 
Before project 
entry into force 
Step 0 
Preparatoy stages  
Establishment of (i) Compositions of local SACP teams, (ii) 
BDS Manuals and templates, (ii) CSA Manuals and 
templates, (iii) Financial Institution partnership for financial 
literacy and transaction services. 
Smallholder support system 
Step 1 
Local level project implementation units capacitated on 
SACP strategy and instruments. 
Preparatory stages  
Establishment of (i) Call for EOI procedures, (ii) TAC and 
Investment Committee with private sector membership, 
(iii) Transaction capacities, (iv) Proactive private sector 
awareness raising. 
Call for Expressions of Interest 
SACP announces the Matching Grants opportunity and 
conditions, and calls for Expressions of Interests from 
Agribusiness Enterprises.  
Expressions of Interest by Agri-companies 
Agribusinesses communicate their investment ideas in 
short concept notes. Investment ideas to upgrade any 
smallholder-inclusive value chain are welcome, including 
not previously identified. 
Initially  and 
hereafter twice per 
year 
Within 3 weeks 
after the call for 
expresesions of 
interest 
Initial screening and field verification 
EoI committee conducts an initial screening of the 
expressions received covering: (i) eligibili ty of applicants, 
(ii) ESG basic requirements, and (iii) field verification. 
Within 2 weeks 
after the 
expressions are 
received 
Preparation of full proposal 
Pre-selected agribusinesses develop full proposals 
including (i) business plans, (ii) financial analysis, (iii) 
development benefits to smallholder households, (iv) 
innovation and CSA, (v) infra design. 
Within 6 weeks 
after the initial 
screening of 
proposals 
Technical Assessment Committee 
SACP Technical Assessment Committee comprising of 
private and public sector members (i) conducts scoring of 
the full proposals against agreed criteria, and (ii) makes 
recommendation for selection. 
Within 2 weeks 
after receipt of full 
proposals 
IFAD No Objection 
The recommended proposals and TAC reviews are sent to 
IFAD for no-objection. IFAD reviews, comments and/or 
provides no-objection. 
Within 4 weeks 
after receiving the 
proposal and TAC 
assessment  
Investment Committee and Investment Start-up 
Investment Committee comprising of private and public 
sector members formally decides on the investment. The 
Lead Enterprise is informed and the first tranche of the 
matching grant financing is made available. The Credit 
Line is opened for applications by the Lead Enterprises. 
Within 4 weeks 
after receiving 
IFAD no objection 
Step 0 
Step 1 
Step 2 
Step 3 
Step 4 
Step 5 
Step 6 
Step 7 
Step 8 
Timing  
(9 Months) 
Before project 
entry into force 
Initially and 
refresher at mid-
term 
After receipt of 
agribusiness 
expresssions of 
interest 
Within 8 weeks 
after the APG 
identification. 
Thereafter twice 
per year. 
Within 4 weeks 
after the call for 
proposals 
Step 2 
Step 3 
Step 4 
Step 5 
Step 6 
Step 7 
Identification of APGs in the clusters 
Community consultations held on SACP. Existing 
Agriculture Producer Groups (APG) and potential new APGs 
identified. APG formalization supported. 
Call for EoIs from the clusters 
SACP announces the Matching Grant opportunity and 
conditions, and calls for investment proposals from APGs 
and Microenterprises. 
Expressions of Interest by APGs and MSMEs 
APGs and Microenterprises communicate their expressions 
of interest in short concept notes. Investment ideas within 
any value chain are welcome. 
APG/Microenterprise Technical Assistance 
Agribusiness and agriculture specialists to provide APG TA 
regarding (i) business plan development, (ii) climate smart 
agriculture, (iii) financial literacy and planning, (iv) 
nutrition, (v) construction design. 
APG/Microenterprise business plans 
As result of the technical assistance, the APGs and 
Microenterprises complete their investment proposals and 
submit these to SACP. 
During 12 weeks 
after expressions 
of interest. 
Immediately after 
completion of TA 
Technical Assessment Committee and Start-up 
Provincial TAC (i) conducts scoring of the full proposals 
against agreed criteria, and (ii) makes decision for 
selection. First financing tranche made available. 
Implementation. 
Within 8 weeks 
after receiving 
the business 
plans. 
Implementation, Reporting, M&E 
The Agribusiness implements its business plan, and 
reports to SACP. SACP facilitates and conducts M&E. SACP 
and FI makes funds available against achievement of 
agreed milestones. . The BDS group provides technical 
assistance services and monitoring support. 
After Investment 
Committee 
decision 
Step 8 
Implementation, Reporting, M&E 
The APG/MSME implements its business plan, and reports 
to SACP. SACP facilitates and conducts M&E. SACP and FI 
makes funds available against achievement of agreed 
milestones. The BDS group provides technical assistance 
services and monitoring support.  
After TAC 
decision. 
107 
Appendix 1: APG and Microenterprise Support Manual 
1 
 Zimbabwe – IFAD 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project  
SACP 
APG and Microenterprise 
Support Manual 
1. APG/ME Mobilization
2. APG/ME Business Planning
3. APG Agricultural Training 
4. Competitive Matching Grants
2 
Contents 
Introduction and Organization 
Part 1: APG Mobilization and Training 
4 
5 
1.1 APG/ME Mobilization ............................................................................................................................. 5 
1.2 APG/ME Production Planning and Trainings........................................................................................... 6 
Part 2: APG/ME Matching Grants 
9 
2.1 Eligible applicants and investment ......................................................................................................... 9 
2.2 Competition to select grant recipients ................................................................................................. 10 
2.3 Matching Grant Implementation: Financial, Procurement and Supervision Procedures ...................... 13 
Annexes 
16 
Annex 1. Farmer Group Regulation Template 
16 
Annex 2. Farmer Group Production/Business Plan Template 
18 
Annex 3. APG Matching Grant Agreement Template  25 
Annex 4 Completion Report template  34 
Annex 5 Completion Letter template 
36 
3 
Introduction and Organization 
The SACP project targets 428 wards in 18 districts and in 5 provinces. In these areas SACP is to mobilize and 
support  800  Agricultural Production Groups (APG)  with  participation  of about 24,000  households. These 
groups  are  to  become  more  productive,  profitable  and  sustainable  in  their  agricultural  activities. 
Furthermore,  SACP  will  support  the  strengthening  of  200  Microenterprises  (ME)  in  the  agriculture  value 
chains. To achieve this, the following main tasks are conducted by the project and implementing partners: 
1.  APG/ME Mobilization: (i) Raise awareness about the project opportunities; (ii) Call for expressions 
of interest for APG and ME upgrading from among smallholder communities; (iii) Identify potential 
APGs/MEs for SACP partnership; (iv) support management/registration for new and existing APGs 
2.  APG/ME Business Planning: (i) Train APGs/MEs on business planning and marketing, (ii) financial 
literacy workshops, (iii) as result, investment proposals developed for Matching Grant competition 
3.  APG Training on Climate Smart Agriculture: (i) Agricultural technique trainings provided, specific for 
each APG clusters’ crop and animal type, (ii) Continuous coaching through project life 
4.  Grant Investment Support: (i) Based on proposals developed by APGs/MEs, selection of matching 
grant recipients; (ii) Oversight and support of matching grant implementation 
APG/ME Support Organization 
At Province level: In each province, SACP recruits: (i) Senior Value Chain and Agribusiness Specialist, (ii) CSA 
Specialist, and (iii) Infrastructure Officer, to coordinate and support APG/ME development. 
For each province, specific technical assistance is mobilized to support business planning skills, agriculture 
skills and financial literacy skills of the APGs and Microenterprises. 
At District level: for field level activities, total 32 District Agritex Extensionists support the APG development 
in 18 districts. For each Agritex Extensionists, the objectives include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Average 2 Extensionist focal points per 1 district 
Each Extensionist will support establishment and strengthening of average 25 APGs over 4 years 
Each Extensionist will support average 6 new APGs per year 
District extensionist award mechanism. At the end of each project year, for each successfully trained APG, 
the accountable district extension officer receives an award equal to 15 per cent of their annual 
government salary, with the maximum of 150%. The success is measured by completed Climate Smart 
Business Plans that qualified to receive matching grant financing from SACP.  
Details and guidance for the APG/ME support is the content of this manual. Before and during the field 
activities, SACP will provide intensive capacity building to its staff at province and district levels. A number 
of TOTs (Training of Trainers) will be organized for all locations, covering the various topics as mentioned in 
this manual. Practical training methods such as farmer field school and learning by doing will be used. 
4 
Part 1: APG Mobilization and Training 
Step 1: Awareness-raising on project concepts and opportunities 
1.1 APG/ME Mobilization 
SACP’s first task is to disseminate comprehensive information about the various project opportunities to all 
households  in  the  project  target  areas.  The  information  should  be  especially  clear  on  the  training 
opportunities  and  Matching  Grants,  requirements  for  access,  purpose,  maximum  amounts,  timing,  and 
application process including trainings and planning. 
The  NPMU  KM  Officer  together  with  the  technical  specialists  will  prepare  specific  materials  for  the 
awareness-raising,  to  explain  the project.  Information  is to  be delivered through various media including 
posters, leaflets, videos, local public speakers, and village meetings and workshops in all project target areas. 
The announcement should be repeated periodically to ensure that villagers are informed and aware of the 
opportunities and conditions. In the beginning of the project, a specific consultancy mission is launched to 
support this work and the community consultation mechanisms in each province. 
Step 2: Call for Expressions of Interest 
To  stimulate  “Farming  as  Business”  and  to  develop  agriculture  and  nutrition  sensitive  value  chains,  the 
Project will hold community consultations involving men, women and youth in the identified cluster areas. 
The venue and the timing of the meetings should allow women to attend, considering the heavy workload of 
women  in  the  communities.  Through  these  community  consultations,  SACP  requests  for  APG  and 
Microenterprise Expressions of Interest from the communities, whereby the smallholder groups: (i) propose 
investments in APG/ME agriculture operations, and (ii) explain potential linkages to market-oriented value 
chains. The APG members will be small-scale agriculture producers, which fulfil the SACP targeting criteria. 
The  Micro-entrepreneurs  will  be  individual  community  members  with  the  capacity  to  manage  small 
businesses, upgrading the value chains at local level. 
Step 3: APG mobilization, management, regulations and registration 
Following the awareness raising workshops / call for Expressions of Interest, smallholders will express their 
interest in joint investment into APG commodity production. The criteria for group membership includes: (i) 
Smallholder farming as main livelihood of the household; (ii) Motivation to participate in group activities and 
smallholder commercialization; (iii) Available time for APG activities and farm improvement; (iv) in overall 
minimum 50 per cent of total SACP’s APG members are women; (v) in overall minimum 30 per cent of SACP’s 
APG members are youth. 
APG  mobilization:  SACP  will  identify  existing  operational  Smallholder  Groups,  and  in  addition,  support 
farmers  in  the  process  of  Group  establishment  where  appropriate.  Villagers  will  lead  the  process  by 
themselves, with support by SACP province and district teams. Initial ideas for group purpose, composition 
and joined activities are recorded in writing during a village meeting, including details as described below: 
(i)  Group name and location 
(ii)  Group purpose in areas of input procurement, production, post-harvest, marketing 
(iii) Group overall membership and group committee 
(iv) Roles of APG members in the APG committee including 1. Group leader, 2. Deputy for production, 
marketing  and  business  plan,  3.  Deputy  for  financial  management,  4.  Assistant  for  production, 
marketing and business plan, 5. Assistant for financial management 
(v)  Establishment of the groups 
5 
APG  Regulations:  After  mobilizing  the  groups,  SACP  will  organize  coaching  sessions  regarding  group 
management. The APGs will be assisted in development of group regulations. The group regulation document 
is an official, signed contract between group members. It includes agreement for:  
(i)  Principles for group operations: production, marketing, management and accounting. 
(ii)  Management and ownership of group property including cash and equipment. This especially for the 
Matching Grant money  transfers through APG bank account, which is  established under a person 
appointed by the group (leader or deputy). For withdrawal of grant money, 3 signatures required 
from group members. Grant funds are only and exclusively used for the agreed APG work plan. 
(iii) Sharing  of  benefits  from  APG  joined  activities.  Access  to  APG  shared  equipment  and  machinery. 
Sharing of financial profit. 
(iv) Rights and responsibilities of group members, group leaders, group deputies and assistants.  
A template for group regulations development is attached in Annex 1. 
APG Registration: The APGs are  registered at district level administration system. The procedures will be 
agreed upon and made available by SACP to relevant district management and officials. The registration will 
follow a simplified and practical procedure, accessible to any Farmer Groups. 
Microenterprise Registration: Local microenterprises that have not yet registered are assisted to register, 
following the procedures under the SME Development offices at district/province level (MWACSMED). 
Establishment of APG/ME database at SACP province and national level: The APG groups and MEs are listed 
in  a  database  with  details  including:  (i)  group/ME  location  and  contact  details,  (ii)  composition  of  group 
membership or ME ownership, (iii) time of group/ME establishment, (iv) APG/ME produced commodity and 
preferred production model, (v) classification of APGs/MEs in terms of management, productivity and market 
access, (vi) technical support provided, (vii) financial support, Matching Grants provided. Each Province has 
an M&E specialist responsible for the database, and the NPMO will coordinate and consolidate information. 
An excel template is made available the database. 
Step 1: Manual development and training of the District and Province Teams 
1.2 APG/ME Production Planning and Trainings 
At  pre-start-up  phase,  the  project  will  develop  gender-sensitive  manuals  and  templates  for  (i)  APG  and 
Microenterprise  Business  Planning,  in  consultation  with  MFIs,  banks  and  ESG  specialists,  and  (ii)  Climate 
Smart  Agriculture,  in  consultation  with  CCA  and  agricultural  development  organizations.  Subsequently, 
before direct support to farmer groups, SACP will organize technical TOT trainings to the district extensionists 
and to the province level specialists: 
1.  TOT on business planning and marketing, implemented by a recruited BDS specialist group. The SACP 
implementing  teams  learn  the  business  plan  template  of  SACP  for  farmer  groups.  An  example 
business plan is completed (following template in appendix 2) including sections for: (i) production 
plan, (ii) cost benefit analysis, (iii) budgeting, (iv) marketing. Based on this TOT, the Province/District 
teams can lead the Step 4 below. 
2.  TOT  on  Climate  Smart  Agriculture  implemented  by  SACP  and  MLAWRR.  Topics  are  on  various 
adaptive commodity/technology applications. The models will be introduced with special attention 
to: (i) Introduce the commodity/technology; (ii) Agrological, technical and capacity requirements; (iii) 
Productivity optimization; (iv) Possibility for replication, especially by the poor and women. 
3.  TOT on Matching Grant procedures: (i) application process, (ii) money transfer to APG bank account, 
(iii) procurement of grant investment, (iv) receipts and quotations required. 
6 
Step 2: Train APGs/MEs on business planning and marketing 
Following the TOTs, the BDS services for APGs are implemented by the province and district level SACP teams, 
jointly with recruited BDS consultant groups. For Microenterprises, the recruited BDS consultants directly 
lead the service delivery. The BDS consultants are from NGO- or private sector. The BDS follows an activity-
based method and Business Planning templates.  
Production/business plan is the key document for APG/ME activities. The plan is also a requirement for SACP 
Matching Grant applications. During the SACP capacity building workshops, the APGs and MEs will develop 
their own production plans and business plans. 
A template for the group production/business plans is attached to this manual (see annex 2). Following the 
production/business plan template, a 3-day coaching session will be organized for the APGs and separately 
for the MEs. The below topics are covered: 
THREE-DAY COACHING ON PRODUCTION/BUSINESS PLANNING AS PER ANNEX 2 TEMPLATE 
DAY 1 Morning 
-  General  introduction  on  the  importance  of  production/business  plan,  project  farmer  grant 
opportunity (1 hour);  
-  Model selection and description of production improvement and volume. (2 hours); 
DAY 1 Afternoon 
-  Marketing for the selected model(s) (i) sales of produced commodity, (ii) purchase of input materials, 
(iii) purchase of investment items and transport costs (3 hours);  
DAY 2 Morning   
Production Plan for the selected model (1 hour). 
- 
-  Costs and benefits (Budget) of the group production plan (2 hours);  
DAY 2 Afternoon 
-  Business plan in detail for the grant proposals of the applicants (2 hours); 
- 
Procurement plan and cost estimation for the grant proposals (1 hours); 
DAY 3 Morning and Afternoon 
- 
Training participants present their business plans and receive comments for improvement. 
As a result of this 3-day session, APG/ME Production Plan is developed. This Plan is key part of the APG/ME 
Grant Proposals, to be financed by the SACP. From among the business plans, those with most potential are 
selected for Matching Grant financing. The APG business plans will also identify public infrastructure needs, 
for possible investments by Component 2 of SACP. 
Step 3: Financial Literacy Workshops: To strengthen the APGs’ and MEs’ business plan implementation and 
overall capacity in banking and financial planning, Financial Literacy workshops will be organized. These will 
be conducted by SACP partner financial institutions, with SACP support. SACP will mobilize the workshop 
participants from among the APG/ME networks. SACP will also cover the travel and DSA costs of specialists 
and officers engaged from the partner institutions. The workshop topics include opening of bank accounts 
for smallholders and for the groups, and training on basic banking skills and concepts such as “saving for a 
Purpose”, borrowing, interest rates, collateral, bank transactions, payments, and use of mobile banking. 
7 
Step  4:  APG  Training  on  Climate  Smart  Agriculture  and  productivity  skills  enhancement.  CSA  technical 
assistance, including e-extension solutions (such as Kurima Mari used in Zimbabwe36), will be delivered by 
Agritex Commodity Specialists and the SACP district/province teams. The service will reach out to all APGs 
that have expressed their interest to join in  project activities and meet the project targeting criteria. The 
objective of the CSA trainings is to promote climate smart production models and increase farm productivity.  
Farmer groups choose one commodity for investment and to receive in-depth coaching including for:  
Commodity and technology details for climate-smart agriculture solutions 
Technical and capacity requirements and variety selection 
Agricultural production schedules 
Productivity optimization and integrated soil fertility management 
Cost and benefit analysis 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi)  Markets for input materials and for sales 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
Food loss and waste control 
Production standards, national and international certifications 
Labour saving technologies in particular those reducing time and burden for women 
The CSA best practices will be included the Business Plans of each APG and cover also improved technologies 
for gender and nutrition optimal food crops. 
Step  5:  Gender,  Youth,  Nutrition  and  Food  Security.  The  project  will  adopt  the  Gender  Action  Learning 
System  (GALS)  approach  for  achieving  gender  transformation.  This  is  a  community-led  empowerment 
methodology that can be complementary to a value chain development approach. Through technical training 
offered by the project, women will be empowered to take up roles as producers and market actors along the 
value  chain,  in  particular  in  value  addition.  Non-technical  training  such  as  prevention  of  gender-based 
violence,  sexual reproductive health rights  will be offered  along with  the  technical training to  encourage 
women’s participation and wellbeing. 
SACP  will  be  aware  of  the  diversity  of  youth  populations  (gender,  age,  level  of  education  part  of  value 
chain/crop preference) and target value chain analysis accordingly to identify tailored approaches to sub-
populations  of  youth.  Value  chain  analysis  and  selection  will  be  done  in  a  participatory  manner  actively 
involving  youth  and  women,  culminating  in  the  selection  of  value  chains  that  are  gender  sensitive  and 
suitable for youth interests and capacities. 
To ensure that the envisaged increased agricultural production and income from SACP value chain activities 
lead to improved nutrition and food security, SACP will mainstream three nutrition related approaches into 
the value chain activities: (i) Social Behaviour Change Communication, (ii) value chain selection, (iii) Women’s 
empowerment. 
Step 6: Coaching and monitoring of APGs/MEs during business plan implementation 
Following  the  Matching  Grant  disbursements,  the  SACP  district/province  teams  and  the  recruited  BDS 
consultants  will  provide  additional  services  to  the  APG  groups  and  the  Microenterprises,  including  (i) 
technical support for the project implementation, (ii) monitoring of the disbursements and utilization of the 
Matching Grants, (iii) facilitation of access to markets and financial services. 
36 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=zw.co.kurimamari&hl=en 
8 
Part 2: APG/ME Matching Grants 
To implement the developed APG/ME business plans, SACP has a competitive Matching Grant mechanism to 
provide financing for the groups through. A total of US$ 16,8 million is available for a minimum 800 APGs; 
and US$ 5 million for 200 ME Grants. 
2.1 Eligible applicants and investment 
During the above explained group meetings and trainings (Part 1), the SACP target groups will learn about 
(i) business planning, (ii) climate smart agricultural production methodologies, (iii) financial literacy, and (iv) 
gender, nutrition and youth inclusivity.  During the business planning training, the APG groups and the 
Microenterprises will develop proposals to implement Matching Grant investments. 
The APGs/MEs that operate in the SACP villages are eligible to apply for Matching Grants. Grants are 
awarded through a competition, to the best Business Plans developed by APGs and by Microenterprises. 
See Business Plan template in Annex 2. The grants are given with the following conditions: 
Target group  
Single commodity APGs with 10-30 members. 
Local private sector ME based in the SACP clusters 
Category 1: APG Climate Smart Co-
Investments 
Category 2: Local ME Co-investments 
The  groups  have  a  group  regulation  at  place, 
specifying  group  member  and  committee  roles,  and 
sharing of APG benefits and assets. 
The  group  members  must  have  participated  in  the 
APG  business  planning  workshops  and  the  CSA 
technical trainings. 
The MEs must be registered according to Zimbabwe 
regulations. 
The MEs participated in the business planning training 
sessions. 
Specific 
objectives  
Max. US$ 
thresholds 
Smallholder 
commercialization 
climate 
change 
resilience 
and 
VC upgrading at local level and climate proofing 
Max. US$ 25,000 to APGs with >25 members 
Max. US$ 20,000 to APGs with >20 members 
Max. US$ 15,000 to APGs with >15 members 
Max. US$ 10,000 to APGs with >10 members 
Max. US$ 30,000 per MSME with link to >60 HHs 
Max. US$ 25,000 per MSME with link to >50 HHs 
Max. US$ 20,000 per MSME with link to >40 HHs 
Max. US$ 15,000 per MSME with link to >30 HHs 
Aver. US$ 
Average US$ 20,000 per APG 
US$ 22,000 per MSME 
Targeted 
overall number 
of 
beneficiaries 
800 APGs 
24,000 SH households 
24,000 seasonal work HHs 
240,000 individuals 
200 MSMEs 
1,000 worker HHs 
10,000 supplier HHs 
56,000 individuals 
Gender and 
youth incl. 
Min.  50%  of  overall  APG  scheme  members  women, 
30% youth 
Min. 25% of beneficiaries women, 30% youth 
CSA and ESG 
All APG investments adopt CSA technology solutions 
All MSME investments follow minimum ESG guidance 
Nutrition and 
food security 
Commodities  with  proven  positive  nutritional  impact 
are preferred 
Commodities  with  proven  positive  nutritional  impact 
are preferred 
Counterpart 
contribution 
Total 
investment 
Grant amount is max. 80% of total investment cost 
Grant amount is max. 50% of total investment cost 
Minimum 10% in cash and 10% in kind by APG 
Minimum 25% in cash and 25% in kind by MSME 
US$ 20 million 
US$ 8.8 million 
Grant Investment period (kick-start period with grant resource) ranges between 6-12 months depending on 
production/business plan. 
As result of any investment, household income level needs to increase significantly in short to medium term. 
All investments should be easily replicable by other households in the localities. 
Objectives: APG MG programme overall objective is to improve smallholder productivity and building their 
climate change resilience. Smallholders will invest in (i) productivity and product quality; (ii) nutrition and 
food  security;  (iii)  food  loss  and  waste;  (iv)  storage;  (v)  pre-processing;  (vi)  market  linkages;  and  (vii) 
environmental/working  standards.  Microenterprise  MG  programme  objective  is  to  develop  agribusiness 
activities in targeted smallholder-inclusive VCs, including investments in: (i) input material supply; (ii) service 
9 
supply; (iii) transport services; (iv) storage; (v) processing; (vi) marketing and sales; (vii) farmer training; (viii) 
cimate resilient technologies and (ix) supply chain coordination. 
Possible investment items: The Matching Grant investment for both APGs and Microenterprises can be used 
for  example  for:  (i)  drying  grounds,  (ii)  drying  mills,  (iii)  post-harvest  milling,  processing  and  packaging 
equipment, (iv) nursery housing and materials, (v) nets and houses for production  and storage, (vi) small 
transport/land  preparation  machinery,  (vii)  small  scale  irrigation  systems  especially  water  efficient  drip 
irrigation,  (viii)  water  distribution  systems  at  APG/ME  and  household  levels,  (ix)  loading  and  weighing 
equipment, (x) waste material and waste water management such as filters, composts and biogas systems, 
(x)  animal  housing,  (xi)  veterinary  kits  and  drugs,  (xii)  transport  costs  of  the  Matching  Grant  investment 
equipment from shop to production site, (xiii) other costs related to start-up of climate smart agricultural or 
micro level agribusiness models. 
2.2 Competition to select grant recipients 
The  best  APG/ME  production  plans are  selected  to  receive financing through a  competition. A  provincial 
Technical Assessment Committee (TAC) is established in each province for the grant winner selection process. 
Each province TAC has 5 members to participate in the grant selection panel, including (i) SACP Provincial 
Coordinator, (ii) Provincial FI Representative, (iii) SACP Provincial CSA Specialist,  (iv) SACP Provincial Social 
Inclusion  Officer,  and  (v)  SACP  Provincial  Financial  and  Procurement  Officer.  Minimum  4  out  of  the  5 
members need to be present for the TAC to be effective. The competition steps are as follows: 
Step 1 
APGs and MEs prepare applications during the business 
planning training / workshops 
Max 2 months 
Step 2 
TAC reviews the applications to select Grant winners 
Max 2 weeks 
Step 3 
Announcement of winners and agreement signing 
Max 10 days 
Step 1: APGs and MEs prepare applications during the business planning training / workshops 
During the Business Planning workshops, the SACP province/district teams will announce the details of the 
Matching Grant competition. The announcement includes the following details:  
i.  Objective of the Matching Grants; 
ii.  Eligible Matching Grant applicants; 
iii.  Duration of the implementation; 
iv.  Maximum grant amount and required beneficiary contribution; 
v.  What can be supported by the grant amount; 
vi.  What documents need to be included in the application; 
10 
vii.  Deadline and location for submission of the Application; 
viii.  Rules for selecting grant winners; 
ix.  Places where interested Applicants may obtain further information and support. 
See explanation for each detail above at 2.1 of this manual. 
After announcement of the Grant opportunity, the APGs have 60 days to finalize and submit their proposals. 
Applicants will be supported by SACP in preparation of the Applications. Details of the training are explained 
above at Part 1 of this guideline. 
The APGs are responsible for preparation, submission and implementation of the grant proposals. A Group 
Leader, on behalf of the APG and selected by the APG, will be the contact person for the grant application 
and implementation process. 
The proposal must be submitted to SACP before the announced submission deadline. Applications received 
after the published deadline will not be eligible, but need to wait for possible next round. 
The Application is required to provide details as follows (see templates at appendix 1 and 2): 
title of the grant investment project and name of the farmer group; 
applicant contact details; 
- 
- 
-  proposed duration of sub-project; 
-  proposed total cost, grant amount and beneficiary contribution; 
- 
technical description of proposed investment; 
- 
input and output market description; 
-  work plan and budget including timeline. 
In addition, applications need to be accompanied by a signed Group Agreement, between all members of 
the group certifying that: (i) the group will work together and members have decided to implement this sub-
project; (ii) the group members agree to contribute to the implementation as described in the sub-project 
proposal; (iii) the group leader, deputies and assistants are assigned by the group; (iv) all group members 
agree to apply for the grant; and (v) group has nominated/selected the responsible person for the Application 
and for the management of the sub-project bank account (group leader or deputy). 
Step 2: TAC reviews the applications to select Grant winners 
Maximum 7 days after the submission deadline, the Province Technical Assessment Committee (TAC) will 
hold a meeting to appraise the proposals against an agreed set of criteria. The following criteria template 
will be used to assess the proposals: 
Criteria 
Impact on increased incomes (maximum 30 points) 
1  Is there sufficient number of beneficiaries against the grant amount? 
2  Will the proposal lead to significant income increase of participants?  
11 
Out of 
maximum  
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
3  Are there 50% women among applicants and beneficiaries in the proposal? 
__ / 10 
Technical feasibility (maximum 30 points) 
4 
Does the proposal include an appropriate production/business plan that follows the 
proposal template? 
__ / 10 
5  Is the applicants’ commitment sufficient, by including in-kind / in-cash contributions? 
__ / 10 
6  Is the production/business plan practical, feasible and profitable? 
__ / 10 
Sustainability and Climate Change Adaptation (maximum 30 points) 
7  Does the proposal contribute to sustainable, climate smart value chains? 
8 
Is it clear how the sub-project activities are continued after the end of the sub-
project? How the procured equipment is maintained and used in long term?   
9  Is the agriculture production plan adapted to climate and other risks?  
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
Environment impact (maximum 10 points) 
10 
What is the impact of the investment on the environment (from -20 if very negative 
to +10 if very positive)? 
__ / 10 
 Total 
__ / 100 
During the evaluation meeting, (i) TAC members will discuss the  proposals and individually give scoring to 
each Application; (ii) The scores of the reviewers are immediately averaged; (iii) After scoring and averaging 
the proposals, the Committee will verify the final scoring of the Applications. 
Proposals  exceeding  scoring  of  70  points  are  considered  approved  for  implementation,  in  the  limits  of 
available  budget  for  the  Matching  Grant  scheme.  Those  with  scores  less  than  70  points  are  returned  to 
Applicants together with the declaration of negative result. Proposals that are rejected can be improved and 
re-submitted in later calls for Applications. 
Step 3: Announcement of winners and agreement signing 
Following approval, the legal Grant Agreement documents will be issued by SACP. The grant agreement will 
be signed by (i) APG Leader and 2 APG Deputies, (ii) SACP representative and (iii) District representative. The 
final Grant Agreement is sent to NPMO for review and no objection. Grant Agreement key contents include: 
i.  Final version of the Matching Grant Proposal: (i) Expected results and description of implementation; 
(ii) Costs including grant funds and applicant in-kind contribution; (iii) Implementation plan and a 
schedule for the grant fund transfer;  
ii.  Disbursement  details  including  documentation  of  a  bank  account  to  be  used  for  Matching  Grant 
money transfers; 
iii.  Procurement  method  and  responsibilities;  Equipment  ownership  rights  during  and  after  the 
completion of the sub-project; 
12 
iv.  Rules  for  reporting,  monitoring,  supervision  and  audit;  Rules  for  publication/disclosure  of 
results/information; 
v.  Cancellation  or  other  measures  to  be  taken  in  the  event  of  an  unacceptable  level  of  sub-project 
implementation or other causes of delay; and cancellation due to Force Majeure; 
vi.  Schedule for the disbursement of funds by the SACP; 
vii.  Commitment of the APG Leader and members to follow the agreed work plan and use Grant funds 
accordingly. 
The Grant Agreement is prepared in three original copies. One original copy each is retained by the APG in 
the Village, District authorities and SACP-PPIU. 
To ensure overall transparency of the Matching Grant mechanism among the target groups, public 
dissemination events for periodic batches of successful matching grants will be organized. This will ensure 
social monitoring of the investments, improve knowledge on SACP among target communities, and 
disseminate best practices among VC stakeholders. The BDS consultant group will support the 
district/province SACP teams in the organization of these events. 
2.3 Matching Grant Implementation: Financial, Procurement and Supervision Procedures 
The PPIU is responsible for the agreed disbursements. PPIU will ensure that grant funds are transferred to 
the APGs as per Grant Agreements in a timely manner. 
The Group Leader and 1-2 deputies are the primary recipients of grant funds. It their responsibility to use 
the grant funds as agreed in the work plan and Grant Agreement. 
The District Extensionists are responsible for supervision of the Grant Implementation. The PPIU specialists 
and infrastructure officer will ensure appropriate procurement procedures and that all grant funds are used 
according to APG work plans and Grant Agreements. 
(a) Disbursement 
The grant disbursements will be made to commercial bank account registered for the  APG Leader or APG 
Deputy. The bank should be located in the district or province, as close to the APG as possible.  The group 
members will officially authorize the Group Leader or Deputy to act as the APG account holder. For Matching 
Grant transaction to the group account, all group members are officially informed. For withdrawal of Grant 
funds, at least three APG members need to sign approval. For each payment by the Grant funds, the grant 
recipient will provide evidence (receipt, photograph) that funds are used according to the work plan. 
The grant disbursements will be in 2-3 tranches which are defined in the grant implementation plan. The 
second  and  third  tranche  are  paid  upon  successful  completion  of  the  business  plans,  against  agreed 
milestones of achievement. 
 (b) Procurement 
All Grant implementation and procurements will be carried out directly by the APG Leader and Members in 
accordance with procedures satisfactory to the Government of Zimbabwe and consistent with IFAD Project 
Procurement Guidelines. The role of the SACP province and district teams is to review, supervise and guide 
the procurement carried out by the Grant Recipients, thereby ensuring transparency and accountability  of 
the Grant Agreement. All goods and services procured by the Grant Recipients using the proceeds of the 
grant shall be used exclusively for the purposes of the project as stipulated in the Grant Agreements. 
Procurement steps are as follows: 
13 
i.  As part of Farmer Grant proposal, APG identifies the goods and services to be procured. A specific 
Procurement Plan details (1) the procurement items, (2) quality specification for each item, (3) the 
timing of procurement for each item, (4) costs per item and total costs; 
ii.  The APG prepares for procurement of each  item by (i) collection of three competitive quotations 
when possible, (ii) agreeing with the suppliers and service providers about purchase details including 
time and cost, (iii) discuss within the group and decide on procurement. 
iii.  When  procuring,  the  APG  shall  pay  attention  to  the  need  for  economy,  efficiency,  transparency, 
timing and quality of the procured goods and services. 
iv.  At the time of procurement (duration 1-2 days per time), the APG will (i) withdraw the required Grant 
funds from the bank account, (ii) contract the transport vehicle as required, (iii) purchase the goods 
and get all receipts, (iv) transport the goods to APG location. To save transport costs, as many items 
should be purchased in one time as possible. 
v.  APG  produces  evidence  of  procurement  and  quotations.  The  evidence  such  as  receipts  and 
photographs are copied or photographed and sent to SACP staff  the next day after procurement 
took place. If seller could not produce receipts, village head signature may substitute the receipts. 
(c) Ownership of Goods 
All purchased materials and equipment remain the property of the SACP during the implementation period. 
The group members will have the full property right for the purchased goods, after successful completion of 
the  Matching  Grant  Work  Plan.  The  ownership  right  belongs  to  the  group  after  Completion  Report  is 
submitted  and  approved  by  SACP.  The  completion  report  is  sent  to  SACP  NPMU  for  information.  (See 
appendix 4 for completion report template) 
The APG will use the goods as agreed in the proposal description, both during and after the completion of 
the sub-project. The APG is responsible for maintenance of all assets. The joint ownership of the assets, joint 
use of the assets, and the sharing of benefits are agreed upon in the APG Group Agreement. 
 (d) Reporting, Monitoring, Evaluation 
The  Matching  Grant  monitoring  and  evaluation  is  done  by  the  SACP  province  M&E  officer  and  district 
extensionists.  This  includes  two  steps:  (i)  initial  field  check  against  APG  work  plan;  and  (ii)  review  and 
validation of APG completion report.  
Initial field check is performed and reported by the SACP province/district teams, prior to signature of the 
Grant Agreement. The main purpose is to verify that the resources presented in the proposal are actually 
available to the APG. APG Leader is required to show available resources, and all APG members need to be 
available to meet with the field check.  
An  additional  purpose  for  the  initial  field  check  is  documentation  (pictures  and  description)  of  baseline 
situation at the production site. 
Completion reporting includes: (i) APG supported by the district extensionists submits completion report, (ii) 
PPIU will review the final report against the Grant Agreement targets, (iii) PPIU will perform a field-check to 
verify  the  Completion  Report  and  submit  a  validated  completion  report  to  NPMU  for  information.  (See 
appendix 4 for Completion Report template) 
In addition, a sample of completed sub-projects will be evaluated and documented by experienced specialists, 
to assess whether the particular sub-projects and Grant Scheme in general has achieved intended results in 
terms of increased incomes,  technology development and dissemination, productivity improvements, skills 
14 
development  and  market  linkages.  The  independent  evaluators  will  have  access  to  field  check  baseline 
documentation, final documents, and all Grant implementation sites. The results of the Farmer Grant scheme 
will be documented by the evaluators, with the aim of showcasing and replicating good activities. 
(e) Accounting and Internal Audit 
SACP holds overall responsibility for ensuring that disbursements are processed timely, and ensures that the 
appropriate procurement procedures are followed, and that the necessary accounting and audit procedures 
are carried out as per general requirements. 
The  APGs  will  submit  to  SACP  the  receipts  and/or  other  evidence  for  all  expenditures  by  Grant  funds. 
(invoices, receipts, written declarations, photographs etc.). With SACP support, the APGs will also prepare a 
Grant Completion Report including expenditure report once the work plan is completed. 
Grant expenditures may be audited, as deemed appropriate, within the overall SACP financial audit process. 
The APGs will co-operate fully with the auditors and will make available to the auditor whatever records, 
documentation and other information is requested by the auditor. If any misuse is found, APG members and 
collaborating institutions will be liable for repaying any grant funds misused and all steps will be taken for 
recovery according to the regulation in power in Zimbabwe. 
(f) Completion, Suspension and Cancellation of Grant 
Completion of Grant. Upon receipt of Completion Report from the APG, SACP shall initiate procedures to 
complete the grant. This includes three steps: (i) Review of the Completion Report including expenditure 
report and evidence of use of funds as per work plan, (ii) Field visit and validation of the Completion Report, 
(iii) Communication of the completion through Completion Letter to the APG. The Completion letter includes 
announcement  that  the  grant  investments  are  moved  to  the  full  ownership  of  the  APG  members.  (see 
Completion Report and Completion Letter templates in appendixes 4 and 5) 
Suspension and Cancellation of Grant. The SACP holds right to terminate the grant at any time, if: (i) the APG 
does not follow work plan of the Grant Agreement; (ii) the APG has significant delays in the implementation 
and SACP believes that the APG cannot achieve its objectives; (iii) no proper evidence is shown for the fund 
use according to  the work  plan;  (iv)  false  documents or information  is provided; (v) the  Grant is used  to 
finance expenses not approved by the SACP, and conducting activities other than approved; or (vi) the APG 
decides to terminate the Matching Grant-project. 
In the case of a cancellation of the Grant, all funds received under the Grant which have not been used, shall 
be returned to the SACP account. All amounts, which have not been paid, shall be cancelled by SACP and all 
equipment purchased by grant shall be returned to the SACP. In the case of misuse of grant funds, the APGs 
will be liable for repaying any grant funds found to have been misused and all steps will be taken for recovery 
according to the regulation in power in Lao PDR. 
Force Majeure. Neither the APG nor SACP will be responsible to the other for delay or failure in performance 
of any of the obligations imposed by this Agreement when such failure is occasioned by unintentional fire, 
flood, explosion, lightning, windstorm, earthquake, subsidence of soil, court order, riot,  war, strikes,  and 
labor disturbances, beyond the reasonable control and without the fault or negligence of either of the APG 
or the SACP. 
15 
Annexes 
Annex 1. Farmer Group Regulation Template 
1.  Purpose of the group 
………………………………………………. 
2.  Group composition, group structure and group management 
………………………………………………….. 
3.  Principles for group operations including production and marketing 
………………………………………………….. 
4.  Ownership of group property including cash and equipment 
………………………………………………….. 
5.  Management and maintenance of group assets in long term 
………………………………………………….. 
6.  Sharing of profits from group activities 
………………………………………………….. 
16 
7.  Responsibilities of group members, group leaders and group assistants 
………………………………………………….. 
8.  management of group bank account and rules for withdrawing funds 
………………………………………………….. 
9.  Responsibilities for financial reporting 
………………………………………………….. 
Signed by all group members 
1.  Name : …….. 
2.  Name : …….. 
3.  Name : …….. 
4.  Name : …….. 
5.  Name : …….. 
6.  Name : …….. 
7.  Name : …….. 
Date of signatures:  
Signature: …….. 
Signature: …….. 
Signature: …….. 
Signature: …….. 
Signature: …….. 
Signature: …….. 
Signature: …….. 
Signed by village leader 
Village leader name: ……  
Signature: ………  
Date: ……… 
17 
Annex 2. Farmer Group Production/Business Plan Template 
I. GENERAL INFORMATION 
Name of the production/business plan: 
…………………………………………………………………………………………... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
Information of the group: 
Village:  ................................................................................................................................  
District:  ...............................................................................................................................  
No. of group members: …………… , of which: Poor………….., Female…………,  
Youth ……………….  
Duration and cost of the production plan: 
Implementation duration, approximately: …….……….. (months). 
Expected 
starting 
time:  ………........... 
(month/year); 
Expected 
ending 
time: 
…………(month/year)  
The total investment cost of the production plan: ……………………….  
Requested financed amount: ……………………... 
In-cash contributions by the benificiaries : .…………………………... 
In-kind contributions by the benificiaries: ……………………………. 
List  out  and  describe  all  the  in-kind  contributions  (e.g.  labor,  equipment,  tools,  land  in 
connection with production activities): 
18 
Description of the in-kind contributions 
Value 
1. 
2. 
3. 
II. Production plan 
A. Product…………………………………………………………………………………... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
B. Production volume (How much production, yield)….…………………………………... 
…………………………………………………………………………………………... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
C. Market (how many % for sales? where to sell the product?)…………………………... 
…………………………………………………………………………………………... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
D. Purchase of input materials (Where to buy? Purchase jointly?)………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………………........... 
…………………………………………………………………………………………... 
…………………………………………………………………………………………... 
19 
E. Matching Grant sub-project objectives:…………………..………………………… 
1. …………………………………………………………………………………........... 
2. …………………………………………………………………………………………... 
3. …………………………………………………………………………………………... 
4. …………………………………………………………………………………………... 
20 
III. Commodity Production Budget (example headings for animal husbandry) 
Product: 
Harvest Period: 
Sold to: 
Unit cost 
Value 
Unit 
No. of 
Units 
 Output 
Output 1  
Output 2 … 
Total Revenue 
kg 
kg 
kg  
1. Input materials 
Grass and legume seed 
Animal feed 
Animal breeds (cattle, pigs, goat) 
Vet. Drugs and vaccines 
… 
2. Housing and equipment (divide 
cost by No. of usable periods) 
Housing facilities 
Water pipes, pumps etc. 
Feed processing equipment 
Operation cost 
Costs of rent machinery 
… 
3. Operations costs 
Water 
Electricitiy 
Gasoline 
Maintenance of housing and machinery 
21 
Transportation 
Miscellanous costs 
… 
 4. Labour 
Land preparation for forage 
day 
Forage planting and tending 
Forage harvest and carry 
Animal feed processing 
Animal feeding and watering 
Cleaning of animal shelter 
… 
5. Loan repayment 
Interest rate 
Capital repayment 
Total costs 
Profits  (revenue-costs) 
22 
IV. Matching Grant Procurement Plan: 
Procurement Items 
Quality 
Specifics 
Time of 
procurement 
Unit 
Quantity  Unit price 
Total cost 
 TOTAL COST 
1) Input materials 
2650 US$ 
 Total: 250 
1.1 Example: Plastic bags for 
nursery 
20L plastic 
bags  
February 
Bag 
500 
0.5 US$ 
250 US$ 
1.2 
1.3 Nursery construction 
materials 
1.4 Drying ground 
construction materials 
1.5 etc etc 
… 
2) Machineries, equipment 
2.1 Example: Tractor 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
… 
Wheelbase: 
min. 250 cm - 
max. 270 cm 
Weight: min. 
4400 kg – 
max. 5000 kg 
Engine: min. 
5.0L – max. 
6.0L diesel 
etc. 
January 2018  Machine 
1 
2000 US$ 
2000 US$ 
 Total: 2000 
23 
2) Services 
2.1 Example: Tractor, plastic 
bags, construction materials 
etc. transport to village 
1 truck for 1 
day 
January 2018 
1 Trip 
1 
400 US$ 
400 US$ 
 Total: 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
… 
24 
V. Verification signature: 
1. Signatures by Group leader and the Deputies 
Group Leader Name: ………………….. Signature …………………. Date ……………... 
Group Deputy Name: ………………….. Signature …………………. Date …………….. 
Group Deputy Name: ………………….. Signature …………………. Date …………….. 
2. Verification by the responisible District support staff and by the Village Head: 
District Staff Name: ………………….. Signature …………………. Date ……………. 
Village Head Name: ………………….. Signature …………………. Date ……………... 
 (Full name and seal) 
Annex 3. APG Matching Grant Agreement Template 
APG MACHING GRANT AGREEMENT  
BETWEEN SACP AND APG 
25 
APG Matching Grant  
Agreement No: 
Parties 
Party 1 
Sub-project No. 
APG Leader and two Deputies on behalf of the APG (see Group Agreement 
Letter in Annex 2 to this agreement) 
Party 2 
SACP Provincial Coordinator 
Contact Details 
Name: 
Address: 
Phone: 
E-mail: 
Bank account 
details: 
APG Leader  
SACP 
Not applicable 
The application to the SACP for APG Matching Grant funding for the grant sub-project defined in the following 
schedule and hereinafter  known  as the “sub-project” has been  approved  by the  SACP  Province Technical 
Assessment Committee, subject to the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement. 
26 
Sub-project title: 
SUB-PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Agreement commencement date:  
Agreement completion date:  
Grant Agreement amount: 
Amount of beneficiary contribution: 
THE AGREEMENT 
It is agreed between the following Parties  
Party 1:  
Party 2:  
(APG Leader, representing the Recipients) 
(SACP Provincial Coordinator) 
1. PURPOSE 
1.1 
The grant funds provided to the APG by the SACP shall be used exclusively for the purposes 
specified  in  the  proposal  (see  Annex  2)  submitted  to  the  SACP  by  __________________  (Group  Leader)  
____________ (date of submission).  
2. RESPONSIBILITIES 
2.1 SACP is responsible for the agreed disbursements. PRCO will ensure that grant funds are transferred to 
the APGs as per Grant Agreements in a timely manner. SACP is also responsible for supervision of the Grant 
Implementation. SACP will ensure appropriate procurement procedures and that all grant funds are used 
according to APG work plans and Grant Agreements. 
2.2 The Group Leader and 1-2 deputies are the primary recipients of grant funds. It their responsibility to use 
the grant funds as agreed in the work plan and Grant Agreement. 
3. DISBURSEMENT 
27 
3.1 The grant disbursements will be made to commercial bank account registered for the APG Leader or APG 
Deputy. The bank should be located in the district or province, as close to the APG as possible.  The group 
members will officially authorize the Group Leader or Deputy to act as the APG account holder. For Matching 
Grant transaction to the group account, all group members are officially informed. For withdrawal of Grant 
funds, at least three APG members need to sign approval. For each payment by the Grant funds, the grant 
recipient will provide evidence (receipt, photograph) that funds are used according to the work plan. 
3.2 The grant disbursements will be in 2-3 tranches which are defined in the grant implementation plan. The 
second  and  third  tranche  are  paid  upon  successful  completion  of  the  business  plans,  against  agreed 
milestones of achievement. 
4. PROCUREMENT 
4.1  All Grant implementation and procurements will be carried out directly by the APG Leader and Members 
in accordance with procedures satisfactory to the Government of Zimbabwe and consistent with IFAD Project 
Procurement Guidelines. The role of the SACP province and district teams is to review, supervise and guide 
the procurement carried out by the Grant Recipients, thereby ensuring transparency and accountability of 
the Grant Agreement. All goods and services procured by the Grant Recipients using the proceeds of the 
grant shall be used exclusively for the purposes of the project as stipulated in the Grant Agreements. 
Procurement steps are as follows: 
i.  As part of Farmer Grant proposal, APG identifies the goods and services to be procured. A specific 
Procurement Plan details (1) the procurement items, (2) quality specification for each item, (3) the 
timing of procurement for each item, (4) costs per item and total costs; 
ii.  The APG prepares for procurement of each item by (i) collection of three  competitive quotations 
when possible, (ii) agreeing with the suppliers and service providers about purchase details including 
time and cost, (iii) discuss within the group and decide on procurement. 
iii.  When  procuring,  the  APG  shall  pay  attention  to  the  need  for  economy,  efficiency,  transparency, 
timing and quality of the procured goods and services. 
iv.  At the time of procurement (duration 1-2 days per time), the APG will (i) withdraw the required Grant 
funds from the bank account, (ii) contract the transport vehicle as required, (iii) purchase the goods 
and get all receipts, (iv) transport the goods to APG location. To save transport costs, as many items 
should be purchased in one time as possible. 
v.  APG  produces  evidence  of  procurement  and  quotations.  The  evidence  such  as  receipts  and 
photographs are copied or photographed and sent to SACP staff  the next day after procurement 
took place. If seller could not produce receipts, village head signature may substitute the receipts. 
5. OWNERSHIP OF GOODS 
5.1  All  purchased  materials  and  equipment  remain  the  property  of  the  SACP  during  the  implementation 
period.  The  group  members  will  have  the  full  property  right  for  the  purchased  goods,  after  successful 
completion of the Matching Grant Work Plan. The ownership right belongs to the group after Completion 
Report is submitted and approved by SACP. The completion report is sent to SACP NPMU for information. 
28 
5.2  The APG will use the goods as agreed in the proposal description, both during and after the completion 
of the sub-project. The APG is responsible for maintenance of all assets. The joint ownership of the assets, 
joint use of the assets, and the sharing of benefits are agreed upon in the APG Group Agreement. 
6. ACCOUNTING AND INTERNAL AUDIT 
6.1 SACP holds overall responsibility for ensuring that disbursements are processed timely, and ensures that 
the  appropriate  procurement  procedures  are  followed,  and  that  the  necessary  accounting  and  audit 
procedures are carried out as per general requirements. 
6.2 The APGs will submit to SACP the receipts and/or other evidence for all expenditures by Grant funds. 
(invoices, receipts, written declarations, photographs etc.). With SACP support, the APGs will also prepare a 
Grant Completion Report including expenditure report once the work plan is completed. 
6.3  Matching  Grant  expenditures  will  be  subject  to  a  performance  audit  at  various  milestones  as  will  be 
agreed  and  incorporated  the  guidelines.  The  APGs  will  co-operate  fully  with  the  auditors  and  will  make 
available to the auditor whatever records, documentation and other information is requested by the auditor. 
If any misuse is found, APG members and collaborating institutions will be liable for repaying any grant funds 
misused and all steps will be taken for recovery according to the regulation in power in Zimbabwe.  
7. COMPLETION, SUSPENSION AND CANCELLATION OF GRANT 
7.1 Completion of Grant. Upon receipt of Completion Report from the APG, SACP shall initiate procedures to 
complete  the grant.  This includes three steps: (i) Review of the Completion  Report including expenditure 
report and evidence of use of funds as per work plan, (ii) Field visit and validation of the Completion Report, 
(iii) Communication of the completion through Completion Letter to the APG. The Completion letter includes 
announcement  that  the  grant  investments  are  moved  to  the  full  ownership  of  the  APG  members.  (see 
Completion Report and Completion Letter templates in appendixes 4 and 5) 
7.2 Suspension and Cancellation of Grant. The SACP holds right to terminate the grant at any time, if: (i) the 
APG  does  not  follow  work  plan  of  the  Grant  Agreement;  (ii)  the  APG  has  significant  delays  in  the 
implementation  and SACP believes that  the  APG cannot  achieve its objectives; (iii) no  proper evidence is 
shown for the fund use according to the work plan; (iv) false documents or information is provided; (v) the 
Grant is used to finance expenses not approved by the SACP, and conducting activities other than approved; 
or (vi) the APG decides to terminate the Matching Grant-project. 
7.3 In the case of a cancellation of the Grant, all funds received under the Grant which have not been used, 
shall be returned to the SACP account. All amounts, which have not been paid, shall be cancelled by SACP 
and all equipment purchased by grant shall be returned to the SACP. In the case of misuse of grant funds, the 
APGs will be liable for repaying any grant funds found to have been misused and all steps will be taken for 
recovery according to the regulation in power in Lao PDR. 
7.4  Force  Majeure.  Neither  the  APG  nor  SACP  will  be  responsible  to  the  other  for  delay  or  failure  in 
performance  of  any  of  the  obligations  imposed  by  this  Agreement  when  such  failure  is  occasioned  by 
29 
unintentional fire, flood, explosion, lightning, windstorm, earthquake, subsidence of soil, court order, riot, 
war, strikes, and labor disturbances, beyond the reasonable control and without the fault or negligence of 
either of the APG or the SACP. 
8. CORRUPT AND FRAUDULENT PRACTICES 
8.1 IFAD requires that all beneficiaries of IFAD funding, including the employer and any bidders, implementing 
partners,  service  providers,  suppliers,  sub-suppliers,  contractors,  sub-contractors,  consultants,  sub-
consultants, and any of their agents (whether declared or not) and personnel observe the highest standards 
of  ethics  during  the  procurement  and  execution  of  such  contracts,  and  comply  with  IFAD’s  Policy  on 
Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  its  activities  and  operations,  revised  on  12  December  2018  (EB 
2018/125/R.6, hereinafter “IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy37”). 
8.2 For the purposes of these provisions, and consistent with IFAD’s Anticorruption Policy, the terms set forth 
below are defined as follows, and sometimes referred to collectively as “prohibited practices”: 
(a)  “corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of 
anything of value in order to improperly influence the actions of another party;  
(b)  “fraudulent  practice”  is  any  act  or  omission,  including  a  misrepresentation,  that 
knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party  in order to obtain  a 
financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation;  
(c)  “collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve 
an improper purpose, including improperly influencing the actions of another party; 
(d)  “coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of any party, to improperly influence the actions of 
that or another party; 
(e)  “obstructive  practice”  is  (i)  deliberately  destroying,  falsifying,  altering  or  concealing 
evidence that may be material to an investigation by the Fund or making false statements 
to  investigators  in  order  to  materially  impede  an  investigation  by  the  Fund;  (ii) 
threatening,  harassing  or  intimidating  any  party  in  order  to  prevent  that  party  from 
disclosing  its  knowledge  of  matters  relevant  to  an  investigation  by  the  Fund  or  from 
pursuing  such  an  investigation;  and/or  (iii)  the  commission  of  any  act  intended  to 
materially impede the exercise of the Fund’s contractual rights of audit, inspection and 
access to information. 
8.3 The Fund will deny approval of a proposed contract award if it determines that the firm or individual 
recommended for award, or any of its personnel or agents, or its sub-consultants, sub-contractors, service 
providers, suppliers, sub-suppliers and/or any of their personnel or agents, has, directly or indirectly, engaged 
in  any  of  the  prohibited  practices  in  connection  with  an  IFAD-financed  and/or  IFAD-managed  activity  or 
operation, including in competing for the contract.  
37 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40189363/fraudpolicy_eb86_e.pdf/e2ae80aa-e423-4d7c-a582-c01c1917b427  
30 
8.4 In accordance with IFAD’s Anticorruption Policy, the Fund has the right to sanction firms and individuals, 
including by declaring them ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time, to participate in any 
IFAD-financed and/or IFAD-managed activity or operation. This may include ineligibility to: (i) be awarded or 
otherwise benefit from any IFAD-financed contract, financially or in any other manner; (ii) be a nominated 
sub-contractor, consultant, manufacturer, supplier, sub-supplier, agent or service provider of an otherwise 
eligible firm being awarded an IFAD-financed contract; and (iii) receive the proceeds of any loan or grant 
provided  by  the  Fund.38  The  Fund  also  has  the  right  to  unilaterally  recognize  debarments  by  any  of  the 
International financial Institutions that are members to the agreement for mutual enforcement of debarment 
decisions if such debarments meet the requirements for mutual recognition under the agreement for mutual 
enforcement of debarment decisions. 
8.5 In addition, the Fund has the right to, at any time, declare a misprocurement and/or the ineligibility of 
any expenditures associated with a procurement process or contract if it determines that prohibited practices 
occurred in connection with this procurement process or contract and that the borrower/recipient has not 
taken timely and appropriate action, satisfactory to the Fund, to address such practices when they occur. 
8.6 Bidders, suppliers, consultants, contractors, and their sub-contractors, sub-consultants, service providers, 
suppliers, agents and personnel, are required to fully cooperate with any investigation conducted by the Fund 
into possible prohibited practices, including by making personnel available for interviews and by providing 
full access to any and all accounts, premises, documents and records (including electronic records) relating 
to  the  relevant  IFAD-financed  and/or  IFAD-managed  operation  or  activity  and  to  have  such  accounts, 
premises, records and documents audited and/or inspected39  by auditors and/or investigators appointed by 
the Fund. 
8.7 The bidder is obliged to disclose relevant prior sanctions and criminal convictions and any commissions 
or fees paid or are to be paid to any agents or other party in connection with this procurement process or 
the execution of the contract. 
8.8  The  bidder  shall  keep  all  records  and  documents,  including  electronic  records,  relating  to  this 
procurement  process  available  for  a  minimum  of  three  (3)  years  after  notification  of  completion  of  the 
process or, in case the bidder is awarded the contract, execution of the contract. 
9. SEXUAL HARASSMENT, SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE 
9.1  The  Fund  requires  that  all  beneficiaries  of  IFAD  Funding,  including  the  employer  and  any  bidders, 
implementing partners, service providers, suppliers, sub-suppliers, contractors, sub-contractors, consultants, 
sub-consultants, and any of their agents (whether declared or not) and personnel comply with IFAD's Policy 
38 For the avoidance of doubt, a sanctioned party’s ineligibility to be awarded a contract shall include, without limitation, (i) applying for 
pre-qualification, expressing interest in a consultancy, and bidding, either directly or as a nominated sub-contractor, nominated 
consultant, nominated manufacturer or supplier, or nominated service provider, in respect of such contract, and (ii) entering into an 
addendum or amendment introducing a material modification to any existing contract. 
39 Inspections include all fact-finding activities deemed relevant by the Fund to address allegations or other indications of possible 
prohibited practices. Such fact-finding activities may include, but are not limited to: accessing and examining a firm's or individual's 
financial records and information, and making copies thereof as relevant; accessing and examining any other documents, data or 
information (whether in hard copy or electronic format) deemed relevant for the investigation or audit, and making copies thereof as 
relevant; interviewing staff and other relevant individuals; performing physical inspections and site visits; and obtaining third party 
verifications of information. It is the responsibility of the firm or individual under inspection to ensure effective compliance with their duty 
to cooperate vis-à-vis any potential local laws or regulations or other potentially conflicting obligations. 
31 
on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. For the purpose of this 
provision,  and consistent  with IFAD’s Policy  on  Preventing  and Responding to  Sexual  Harassment, Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse as it may be amended from time to time, the terms set forth below are defined as 
follows: 
(a) 
(b) 
Sexual harassment means “any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favour or other verbal, 
non-verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature that unreasonably interferes with work, alters or is 
made a condition of employment, or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. 
Sexual exploitation and abuse means “any actual or attempted abuse of a position of vulnerability, 
differential power, or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, 
socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of others (sexual exploitation); the actual or 
threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive 
conditions (sexual abuse)”. 
9.2  Employers,  suppliers  and  bidders  shall  take  all  appropriate  measures  to  prevent  and  prohibit  sexual 
harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse on the part of their personnel and subcontractors or anyone 
else directly or indirectly employed by them or any of subcontractors in the performance of the contract. 
Purchasers, suppliers and bidders shall immediately report to the purchaser or IFAD any incidents of sexual 
harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse arising out of or in connection with the performance of the 
contract or prior to its execution, including convictions, disciplinary measures, sanctions or investigations. 
The purchaser may take appropriate measures, including the termination of the contract, on the basis of 
proven  acts of sexual harassment, sexual exploitation  and abuse arising out of or in  connection  with  the 
performance of the contract. 
9.3 The bidder or subcontractor or supplier is required to disclose any relevant prior sanctions, convictions, 
disciplinary measures or criminal records. 
10. MONEY LAUNDERING AND TERRORIST FINANCING 
10.1 The Fund requires that all beneficiaries of IFAD funding or funds administered by IFAD, including the 
employer,  any  bidders,  implementing  partners,  service  providers  and  suppliers,  observe  the  highest 
standards of integrity during the procurement and execution of such contracts, and commit to combat money 
laundering  and  terrorism  financing  consistent  with  IFAD’s  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Countering  the 
Financing of Terrorism Policy. 
32 
Date: 
……………………………………. 
{Date/Month/Year} 
On behalf of the Group signed by APG Leader: 
Name: 
Signature: ……………. 
Signed by the Village Head: 
Name:  
Signature: …………….. 
Signed by the SACP Province Coordinator:   
Name 
Signature: …………. 
APPENDIX 1 TO THE GRANT AGREEMENT: FARMER GROUP AGREEMENT (see manual appendix 1) 
APPENDIX 2 TO THE GRANT AGREEMENT: PRODUCTION/BUSINESS PLAN (see manual appendix 2) 
33 
Annex 4 Completion Report template 
COMPLETION REPORT 
The APG Matching Grant has been completed, and results are achieved as explained in 
the below tables 1 and 2. 
Group name and Village name: …………………………………………….. 
Signed by Group Leader on behalf of the APG members: ……………………………… 
Signed by Village Head: …………………………………………. 
DATE: ………………………………………….. 
TABLE 1. RESULTS TABLE AGAINST PRODUCTION PLAN OBJECTIVES 
Objective 
Activity 
Result 
Next steps 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
34 
TABLE 2. FINANCIAL CHECK LIST AGAINST PROCUREMENT PLAN: 
Procurement Items 
Time of 
completion? 
Total 
expenditure? 
Completed or 
not? 
Receipt 
available? 
Other 
evidence 
available? 
2650 US$ 
 Total: 250 
January 04 
250 US$ 
Yes 
Yes 
Picture 
 TOTAL COST 
1) Input materials 
1.1 Example: Plastic bags for 
nursery 
1.2 
1.3 Nursery construction 
materials 
1.4 Drying ground 
construction materials 
1.5 etc etc 
2) Machineries, equipment 
 Total: 2000 
2.1 Example: Tractor 
January 04 
2000 US$ 
Yes 
Yes 
Picture 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2) Services 
 Total: 
2.1 Example: Tractor, plastic 
bags, construction materials 
etc. transport to village 
January 04 
400 US$ 
Yes 
No 
Village head 
stamp 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
35 
Annex 5 Completion Letter template 
Sent to: 1. APG Leader and deputy of group …………… 
2. SACP NPMU 
Sent by: SACP PPIU …………… 
MATCHING GRANT COMPLETION LETTER 
It is certified that the Matching Grant is completed with the following details: 
Group name, Village Name and Matching Grant number: 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
Matching Grant total expenditure: 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
Matching Grant starting date and completion date: 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
The attached APG Matching Grant Completion Report is validated and correct. 
Hereby the assets gained through the Matching Grant are transferred to full ownership 
and management of the APG members. The assets will be managed following the APG 
Group Agreement. 
CERTIFIED BY SACP PROVINCIAL PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION UNIT 
SIGNATURE BY SACP PROVINCIAL COORDINATOR: ……………… 
36 
Appendix 2: Lead Enterprise Matching Grants Manual 
37 
Lead Enterprise Matching 
Grants Manual 
Zimbabwe 
Smallholder 
Cluster Project 
Agriculture 
38 
CONTENTS 
Part 1: Introduction and principles of the LEG Scheme  40 
Priorities for Lead Enterprise Matching Grants (LEG)  40 
Eligible Applicants and Types of Support 
Management of Competitive Business Grants 
41 
42 
Part 2: LEG Competition  43 
Step 1: Call for Expressions of Interest  43 
Step 2: Rapid Screening and initial monitoring visit 
44 
Step 3: Application 
44 
Step 4: Technical review by TAC 
Step 5: Investment Decisions 
Part 3: Grant Implementation 
Grant Agreement 
47 
45 
47 
47 
Financial and Procurement Procedures 48 
Ownership of Goods 
50 
Reporting, Monitoring and Evaluation  50 
Close-out, Suspension and Cancellation of Grant 
52 
Annexes 
53 
Annex 1 of the LEG Manual. Investment Proposal Template 
53 
Annex 2 of the LEG Manual. Investment Summary/Evaluation by independent Agribusiness Specialists 
53 
Annex 3 of the LEG Manual. Format for Rapid Screening of Proposals by the EoI 
Annex 4 of the LEG Manual. Draft Proposal Evaluation Report by TAC 
Annex 5 of the LEG Manual. Format for Field check of preselected Proposals 
61 
63 
67 
Annex 6 of the LEG Manual. Procurement Plan 
Annex 7 of the LEG Manual: Grant Agreement template 
66 
71 
This draft manual is produced as part of the SACP project design, Zimbabwe. It will be reviewed 
and updated in the course of the SACP Project Start Up workshops. 
July, 2020 
39 
PART 1: INTRODUCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THE LEG SCHEME 
1.  As an important tool for poverty reduction and improved development impact, the purpose of the Value 
Chain Lead Enterprise Matching Grant (LEG) scheme under the IFAD-Financed SACP project is to leverage 
private investment  in  agriculture  and rural development through  reduced  risks and costs associated  with 
investment in under-developed locations or resulting from climate change impacts. 
2.  The objectives of LEG investments include:  
i. 
Increased incomes of rural farmer households by improving their market opportunities, supply 
provision and available services, by 
initiating and strengthening profitable agricultural business in the rural areas, and by 
ii. 
iii.  creating and strengthening the market linkages between farmers and businesses. 
3.  Registered  Agribusiness  Enterprises  can  apply  for  grants  to  introduce  new  production/business 
modalities  to:  (i) increase  their  processing  capacity,  raw  material  and  raw  produce  intake  capacity, 
productivity,  marketing  and  competitiveness;  and/or  (ii) improve  the  quality  of  agricultural  and  business 
development services to farmer households and Agriculture Producer Groups (APG); and/or (iii) improve the 
quality  of  input  supply  to  farmer  households  and  APG;  and  (iv) showcase  and  disseminate  new  business 
opportunities locally. 
4.  This document is a guide to implement the LEG schemes. The guide includes information on: 
LEG competition announcement; 
i.  Overall priorities, applicant eligibility and management of the LEG scheme; 
ii. 
iii.  Contents and submission of Applications; 
iv.  Technical review of Applications and selection of Winners; 
v. 
Implementation, financing, and monitoring procedures. 
5.  Grants  are  awarded  based  on  a  competitive  and  transparent  process,  and  include  a  significant 
contribution  from  grant  recipients.  Grants  are  awarded  in  the  context  of  IFAD  project  activities,  and, 
alongside  grant-funding,  the  awardees  will  receive:  (i) support  to  improve  their  management,  business 
planning and business linkages; and (ii) support to improve the quantity and quality of the primary produce 
procured from the farmers. 
6.  The LEG scheme is implemented alongside a Competitive Small Grants (CSG) scheme of smaller grants 
targeting  Agriculture  Producer  Groups  and  Microenterprises.  The  two  categories  of  grants  are  to  be 
implemented in close synergy, allowing coherence between the value chain investments. 
Priorities for Lead Enterprise Matching Grants (LEG) 
7.  The LEG Matching Grants are to improve the quality and quantity of the production and services of grant 
winning business entities', in terms of: (i) productivity, (ii) product/service quality and quality control, (iii) 
quality and quantity of procured primary produce, (iv) food safety, (v) storing, (vi) processing, (vii) transport, 
40 
(viii) branding, (ix) marketing strategies, market linkages and outreach of sales/services, (x) environmental 
standards and climate change adaptation, and (xi) working standards for the human resource base. 
8.  Priority activities consist of appropriate and affordable production technologies and service modalities 
that will enable wider participation of the poor in market oriented agricultural value chains, increase rural 
productivity,  enhance  competitiveness  and  increased  market-accessibility  of  local  agricultural  products. 
Grant  proposals  need  to  include  support  towards  greater  productivity  and  profits  of  smallholder  farms.
Eligible Applicants and Types of Support 
Large Enterprise Matching Grants (LEG) are made available to (i) Private Agribusiness Enterprises, (ii) 
9. 
Agribusiness Cooperatives. As of now, these are referred to as “Agribusinesses”. 
10.  For eligibility, the business entities need to operate in  SACP targeted  areas by (i) procuring from, (ii) 
supplying to, and/or (iii) delivering services to rural producer groups comprising poor households. 
11.  Only registered Agribusinesses in operation at least 12 months are eligible to apply. The entities should 
provide  the  following  documentation:  (i)  Business  License/Registration;  (ii)  Article  of  Association  for 
cooperatives; (iii) Annual tax Return Report for previous year; and (iv) Bank account details and 12 months 
report on cash-flow. 
12.  Business entities are not eligible to apply in cases of: (i) having gone bankrupt or being liquidated; (ii) 
being sentenced for offences or involved in a court case for offences; (iii) not fulfilling obligations related to 
the payment of social security contributions or tax payments; (iv) history of any breach of their contractual 
obligations concerning payments, contracts or tender procedures. 
13.  The  LEG  scheme  will  consider  supporting  grant  proposals  for  the  defined  priorities  and  eligible 
applicants, within the following limits: 
i.  Grant amount of US$ 30,000 - 75,000, based on evaluation of detailed business plan; 
ii.  The Agribusinesses are required to contribute at least 50% to the total investment cost, in 
cash, which is required to be disbursed alongside the first grant tranche, and before a second 
tranche; 
Implementation period of up to 24 months depending on value chain requirements. Longer 
periods require exceptional justification; 
iii. 
iv.  The location of the investment needs to be within Zimbabwe; 
v.  The  investment  needs  to  include  expansion  of  supply  chain  or  other  activities  with 
smallholders in the SACP target areas; 
14.  In addition  to the  minimum  50% in-cash  contributions, the Agribusinesses are encouraged  to report 
additional in-kind contributions, to demonstrate high commitment to the proposal. The in-kind contributions 
may take the form of assets, inputs or materials that are directly applicable to the activities within the LEG 
Matching Grant proposals. This may include the value of the following: 
41 
i. 
Land allocation for the new investment, including additional land and transformation of the 
use of existing land; 
ii.  Reallocation of existing machinery/equipment and stocks in support of the investment; 
iii.  Reallocation of existing buildings for the purpose of the investment; 
iv.  Existing water, electricity and other utilities to be used for the investment. 
15.  The value of all in-kind contributions will be estimated by the Agribusiness, as part of the proposal, and 
validated by the SACP. Any material or input that is used by the business entity prior to the investment, and 
not reallocated for the purposes of the investment, shall not be considered as in-kind contribution. 
16.  Acceptable budgetary items to be covered by the grant financing can be divided into four categories:  
i. 
Costs related to agriculture supply chain management and delivery of agricultural technology 
or BDS services to smallholder farmer households,  
ii.  Machinery and equipment, non-consumable materials such as equipment, machineries and 
other non-consumable (non-input) materials associated with establishing the technology;  
iii.  Technical  Assistance  and  Business  Development  Services  to  strengthen  the  Agribusiness 
operations  such  as  infrastructure designs, technology installations and training, marketing 
support, business planning support, investment planning support;  
iv.  Consumable  materials  such  as  initial  inputs,  supplies  and  other  consumable  materials 
associated with establishing the new technology. 
17.  The LEG scheme will not cover expenditures: 
i.  Made prior to signature of the grant agreement  
ii.  That does not fall within the approved and announced priorities;  
iii.  Where sub-project completion date is not within the announced time frame;  
iv. 
If  the  value  of  the  grant  requested  is  higher  than  the  amount  mentioned  in  the  public 
announcement of the call for Expressions of Interest (EoI);  
If the grant Application does not follow the rules announced in the call for EoIs; 
If the Applicant has failed to follow terms of agreement of any previous IFAD or other public 
institutions grant supported projects with the consequence of grant cancellation. 
v. 
vi. 
Management of Competitive Business Grants 
18.  Management of the LEG process will include: (i) National Project Management Unit (NPMU) of the IFAD 
supported Project is responsible for daily management of the LEG scheme. (ii) EoI Committee will be set up 
for the shortlisting of LEG Expressions of Interest for preparation of full proposals. (iii) Technical Assessment 
Committee  (TAC)  is  established  to  assess  the  quality  of  LEG  proposals,  (iv)  Investment  Committee  is 
established to make investment decisions. 
19.  The SACP NPMU will include a Senior Value Chain and Agribusiness Specialist to coordinate the LEG the 
process. He/she, jointly with other NPMU relevant members, will perform the following: 
42 
i. 
announce  the  LEG  competition  and  coordinate  the  process,  including  a  broad-based 
promotional and application training programme; 
recommend suitable BDS providers for detailed planning and implementation support; 
ii.  manage the LEG monitoring and evaluation; 
iii.  give overall LEG guidance for candidates: 
iv. 
v.  advise the Grant Winners on administrative requirements of the Grant Agreements; 
vi.  ensure that LEG candidates - and each Grant Winner in particular - will benefit from Value 
Chain  services  provided  by  the  IFAD  project,  including  productivity  support,  business 
management/planning support and marketing support at supply chain level. 
20.  EoI Committee will be established by the NPMU and the PSC. The board will be composed of: (i) SACP 
Project  Coordinator,  (ii)  SACP  Senior  VC/Agribusiness  Adviser,  (iii)  SACP  Procurement  Officer.  The  EoI 
Committee will meet half-yearly, or as considered appropriate, for the shortlisting of eligible LEG candidates, 
but not later than 1 week after the date of submission of LEG Expressions of Interest. Prior to the meeting, 
the EoI will have reviewed the EoIs, and make decision on shortlist. 
21.  Technical Assessment Committee (TAC) will also meet half-yearly, to technically assess the quality of 
the full investment proposals prepared by the Agribusinesses. The TAC is established by the PSC and will 
consist of (i) External Review Consultant recruited for this particular task from a reputable international Audit 
Company, (ii) Representative  of  a  Financial Institution  (preferably a bank that conducts  the LEG financial 
transactions),  (iii)  SACP  Senior  VC/Agribusiness  Adviser,  (iv)  SACP  Senior  CSA  Adviser,  (v)  SACP  Senior  SI 
Specialist, (vi) SACP Procurement Officer. The TAC will, on a case-by-case basis as required, in accordance to 
an agreed format (Appendix 2), guide the LEG Investment Committee in their decision on grant winners. 
22.  Investment Committee will meet regularly to decide on investments, based on TAC recommendation 
and IFAD No Objection. The Investment Committee will consist of (i) Senior Ministry Representative, (ii) SACP 
Project Coordinator, (iii) Financial Institution Representative, (iv) Private Sector Representative. 
PART 2: LEG COMPETITION 
Step 1: Call for Expressions of Interest 
23.  At the project start-up, and every 6 months during the following 3 years, the Project will advertise the 
LEG scheme to potential Agribusiness. The advertisement is in the form of “Call for Expressions of Interest”. 
The  call  will  be  made  through  discussion  events,  mass  media  (including  local  and  national  newspaper 
advertisements), direct contacts, business associations and project implementing partners. The NPMU will 
be the point of contact for requests and queries, and for submission of proposals. The NPMU will also have a 
public posting at the office, informing on all LEG related events and results. 
24.  The call for EoIs will include the following information: 
x.  Objective of the EoI; 
xi.  The categories of eligible competing candidates; 
xii.  Conditions  of  Application  and  participation,  including:  (i)  sub-project  duration,  (ii)  total 
acceptable sub-project cost, (iii) maximum grant size, (v) requirement of mid-term milestones 
in implementation plan and the practice of disbursement tranches; 
43 
xiii.  Requirement  of  50%  beneficiary  in-cash  contribution  to  total  sub-project  cost,  to  be 
disbursed before receiving second tranche of the grant amount; 
xiv.  Encouragement to include additional of in-kind contributions; 
xv.  Categories of costs that can be supported out of the grant amount; 
xvi.  Deadline for submission of the EoI; 
xvii. Conditions of EoI submission and information regarding the sub-project selection procedures; 
xviii. Places where interested Applicants may obtain the necessary documentation and support. 
Step 2: Rapid Screening and initial monitoring visit 
25.  After  the  deadline  of  submissions,  the  NPMO’s  EoI  Committee  will  carry  out  a  rapid  screening  of 
proposals for eligibility and compliance with the LEG guidelines. The screening process will reject proposals 
for the following reasons: 
i. 
If applicants do not meet the eligibility criteria as stated in the call for Applications; 
ii. 
If the proposed duration of the sub-project is longer than stated in the call for Applications; 
iii.  If the total grant request and beneficiary contribution are not within the minimum and maximum 
limits allowed; 
If the proposal is not within the specified project area and priorities; 
iv.  If the requested documentary evidence is not provided; 
v. 
vi.  If the requested budget items are different from the stated objective; 
vii.  If the Application is not completed and signed. 
26.  If the proposal is rejected in the rapid screening, the EoI committee will inform the Principal Applicant 
accordingly  together  with  the reasons for rejection. Proposals that are rejected  can  be improved  and re-
submitted in subsequent calls for Applications. 
If the proposal passes the rapid screening, the EoI committee will conduct an initial monitoring visit to the 
Applicant and business location to officially validate the facilities and capacities as mentioned in the 
proposal. If the proposal and the capacity of the enterprise are confirmed by the validation, the proposal is 
forwarded for Full Proposal Preparation and subsequent assessment by the Technical Assessment 
Committee. 
Step 3: Application 
27.   Responsibility for proposal preparation, submission, implementation, and accountability will rest with 
the Principal Applicant. The Principal Applicant, legally representing the business entity, will be the contact 
for  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  sub-project.  Three  copies  of  the  proposal  and  of  all  supporting 
documentation must be received at the  PCU by  the announced deadline.  Applications received after  the 
published deadline will not be eligible for consideration. In order to ensure timely submission, Applicants will 
be advised to deliver proposals by hand. 
44 
28.  Applicants will be invited to prepare and submit the proposals not less than 6 weeks from the first date 
of publishing the call for proposals. Applicants will be supported by the PCU and PCU-facilitated BSD providers 
in preparation of the Applications. The LEG Application is required to provide details as follows: 
i.  Business Plan; 
ii.  Financial Plan; 
iii.  Application form including: 
- title of the sub-project and name of the Lead Enterprise; 
- applicant contact details including for the business entity and Principal Applicant; 
- proposed duration of the sub-project; 
- proposed total cost, requested grant amount and Lead Enterprise in-cash contribution; 
- proposed in-kind contribution by Lead Enterprise; 
- sub-project description including problem statement and proposed solution / actions; 
- input and output market description and action plan; 
- budget items, schedule of tranches of disbursement, measurable milestones; 
- expected outputs and outcomes of the grant project; 
- applicant capacity statement; 
- budget and procurement plan; 
- implementation plan table. 
iv.  Documentation  of  an  account  in  a  financial  institution  with  available  funds  for  beneficiary’s 
investment contribution; 
v.  Business license/ Business or Cooperative registration; 
vi.  Annual tax Return Report for previous year and minimum 12 month historical financial report. 
29.  Upon  receiving  an  Application,  the  Technical  Assessment  Committee  (TAC)  will 
immediately 
acknowledge the receipt of submission and assign a registration number to the proposal that will be used 
throughout the life of the sub-project. 
Step 4: Technical review by TAC 
30.  Upon receiving the full LEG Applications, TAC will review them in detail, and prepare comments dealing 
with the financial viability, market viability, technical quality, sustainability, poverty reduction impact and 
applicability of the proposals. Within two weeks after the submission deadline, TAC will score all received 
proposals,  and  Technical  Recommendation  is  made  with  either:  (i)  Recommendation  to  invest,  (ii) 
Recommendation  to  invest  with  required  improvements,  or  (iii)  recommendation  not  to  invest,  with  the 
possibility of re-submission with improvements. 
31.  The following weighted criteria template will be used to score the proposals. SACP can decide to change 
the weighting between criteria, and add, revise or remove criteria as per project priorities. It is also expected 
that the criteria would be amended over time, as experience and changes in the focus of the program occur. 
45 
Criteria 
Development impact (maximum 40 points) 
Out of 
maximum 
Points 
1  Poverty reduction and nutrition impact to smallholder households in the supply network 
__ / 15 
2  Employment creation both at the facility and on-farm 
3  Inclusion of women and youth 
__ / 10 
__ / 15 
Sub-project innovation and replication potential (maximum 30 points) 
4  Climate Smart Agriculture and long term environmental sustainability of supply chains 
     / 10 
5  Long term economic/financial sustainability (profitability) of the investment 
6  Potential for further expansion of the operation by the business entity 
Beneficiary contribution and technical capacity (maximum 20 points) 
7  Technical capacity of the investor and staff 
8  Level of in-cash contribution above the minimum 
9  Level of in-kind contribution 
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
__ / 5 
__ / 5 
Lead Enterprise on-site environmental impact (maximum 10 points) 
10  Consideration for mitigation of pollution including respective treatment plans 
__ / 10 
Total 
__ / 100 
32.  During the TAC meeting, (i) Recruited TAC External Review Consultant will present his review made, (ii) 
TAC members will discuss the proposal and give individual scores to each Application. (iii) The scores of the 
reviewers are immediately averaged. (iv) the TAC will verify the final scoring of the Applications. 
33.  Proposals with or exceeding a score of 70 points are recommended for implementation, within the limit 
of available budget for the LEG scheme. Those with scores less than 70 points are returned to Applicants 
46 
together with the declaration of negative result and the main reasons for failure. Proposals that are rejected 
can be improved and re-submitted in subsequent calls for Applications. 
Step 5: Investment Decisions 
34.  The  sub-projects  approved  by  the  TAC  will  proceed  for  next  steps:  (i)  IFAD  No  Objection.  The 
recommended proposals and TAC reviews are sent to IFAD for no-objection. Within 3 weeks after received, 
IFAD reviews, comments and/or provides no-objection; (ii) Investment Committee Decision is made following 
the  TAC  technical  recommendation  and  the  received  IFAD  no  objection,  and  finally,  (iii)  Contract  signing 
meeting is organized, and the final list of winning Applicants and titles of the proposals will be made available 
to all LEG applicants and displayed publicly. 
35.  SACP will organize an information session for the successful Applicants to clarify the contract-signing 
implementation,  disbursement  and  procurement  regulations, 
procedures,  grant  management  and 
monitoring and reporting requirements, and contractual obligations. A schedule for individual meetings will 
also be arranged. 
36.  Prior to the signing of the Grant Agreement, each winning Applicant will attend an individual meeting 
with the PCU, to clarify the budget, the schedule of activities and any other outstanding issues necessary 
before the finalization of the Agreement. The meeting would agree on: (i) responsibilities for monitoring; (iv) 
schedule of the sub-project implementation; (v) reporting requirements; and (vi) other issues as required. 
After agreement on the above issues has been reached, a contract will be prepared. 
PART 3: GRANT IMPLEMENTATION 
Grant Agreement 
37.  Following Investment Committee approval of the grant proposal, the legal Grant Agreement documents 
will be issued by the SACP. The final Grant Agreement has to be reviewed by the SACP technical and financial 
officers, signed by the NPMU Director, and sent to SACP PSC for information. 
38.  The  Grant  Agreement  is  binding  on  signature  by  all  parties,  and  the  LEG-project  proposal  will  be  a 
component of the legal documentation. Key items of the Grant Agreement are as follows: 
i.  Products, services and results that must be delivered under the contract; 
ii.  Agreed measurable milestones, with technical description of implemented items by agreed ending 
dates of proposed sub-project periods; 
iii.  Costs financed  within the sub-project framework, including grant funds to be made available and 
applicants' in-cash contribution; 
iv.  Implementation plan by milestones and a schedule for the releasing trenches of grant funds;  
v.  Procurement method and responsibilities; 
vi.  Equipment ownership rights (during and after the completion of the sub-project); 
47 
vii.  Rules for reporting, monitoring, and supervision; 
viii. Rules for publication/disclosure of results/information; 
ix.  Cancellation  or  other  measures  to  be  taken  in  the  event  of  an  unacceptable  level  of  sub-project 
implementation or other causes of delay; and 
39.  The Grant Agreement will include the milestone-based schedule for the disbursement of funds by the 
PCU, adherence to the agreed work plan and expenditure requirements by the grantee, and commitment to 
the monitoring and supervision process by all parties. 
40.  The Grant Agreement should be signed not later than 30 days after the publication of the notice of LEG 
awardees, unless strong evidence is provided by Principal Applicant to delay the Agreement. If the reasons 
presented by the Principal Applicant that led to the failure in signing the Grant Agreement within the 30 days 
are found insufficient by the NPMU, the sub-project will be cancelled. 
41.  The  Grant  Agreement  will  be  signed  by  the  Principal  Applicant  and  the  SACP  Director.  The  Grant 
Agreement is prepared in three original copies. One original copy each is retained by the Principal Applicant, 
SACP NPMU, and the Ministry of Finance. 
Financial and Procurement Procedures 
42.  The SACP NPMU holds overall responsibility of ensuring that agreed disbursements are processed in a 
timely  manner  as  per  Grant  Agreement,  appropriate  procurement  procedures  are  observed,  and  the 
necessary accounting and audit procedures are carried out. 
43.  Grant winning business entities and their representative Principal Applicants must be fully aware of their 
financial  obligations  under  the  Grant  Agreement  and  make  appropriate  provisions  for  meeting  the 
requirements. The Principal Applicant is the signatory of Grant Agreement and it is the responsibility of the 
Principal Applicant to ensure that funds are handled in accordance with the work plan and Grant Agreement, 
and ensure that reporting is to the standard and timing required. The Grant Agreement requires that funds 
be  returned  in  the  event  of  termination  of  the  Grant  Agreement  and  that  any  uncommitted  funds  on 
completion date be returned to the NPMU.  
(a) Disbursement 
44.  The grant disbursements will be made to an account in a commercial bank, registered and managed by 
the business entity. For each payment from the grant amount, the grant recipient will provide evidence that 
the money has been receipted and used according to the contract. 
45.  The grant will be disbursed in 2-3 tranches as agreed between SACP NPMU and the Principle Applicant. 
The first tranche payment will be made as an advance payment immediately after approval and signing of 
the  Grant  Agreement  by  all  parties.  Further  tranche  payments  would  be  advanced  on  the  basis  of  (i) 
beneficiary submitted request, together with (ii) documented evidence for the use of disbursed grant and 
beneficiary funds as per Grant Agreement, (iii) milestone progress report by Grant Recipient and milestone 
monitoring report by the SCAP NPMU, and (iv) disbursement of the Lead Enterprise counterpart contribution. 
46.  Upon receiving a milestone progress report that satisfactorily describes the fulfillment of the milestone 
targets, the NPMU will review the report, conduct a field visit, and confirm the correct use of the previous 
48 
tranche and authorizes in writing the payment of the next tranche. A payment order is prepared by the NPMU 
and signed by the Director. This “Order of Payment” is to be submitted together with the annexed (i) “Request 
for  Payment”  from  the  beneficiary,  (ii)  summary  table  of  the  beneficiaries  “Statement  of  Expenditure” 
(original) for the use of previous tranche, and (iii) the milestone monitoring report. Upon submission, the 
NPMU will release the funds from the Project bank account to the beneficiary’s account. 
47.  The in-cash beneficiary contribution needs to be disbursed during implementation of the first milestone. 
Second tranche  of  grant amount can be requested  for only  after full disbursement of beneficiary  in-cash 
contribution, following the agreed work plan. 
48.  The grant recipient shall notify the PCU in writing of any anticipated delays in achieving the established 
milestones and the reason. At any time during the grant period, the grant recipient may request the PCU to 
revise the "Payment Schedule” to better reflect the current work plan and to better meet the grant recipient's 
cash flow needs, but this request should be justified accordingly. 
 (b) Procurement 
49.  All Grant implementation related procurements will be carried out directly by the Grant Recipients in 
accordance with procedures satisfactory to the Government of Zimbabwe and consistent with IFAD Project 
Procurement Guidelines. The role of the SACP is to review, supervise and guide the procurement carried out 
by the Grant Recipients, thereby ensuring that integrity, transparency and accountability are maintained. All 
goods and services procured by the Grant Recipients using the proceeds of the grant shall be used exclusively 
for the purposes of the project as stipulated in the Grant Agreements. 
50.  Following the IFAD good practice of procurement includes: 
i.  As part of sub-project proposal, the Grant Applicant identifies the goods and services to be procured. 
A  specific  procurement  plan  (Annex  6  of  the  LEG  Manual)  details  (1)  the  procurement  items,  (2) 
quality specification for each item, (3) the timing of procurement for each item, (4) costs per item 
and total costs; 
ii.  The NPMU and the Grant Recipient record the identified procurement needs and procurement plan 
under the Grant Agreement; 
iii.  The Grant Recipient prepares for procurement of each item by (i) collection of three competitive 
quotations when possible, (ii) agreeing with the suppliers and service providers about purchase 
details including time and cost; 
iv.  When procuring the Grant Recipient shall pay attention to the need for economy, efficiency, 
transparency, timing and quality of the procured goods and services; 
v.  Grant Recipients produce evidence of procurement and quotations, as per Grant Agreement, as part 
of the mid-term and final report to be submitted to NPMU; 
vi.  The Project may conduct a random audit of LEGs by an external auditor. 
49 
(c) Accounting and Internal Audit 
51.  The NPMU will give technical guidance to Principal Applicants in preparing the statement of expenditure 
reports, upon which Principal Applicants can request the subsequent disbursement. The NPMU holds overall 
responsibility  for  ensuring  timely  disbursements,  that  the  appropriate  procurement  procedures  are 
observed,  and  that  the  necessary  accounting  and  audit  procedures  are  carried  out  as  per  general 
requirements. 
52.  Grant beneficiaries must be fully aware of their financial obligations under the Grant Agreement and 
make appropriate provisions for meeting those requirements. The Grant Agreement requires that funds must 
be  returned  in  the  event  of  termination  of  the  Grant  Agreement  and  that  any  uncommitted  funds  upon 
completion be returned to the NPMU.  
53.  The grant beneficiary will submit to the NPMU the statement of expenditure, accompanied with original 
supporting documents (i.e. invoices, receipts, written declarations, etc.). The originals must be filed by the 
NPMU  and  kept  for  as  many  years  as  specified  in  the  national  legislation.  The  beneficiary  shall  provide 
documentary evidence of both grant and beneficiary cash contributions to the sub-project. The NPMU may 
withhold  scheduled  payments  or  require  that  grant  activities  be  suspended  if statements  of  expenditure 
reports are overdue or the documentary evidence on the use of grant funds is insufficient.  
54.  The grant beneficiary shall prepare a final grant report at the end of the grant sub-project in the format 
mentioned in Annex 6 reflecting the operations, resources and expenditures related to the sub-project. The 
grant beneficiary shall submit a copy of the said final grant report as soon as available, but in any case not 
later than 45 days after the completion of the sub-project. 
55.  Grant expenditures will be audited, as deemed appropriate, within the overall NPMU’s financial audit 
process. The grant beneficiary will co-operate fully with the PCU auditor and will make available to the auditor 
whatever records, documentation and other information requested by the auditor in connection with the 
audit of the NPMU funds. Business entities and Principal Applicants will be liable for repaying any grant funds 
found to have been misused and all steps will be taken for recovery according to the legislation in force. 
Ownership of Goods 
56.  The applicant will follow the stipulated use of goods as agreed in the Grant Agreement. All purchased 
goods and assets are the property of the Project during the implementation of the sub-project. The recipient 
will enjoy the property right for the purchased goods only after a successful completion of the sub-project. 
The  recipient  is  responsible  for  taking  care  of  all  property  and  providing  for  the  proper  maintenance  of 
equipment. If stipulated in the Grant Agreement the Grant Recipient shall insure the assets procured with 
grant funding. In the case of NPMU’s termination of the grant as a result of violation of the Grant Agreement, 
or the termination of the sub-project by the grant recipient, the NPMU may be instructed to repossess the 
equipment. Repossessed equipment would be sold and proceeds, less any sales costs, would be deducted 
from  the grant beneficiary  financial obligations under the agreement, and returned  to  the grant fund  for 
reallocation. 
Reporting, Monitoring and Evaluation 
57.  A  well-designed  monitoring  and  evaluation  system  is  critical  for  ensuring  timely  and  successful 
implementation  of  grant-funded  sub-project activities and for  enhancing their impact through  systematic 
50 
analysis  and  dissemination  of  lessons  learned.  The  NPMU  is  responsible  for  the  overall  monitoring  and 
evaluation grant-funded sub-projects, through reviews of all progress reports and on-site visits. 
58.  The monitoring and evaluation of the grant implementation includes five steps: (i) initial monitoring visit; 
(ii) baseline evaluation; (iii) milestone reports and subsequent monitoring visits; (iv) final monitoring review 
and (v) final evaluation. The NPMU is responsible for all monitoring and evaluation, and the Grant recipient 
is responsible for submission of milestone reports and the final report. Each proposal will have clearly defined 
milestones, final targets and associated  performance indicators,  against which progress  can  be assessed. 
These indicators are agreed between the NPMU and the applicant, as part of the Grant Agreement. 
59.  Initial monitoring visit is performed and reported by the NPMU EoI Committee, prior to submitting the 
proposal to the technical review and scoring by the TAC. The main purpose is to verify that the resources and 
capacities presented in the proposal are actually available to the Applicants. 
60.  Baseline evaluation is  performed  after start of the grant implementation, to  document  the baseline 
situation of the grant winning businesses including their economic impact among farmer households. The 
final impact evaluation will be conducted against results of the baseline evaluation. 
61.  Milestone  monitoring  is  (i)  initiated  by  Grant  recipients  submission  of  milestone  progress  report, 
describing progress of implementation against Grant Agreement's listed milestone indicators. Subsequently, 
(ii) the NPMU will review the milestone progress report prepared and submitted by the Grant recipients, and 
(iii)  perform  a field  visit  to  confirm  the reported  implementation. Within  30 days after the submission  of 
milestone progress report, (iv) the NPMU will submit a milestone monitoring report for information of PSC 
and Grant Recipient, describing results of the desk review and field visit. The milestone monitoring report of 
the NPMU is a requirement for disbursement of the next tranche of  the Grant.  The NPMU may  contract 
independent evaluators to support the NPMU with milestone reviews. 
62.  Final monitoring review is initiated by (i) Grant recipient’s submission of final report, describing the final 
outcomes of the implementation against Grant Agreement's listed indicators. (ii) The NPMU will review the 
final report and (iii) perform a field-check of implementation, and (iv) submit a final monitoring report to 
NPMU and Grant Recipient. 
63.  Final Evaluation will be conducted by NPMU contracted independent evaluators, to assess whether the 
sub-project  and  Grant  Scheme  in  general  have  achieved  intended  results  in  terms  of  poverty  reduction, 
creation  of  farmer  household  market  opportunities, 
incomes,  employment,  technology 
development  and  dissemination,  productivity  improvements,  skills  development  and  improved  market 
access. The independent evaluators will compare the situation with baseline evaluation results, and will have 
full access to baseline data, milestone documents and all Grant Beneficiary production sites. The results of 
the LEG scheme will be documented by the evaluators, with the aim of showcasing good activities. The NPMU 
will disseminate the lessons learnt for replication/adoption by others. 
increased 
51 
Close-out, Suspension and Cancellation of Grant 
64.  Close-out of Grant. Upon receipt of final reports from the Recipient, the NPMU shall initiate procedures 
to  close-out  the  grant.  Close-out  procedures  include  obtaining  and  approving  all  required  statement  of 
expenditure  and  progress  reports,  ensuring  that  any  unexpended  grant  funds  are  refunded  to  the  IFAD 
project, and communication of close-out through a close-out letter from NPMU to the Grant recipient. All 
Grant requirements remain in full force and effect until the grant recipient receives the close-out letter from 
NPMU indicating that all obligations have been satisfied. 
65.  Suspension and Cancellation of Grant. The NPMU holds right to terminate the grant at any time, if: (i) 
the Recipient does not follow provisions of the Grant Agreement; (ii) the Recipient has significant delays in 
the  implementation  of  the  sub-project  and  the  NPMU  believes  that  the  sub-project  cannot  achieve  its 
objectives; (iii) the Recipient fails to submit complete financial report; (iv) the Recipient fails to submit copies 
of financial documents to complete financial reporting; (v) no proper accounting exists in financial records; 
(vi) false documents or information is provided; (vii) the Grant is used to finance expenses not approved in 
the  LEG  agreement,  and  conducting  activities  other  than  approved;  and  (viii)  the  Principal  Applicant 
terminates engagement in the sub-project. 
66.  In  the  case  of  a  cancellation  of  the  Grant,  all  unused  funds  received  under  the  sub-project  shall  be 
returned to the NPMU account. All amounts, which have not been paid, shall be cancelled by the NPMU and 
all equipment purchased by grant financing shall be returned to SACP. In the case of misuse of grant funds, 
the Principal Applicants will be liable for repaying any grant funds found to have been misused and all steps 
will be taken for recovery according to the legislation in power. 
67.  Force Majeure. Neither the Recipient nor SACP will be responsible to the other for delay or failure in 
performance  of  any  of  the  obligations  imposed  by  this  Agreement  when  such  failure  is  occasioned  by 
unintentional  fire,  flood,  explosion,  lightning,  windstorm,  earthquake,  subsidence  of  soil,  court  order  or 
government interference, civil commotion, riot, war, strikes, and labor disturbances, beyond the reasonable 
control and without the fault or negligence of either of the Recipient or the SACP. 
52 
ANNEXES 
Annex 1 of the LEG Manual. Investment Proposal Template 
The Business Entity will be provided with below Investment Proposal Template, and an excel template for 
financial/economic analysis of the proposed investment. 
The text in red is explanation and detailed questions to help in preparation of an investment proposal. The 
red text is to be deleted and replaced by enterprise descriptions as per given headlines. 
Executive Summary 
(each section summarized from descriptions below) 
Project title 
Product description 
Marketing and Sales  
Development/investment 
Supply chain of raw materials and its development 
Operations management and personnel 
Financial summary 
Opportunity 
Business overview 
Name, Location and Legal Status 
Mission Statement 
What is your business underlying idea, goals and vision in few sentences? Few examples: 
- AGCO is the chief manufacturer and distributor of agricultural equipment such as replacement parts, 
tractors,  hay  tools,  sprayers,  forage  equipment,  and  implements.  Mission  statement  is  "Profitable 
growth through superior customer service, innovation, quality and commitment." 
53 
- Harley Davidson fulfills dreams through the experience of motorcycling, by providing to motorcyclists 
and  to  the  general  public  an  expanding  line  of  motorcycles  and  branded  products  and  services  in 
selected market segments. 
Products and Markets 
Explain briefly:  
- Overall description of the product and the raw materials used 
- Description of the business customers 
Objectives  
- Potential opportunity of growth 
- Foreseen development of above described products and markets 
- Required improvement to reach the objective, description of needed inputs 
Product/service description 
Description 
Details, quality, volumes and pricing of the produce explained in depth 
Stage of Development 
The growth vision of the business explained in depth: 
- In what size and production model did the business start? 
- How has the business developed until now? 
- What are business objectives for the coming 5-10 years? 
- What are the next strategic measures to reach the objectives? 
- How will the business finance its growth measures? 
Marketing and sales 
Customers 
- Who are the current customers and where are the customers located? 
- Why do the customers buy produce from the business? 
Competitor Analysis  
- Which other producers sell to the same customers?  
- What is the difference between product of the business and its competitors? 
- What is the difference between price of the business and its competitors? 
Target Market Strategy  
- How will the business keep its customers and reach to new customers?  
- Where are potential new markets? 
- What are the product quality and volume requirements of new markets? 
Advertising and Promotion Strategy 
- How will the potential new customers learn about the offered product? 
- What channels of promotion will the business use? 
54 
Marketing and Sales Forecasts 
- How did the markets of the produce change during last years? 
- How will (can) the produce price and quality requirements change in the coming years? 
- What are seen business risks and opportunities in changing markets? 
Development/investment 
Existing facilities: description, value and operations cost 
- What facilities (including land, buildings, machines, vehicles, etc.) are currently owned and used by 
the business? 
- What is the value of the facilities? 
- What is the full operation cost of the facilities? 
- What is the full maintenance cost of the facilities? 
Investment: description, value,  implementation timeline and milestones for reimbursement of refinancing 
- What investment is required for the growth of the business? 
- As result of the investment, how will the quantity and quality of produce be increased? 
- As result of the investment, how will the intake capacity of the business be increased? 
- How will the business increase its profitability as result of the investment? 
- What is the value of planned investment? 
- What are the sources of funding for the investment, including own capital, lending, CBG? 
-  What  is  detailed  workplan  to  implement  the  investment  including  schedule,  responsibilities  and 
milestones for funds reimbursement? 
Permits and Government Incentives 
- Which official permits are needed for the current operation and for the planned investment? 
-  Which  government  incentive  policies  such  as  subsidized  lending,  primary  producer  support,  staff 
training or other inputs are available? 
- How the government incentives can be utilized? 
Human Resources (Staff, training, working standards) 
- How many employees currently work in the facility? 
- What are the different tasks of the workers, including administration and technical staff? 
- What is the full cost of the staff? 
- Have the workers received training for their tasks? 
- Has the business paid attention to working standards? What concrete measures? 
Human Resources Development (Staff, training, working standards) 
- How many employees are foreseen to work in the facility after the investment? 
- If there will be new staff, what are their tasks? 
- What is the cost of the new staff and new total budget for the personnel? 
- Is there training requirement due to the investment? 
- How will the investment influence the working standards in the business? 
Environmental Aspects: existing and foreseen problems, solutions and cost of solutions 
55 
- What problems of environmental pollution exist currently? 
- What measures business has done to solve the problems? What was cost of these solutions? 
- What environmental problems are foreseen as result of the planned investment? 
- What are the proposed solutions to these problems? What is the cost of the solutions? 
Development/investment Expenses (should include detailed drawing if appropriate, BQ, at least 3 quotation 
for each capital item-machinery/service or for each batch of items or for turnkey) 
- List of all cost items constituting the full investment budget 
- 3 quotations for each item and selection of best quotations (quality vs cost) 
Supply chain of raw materials and its development 
Location of source of raw material 
- What is/are the raw material(s) procured by the business? 
- Where is the raw material procured from? 
Total raw material needed and annual growth 
- How much raw material does the business take in monthly? 
- How much is the monthly cost of the raw material? 
- As result of the investment, how much more raw material the business plans to procure? 
- Annually, how the business plans to grow it's intake during the coming 5-10 years? 
Number of HH expected to be supplying and unit under production 
- What is average yield per Ha/unit of the procured raw material? 
- How much is the average area/unit of production per household? 
- How many households currently sell raw material to the business? 
- After the investment, how many more households will be required to produce the raw material? 
Realistic budget for rural Households (HH) producing the raw material (per unit e.g. ha, animal etc) 
-  What  is  the  average  budget  of  the  households  producing  the  raw  material  (please  provide 
comprehensive crop budget per Ha, including output volume and value, input description and cost, 
external and household labour cost, and total revenues)? 
Need for input and its availability for supplier of raw material 
- What services and inputs the raw material producers require? 
- Are these inputs available in satisfactory quantity and quality to the current producers? 
- Are the inputs available to increased amount of producers after the investment? 
- How the inputs can be improved in collaboration with the business? 
Need  of  finance  for  the  HH  and  type  (in  kind,  cash)    source  of  financing  (promoter/investor,  financial 
institutions, credit guarantee and joint and several liability) (who is doing it and financing it) 
- For both existing and new raw material producer HHs, what is the need of financing to sustain and 
improve the production? 
- What are the current and potential sources of financing to the HHs? 
- How can the project and the business help HHs access financing? 
56 
Type of buying arrangement entered into with supplier e.g.  group contract, individual contract, buy back 
with inbuilt credit in kind etc. 
- Are the HHs organized to groups or villages or led by lead farmers? 
- Who helps the groups in group management and with technical issues? 
- Is the business dealing with groups of HHs or with individual HHs? 
- Is the business signing contracts with the HHs to buy the raw material? 
- Is the contract signed at time of purchase, in the beginning of the season or for longer term? 
- How is the price of raw material set in the contract? 
- Is the business lending inputs to HHs to increase quality and quantity (give input against reduced cost 
of purchase)? 
- How is the arrangement between the business and the required new producer households foreseen?  
Need of training the suppliers of raw material (who is doing it and financing it) 
- Is there need of training the existing raw material producers? 
- Is there need of training the new raw material producers after investment? 
- Is the business helping the producer households technically? 
- What are the total required training items, what is their cost and what is the source of funding (capital, 
lending, public resources, producer households, project funds)? 
- Who will provide the trainings? 
Need of R&D for activities undertaken by the supplier of raw materials (who is doing it and financing it) 
- Do the current raw material producers require improved inputs or agricultural technology? 
- Do the new raw material producers require improved inputs or agricultural technology? 
- What are the required R&D activities? 
- What is the foreseen impact of the R&D activities? 
- What is the total cost of the R&D, and what is the source of funding (business capital, lending, public 
resources, producer households, project funds)? 
- Who will be responsible of the R&D and what is the timeframe? 
Need for improvement of public infrastructure e.g. repair of bridge, retaining wall pivotal stretches of roads, 
drainage etc (who is doing it and financing it, business contribution, CDF?) 
- What is the condition of public infrastructure supporting the business directly? 
-  What  is  the  requirement  of  infrastructure  construction/repairs  works  supporting  the  business 
directly? 
- What is the condition of public infrastructure supporting the raw material producers? 
- What is the requirement of infrastructure construction/repairs works supporting the raw material 
producers? 
- What are the total required infrastructure works and their cost? 
- Who will be responsible of the works and what is the source of funding (business capital, lending, 
public resources, public works with producer households, project funding)? 
Operations management  
Company Organization (structure) 
- What is the management and personnel organization of the business? 
57 
Management Team 
- Who have management tasks in the business? What are the individual tasks? 
Training needs of Management Team and Estimated Input and cost 
- What training has been provided to the business? 
- What training is currently needed to the management team? 
- Detailed list of required training items, including total costs and proposed schedule 
- Source of funds for the training items 
Financial Analysis (supporting excel template provided by project) 
Financial Assumptions with and without additional investment 
- Price and quantity of produce sold per annum or per season 
- Price and quantity of raw material purchased per annum or per season 
-  Running  costs  of  the  production  per  annum  or  per  season,  including  electricity,  water,  fuels,  
transportation, maintenance costs, marketing costs, and any other cost 
- Estimated value addition per annum or per season (excluding depreciation, labour and tax costs) 
- Estimated labour and tax costs per annum or per season 
- Estimated gross profit per annum or per season (excluding building and machinery depreciation cost) 
- Evaluation of annual depreciation of the buildings, machinery and vehicles (investment cost divided 
by estimated no of years of use = investment depreciation cost for each item) 
- Estimated net profit per annum or per season (including all costs and revenues) 
Financing Requirement for upgrading or establishment of the production (house, machinery, vehicles, utility 
installations, trainings, etc.) 
- Required buildings and their cost 
- Required machinery and their cost 
- Required vehicles and their cost 
- Required installation services and their cost 
- Required trainings and their cost 
- Total cost of upgrading / establishment of the production facility 
Valuation of Business (evaluation of in kind contribution value by project authorized valuer) 
- Value of existing buildings 
- Value of existing machinery 
- Value of existing vehicles 
- Total value of existing business, total value of business including investment and existing business 
Financing Plan and Cash Flow estimation 
- Enterprise capital contribution to investment 
- Enterprise dept contribution to investment 
- Grant contribution to investment 
- Financing plan and payment schedules 
- Plan of revenues and estimated cash flows per production season, ensuring availability of operational 
budget/working capital 
- Estimated period for Return Of Investment 
58 
Annexes: Financial analysis supporting excel table 
59 
Annex 2 of the LEG Manual. Investment Summary/Evaluation by independent 
Agribusiness Specialists 
The NPMU contracted External Reviewer Agribusiness Specialists will prepare an Investment Summary for 
Each Investment Proposal (3-5 pages). The summary will introduce and evaluate viability of each aspect of 
the Proposal. In the conclusion the Specialists will specify if there are issues which need to be addressed by 
the Business Entity before final financing is provided. 
I. 
COMPANY DETAILS  
II. 
DUE-DILIGENCE  
III. 
PROPOSED INVESTMENT 
1. Company Overview  
2. Market study and Marketing Strategy  
3. Investment Plan and Milestones for Reimbursing LF 
4. Financial and technical viability 
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT OF THE INVESTMENT  
1. Job Creation 
2. Capacity Building 
3. Increased Income for HH (poor and non poor) 
4. Working condition 
V. 
CONCLUSION   
60 
Annex 3 of the LEG Manual. Format for Rapid Screening of Proposals by the EoI 
Sub-project Registration Number: _________  
Name of Applicant:_____________________ 
Sub-project Title: ___________________________________________________________ 
Total Sub-project Cost:  
_____________________ 
Total Grant Amount Requested:  
_____________________ 
Criteria for assessment of compliance with acceptance rules:  
1. Complete sub-project application form is attached: 
yes 
   no 
(Annex 1) 
2. The business entity meets the defined eligibility criteria: 
yes 
   no 
3. Sub-project duration is within the announced limits:  
yes 
   no 
4. Requested CBG grant amount is within announced limits: 
  no 
 yes 
5. Requested budget items are aligned with objectives: 
yes 
   no 
(Budget vs. Implementation plan in Annex 1) 
61 
 
 
 
 
6. Required business entity documentation is provided: 
yes 
 no 
 
[NOTE:  If  the  Application  does  not  meet  all  of  these  criteria  of  compliance  with  acceptance  rules,  the 
Application should not go through technical review] 
The sub-project is accepted for TAC Technical Review:  
 yes 
 no 
Comments: 
Signature of the Screener: ___________________ Date: __________________ 
62 
Annex 4 of the LEG Manual. Draft Proposal Evaluation Report by TAC 
PROPOSAL EVALUATION REPORT 
Sub-project Registration Number: _________ District Name: ______________________ 
Sub-project Title:  
_______________________________________________________ 
1. Evaluation of Application according to each specific criteria: 
Criteria 
Development impact (maximum 40 points) 
Out of 
maximum 
Points 
1  Poverty reduction and nutrition impact to smallholder households in the supply network 
__ / 15 
2  Employment creation both at the facility and on-farm 
3  Inclusion of women and youth 
__ / 10 
__ / 15 
Sub-project innovation and replication potential (maximum 30 points) 
4  Climate Smart Agriculture and long term environmental sustainability of supply chains 
     / 10 
5  Long term economic/financial sustainability (profitability) of the investment 
6  Potential for further expansion of the operation by the business entity 
Beneficiary contribution and technical capacity (maximum 20 points) 
7  Technical capacity of the investor and staff 
8  Level of in-cash contribution above the minimum 
9  Level of in-kind contribution 
63 
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
__ / 10 
__ / 5 
__ / 5 
Lead Enterprise on-site environmental impact (maximum 10 points) 
10  Consideration for mitigation of pollution including respective treatment plans 
__ / 10 
Total 
__ / 100 
2. Which are the strengths of the proposal related to the subject of intervention related to: 
Development impact aspects 
Technical, Financial and Capacity Aspects 
3. Which are the weaknesses of the proposal related to the subject of intervention related to: 
Development impact aspects 
Technical, Financial and Capacity Aspects 
64 
4. Other comments/suggestions. 
DECLARATION OF RESULTS OF THE TECHNICAL EVALUATION  
[NOTE: This part of the report should always be in a separate page, in order to be easy taken off 
from the report when the Applicant requests the report] 
Funding of this LEG sub-project proposal is (check the appropriate box below): 
Points received 
- From 0 – 70 points 
- From 70 – 80 points 
- From 80 – 90 points 
- More than 90 points 
Level of recommendation 
 
Not recommended 
Recommended with reservation   
 
Recommended 
 
Strongly recommended  
65 
Name of the Technical Reviewer:  _______________________ 
Signature: 
________________________ 
_________________________  
Date: 
66 
Annex 5 of the LEG Manual: Format for Field check of preselected Proposals 
FIELD CHECK - VERIFICATION OF PROPOSALS 
I. SUB-PROJECT INFORMATION [to be completed in office] 
District: 
Location:  
[address, phone, fax, email] 
Sub-project Number 
Sub-project Title: 
Principal Applicant: 
Contact information 
of Principal Applicant: 
Sub-project Total 
Cost:  __ __ __ __ __ 
LEG Grant:  __ __ __ __ __ 
Beneficiary Contribution:  __ __ __ __ __ 
Sub-project 
start:  
[mm, yy] 
Sub-project 
Completion:  
[mm, yy] 
Sub-project duration:  
[in months] 
II. VERIFICATION RESULTS 
Things to be verified: 
Result of the verification: 
[to be completed in office] 
[to be completed in the field] 
1. 
2. 
3.  
4. 
5. 
6. 
67 
…. 
III. ADDITIONAL NOTES AND COMMENTS 
The verification team 
For the beneficiary 
Verification Team: 
Name1 and Signature: _______________________________ 
Principal Applicant: 
Name and Signature:  
Name2 and Signature: _______________________________ 
_______________________________ 
Date ______/____/201__ 
Date ______/____/201__ 
68 
Annex 6 of the LEG Manual: Procurement Plan 
Procurement Items 
Quality 
Specifics 
Time of 
procurement 
Unit 
Quantity  Unit price 
Total cost 
 TOTAL COST 
1) Input materials 
2650 US$ 
 Total: 250 
1.1 Example: Plastic bags for 
nursery 
20L plastic 
bags  
February 
Bag 
500 
0.5 US$ 
250 US$ 
1.2 
1.3 Nursery construction 
materials 
1.4 Drying ground 
construction materials 
1.5 etc etc 
… 
2) Machineries, equipment 
2.1 Example: Tractor 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
… 
2) Services 
Wheelbase: 
min. 250 cm - 
max. 270 cm 
Weight: min. 
4400 kg – 
max. 5000 kg 
Engine: min. 
5.0L – max. 
6.0L diesel 
etc. 
January 2018  Machine 
1 
2000 US$ 
2000 US$ 
 Total: 2000 
 Total: 
69 
2.1 Example: Tractor, plastic 
bags, construction materials 
etc. transport to village 
1 truck for 1 
day 
January 2018 
1 Trip 
1 
400 US$ 
400 US$ 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
… 
70 
Annex 7 of the LEG Manual: Grant Agreement template 
GRANT AGREEMENT  
BETWEEN SACP AND GRANT RECIPIENT 
Competitive Small Grant  
Agreement No: 
Sub-project No. 
Principal Applicant representing the Grant Winning Business Entity 
SACP National Project Management Unit 
Principal Applicant  
SACP NPMU 
Parties 
Party 1 
Party 2 
Contact Details 
Name: 
Address: 
Phone: 
Fax: 
E-mail: 
Bank account 
number: 
The  application  to  the  SACP LEG funding for the grant sub-project defined  in  the following schedule and 
hereinafter known as the “sub-project” has been approved by the SACP Investment Committee, subject to 
the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement. 
71 
Sub-project title: 
SUB-PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Agreement commencement date:  
Agreement completion date:  
Grant Agreement amount: 
Amount of beneficiary contribution: 
Items to be financed by the grant: 
See Annex 1 to this Agreement 
It is agreed between the following Parties  
THE AGREEMENT 
Party 1:  
Party 2:   
(Principal Applicant, representing the Recipient) 
(Director, representing SACP NPMU) 
1. PURPOSE 
With the support of the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD), SACP project 
1.1 
has  established  the  Lead  Enterprise  Matching  Grants  (LEG)  scheme  to  increase  incomes  of  rural  farmer 
households by improving their market opportunities, supply provision and available services. The LEG scheme 
is coordinated and managed by the SACP National Project Management Unit (NPMU). 
1.2 
The  grant  funds  provided  to  the  Recipient  by  the  SACP  shall  be  used  exclusively  for  the 
purposes specified in the proposal submitted by __________________________ (Applicant) based on  the 
call for proposal issued ____________ (date).   
1.3 
When  a  discrepancy  exists  between  the  proposal  documents  and  this  Agreement,  this 
Agreement shall take precedence. The Recipient must request the NPMU approval prior to implementing any 
substantive changes in the nature of grant funded activities. In the event Grant funds are not used for these 
purposes within the grant period specified on page 1 of this Agreement or within any approved extension of 
this time period, the funds shall be returned to NPMU.  
72 
Grant funds cannot be  transmitted to other institution or person, as a sublease or a grant. 
1.4 
Grant funds cannot be used to cover tax payments, expenses or other compensations for business partners. 
2. RESPONSIBILITY 
2.1 
The Recipient is responsible for ensuring that the sub-project is administered in accordance 
with the terms of this Agreement and all applicable laws. The tax consequences of this award on the grant 
recipient and the fulfillment of these are the responsibility of the Recipient. 
2.2 
NPMU sends all relevant correspondence to the Principal Applicant, through contact details 
pointed out at the first page of this agreement. NPMU reserves its' right to terminate financing in the case if 
the Principal Applicant terminates participation in the project. 
3. PROCUREMENT 
3.1 
Procurement  of  goods  and  services  shall  be  governed  by  the  provisions  of  Annex  1 
(Procurement Plan  as part of the Grant Application) to this Agreement. All Grant implementation related 
procurement  is  fully  under  responsibility  of  the  Recipient  and  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with 
procedures  satisfactory  to  the  Government  of  Zimbabwe  and  consistent  with  IFAD  Project  Procurement 
Guidelines.  The  role  of  the  NPMU  is  to  review,  supervise  and  guide  the  procurement  carried  out  by  the 
Recipient, thereby  ensuring  that integrity, transparency and accountability  are maintained.  All goods and 
services procured by the Recipient using the proceeds of the grant shall be used exclusively for the purposes 
of the project as stipulated in the present Grant Agreement. 
3.2   
The Recipient shall ensure that all grant financed goods shall be insured, as necessary, against hazards 
incident to the acquisition, transportation and delivery thereof to the place of use or installation. The Recipient 
shall ensure that any facilities relevant to the Activities are at all times operated and maintained in accordance 
with appropriate practices and that any repairs or renewals of such facilities are promptly made as needed. 
3.3  The  Recipient  agrees  that:  (i)  a  specific  procurement  plan  (Procurement  Plan  as  part  of  the  Grant 
Application)  details  (1)  the  procurement  items,  (2)  quality  specifications  for  each  item,  (3)  the  timing  of 
procurement for  each item, (4) costs per item  and  total costs; (iii)  the  Recipient  will    procure goods and 
services, as planned in the Grant Agreement, following the Procurement Manual issued by the project; (iv) 
the Recipient will prepare for procurement of each item by collecting three competitive quotations when 
possible, agreeing with the suppliers and service providers about purchase details including time and cost; 
(v)  when  procuring,  the  Recipient  shall  pay  attention  to  the  need  for  economy,  efficiency,  transparency, 
timing  and  quality  of  the  procured  goods  and  services;  (vi)  the  Recipient  will  produce  evidence  of 
procurement  and  quotations,  as  per  Grant  Agreement,  as  part  of  the  mid-term  and  final  report  to  be 
submitted to NPMU; (vii) The Project may conduct a random audit of LEG investments by an external auditor. 
73 
4. PROPERTY OF GOODS 
4.1 
The applicant will follow the stipulated use of goods (both during and after the completion of 
the sub-project) as agreed in the Grant Agreement. All purchased goods (including materials, equipment, 
data and  information)  are  the property  of the Project during the implementation  of the sub-project.  The 
recipient  (beneficiary)  would  enjoy  the  property  right  for  the  purchased  goods  only  after  a  successful 
completion of the sub-project. The recipient is responsible for taking care of all property and providing for 
the proper maintenance of equipment. If stipulated in the Grant Agreement the Grant Recipient shall insure 
the assets procured with grant funding. In the case of NPMU’s termination of the grant as a result of violation 
of the Grant Agreement, or the  termination of the sub-project by the grant recipient, the NPMU may be 
instructed to repossess the equipment. Repossessed equipment would be sold and proceeds, less any sales 
costs, would be deducted from the grant beneficiary financial obligations under the agreement, and returned 
to the grant fund for reallocation. 
5. PAYMENT OF GRANT 
5.1 
The grant disbursements will be made to  an account in  a commercial bank, registered  and 
managed by the business entity. For each payment from the grant amount, the grant recipient will provide 
evidence that the money has been receipted and used according to the contract. 
5.2 
The  grant  will  be  disbursed  in  2-3  tranches  as  agreed  between  NPMU  and  the  Principle 
Applicant. The first tranche payment will be made as an advance payment immediately after approval and 
signing of the Grant Agreement by all parties. Further tranche payments would be advanced on the basis of 
(i) beneficiary submitted request, together with (ii) documented evidence for the use of disbursed grant and 
beneficiary funds as per Grant Agreement, (iii) milestone progress report by Grant Recipient and milestone 
monitoring report of NPMU, and (iv) disbursement of Lead Enterprise counterpart financing. 
5.3 
Upon receiving a milestone progress report that satisfactorily describes the fulfillment of the 
milestone targets, the NPMU will review the report, conduct a field visit, and confirm the correct use of the 
previous tranche and authorizes in writing the payment of the next tranche. A payment order is prepared by 
the NPMU and signed by the NPMU Director. This “Order of Payment” is to be submitted together with the 
annexed (i) “Request for Payment” from the beneficiary, (ii) summary table of the beneficiaries “Statement 
of Expenditure” (original) for the use of previous tranche, and (iii) the milestone monitoring report. Upon 
submission, the NPMU will make the transfer of money from the Project bank account to the beneficiary’s 
account. 
5.4 
The in-cash beneficiary contribution needs to be disbursed during implementation of the first 
milestone. Second tranche of grant amount can be requested for only after full disbursement of beneficiary 
in-cash contribution, following the agreed work plan. 
5.5 
The grant recipient shall notify the NPMU in writing of any anticipated delays in achieving the 
established milestones and the reason. The scheduled payments for the next tranche may be withheld or 
delayed  in  the  event  that  the  grant  recipient's  expenditure  reports  show  a  larger  cash  balance  than 
anticipated. At any time during the grant period, the grant recipient may request the NPMU to revise the 
"Payment Schedule” to better reflect the current work plan and to better meet the grant recipient's cash flow 
needs, but this request should be justified accordingly. 
74 
6. ACCOUNTING, AUDITS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS 
6.1 
The NPMU will give technical guidance to Principal Applicants in preparing the statement of 
expenditure reports, upon which Principal Applicants can request the subsequent disbursement. The NPMU 
holds overall responsibility for ensuring timely disbursements, that the appropriate procurement procedures 
are  observed,  and  that  the  necessary  accounting  and  audit  procedures  are  carried  out  as  per  general 
requirements of the sub-project. 
6.2 
Grant  beneficiaries  must  be  fully  aware  of  their  financial  obligations  under  the  Grant 
Agreement and make appropriate provisions for meeting those requirements. The Grant Agreement requires 
that funds must be returned in the event of termination of the Grant Agreement and that any uncommitted 
funds upon completion be returned to the NPMU.  
6.3 
The grant beneficiary will submit to the NPMU the statement of expenditure, accompanied 
with original supporting documents (i.e. invoices, receipts, written declarations, etc.). The originals must be 
filed by the NPMU and kept for as many years as specified in the national legislation. The beneficiary shall 
provide  documentary  evidence  of  both  grant  and  beneficiary  cash  contributions  to  the  sub-project.  The 
NPMU  may  withhold  scheduled  payments  or  require  that  grant  activities  be  suspended  if  statements  of 
expenditure reports are overdue or the documentary evidence on the use of grant funds is insufficient.  
6.4 
The grant beneficiary shall prepare a final grant report at the end of the grant sub-project in 
the format mentioned in Annex 2 reflecting the operations, resources and expenditures related to the sub-
project. The grant beneficiary shall submit a copy of the said final grant report as soon as available, but in any 
case not later than 45 days after the completion of the sub-project. 
Grant expenditures will be audited, as deemed appropriate, within the overall NPMU financial 
6.5 
audit process. The grant beneficiary will co-operate fully with the NPMU auditor and will make available to 
the auditor whatever records, documentation and other information requested by the auditor in connection 
with the audit of the SACP funds. Business entities and Principal Applicants will be liable for repaying any 
grant funds found to have been misused and all steps will be taken for recovery according to the legislation 
in force. 
7. REPORTING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
7.1 
A  well-designed  monitoring  and  evaluation  system  is  critical  for  ensuring  timely  and  successful 
implementation  of  grant-funded  sub-project  activities and for  enhancing their impact through  systematic 
analysis  and  dissemination  of  lessons  learned.  The  NPMU  is  responsible  for  the  overall  monitoring  and 
evaluation grant-funded sub-projects, through reviews of all progress reports and on-site visits. 
The monitoring and evaluation of the grant implementation includes five steps: (i) initial monitoring 
7.2 
visit; (ii) baseline evaluation; (iii) milestone reports and subsequent monitoring visits; (iv) final monitoring 
review and (v) final evaluation. The NPMU is responsible for all monitoring and evaluation, and the Grant 
recipient  is  responsible  for  submission  of milestone reports and the final report.  Each  proposal will have 
clearly defined milestones, final targets and associated performance indicators, against which progress can 
be  assessed.  These  indicators  are  agreed  between  the  NPMU  and  the  applicant,  as  part  of  the  Grant 
Agreement. 
75 
Initial monitoring visit is performed and reported by the NPMU EoI committee, prior to submitting 
7.3 
the proposal to the technical review and scoring by the TAC. The main purpose is to verify that the resources 
and capacities presented in the proposal are actually available to the Applicants. 
Baseline evaluation is performed after start of the grant implementation, to document the baseline 
7.4 
situation of the grant winning businesses including their economic impact among farmer households. The 
final impact evaluation will be conducted against results of the baseline evaluation. 
Milestone  monitoring is (i) initiated by Grant recipients submission  of milestone progress report, 
7.5 
describing progress of implementation against Grant Agreement's listed milestone indicators. Subsequently, 
(ii) the NPMU will review the milestone progress report prepared and submitted by the Grant recipients, and 
(iii)  perform  a field  visit  to  confirm  the reported  implementation. Within  30 days after the submission  of 
milestone progress report, (iv) the NPMU will submit a milestone monitoring report for information of PSC 
and Grant Recipient, describing results of the desk review and field visit. The milestone monitoring report of 
the NPMU is a requirement for disbursement of the next tranche of  the Grant.  The NPMU may  contract 
independent evaluators to support with milestone reviews. 
7.6 
Final monitoring review is initiated by (i) Grant recipient’s submission of final report, describing the 
final outcomes of the implementation against Grant Agreement's listed indicators. (ii) The NPMU will review 
the final report and (iii) perform a field-check of implementation, and (iv) submit a final monitoring report to 
PSC and Grant Recipient. 
Final Evaluation will be conducted by NPMU contracted independent evaluators, to assess whether 
7.7 
the sub-project and Grant Scheme in general have achieved intended results in terms of poverty reduction, 
creation  of  farmer  household  market  opportunities, 
incomes,  employment,  technology 
development  and  dissemination,  productivity  improvements,  skills  development  and  improved  market 
access. The independent evaluators will compare the situation with baseline evaluation results, and will have 
full access to baseline data, milestone documents and all Grant Beneficiary production sites. The results of 
the LEG scheme will be documented by the evaluators, with the aim of showcasing good activities. The NPMU 
will disseminate the lessons learnt for replication/adoption by others. 
increased 
8. CLOSE-OUT OF GRANT 
8.1 
Upon receipt of final reports from the Recipient, the NPMU shall initiate procedures to close-
out the grant. Close-out procedures include obtaining and approving all required statement of expenditure 
and progress reports, ensuring that any unexpended grant funds are refunded to SACP, and communication 
of close-out through a close-out letter from NPMU to the Grant recipient. All Grant requirements remain in 
full  force  and  effect  until  the  grant  recipient  receives  the  close-out  letter  from  SACP  indicating  that  all 
obligations have been satisfied. 
9. SUSPENSION AND CANCELLATION 
9.1 
The NPMU holds right to terminate the grant at any time, if: (i) the Recipient does not follow 
provisions of the Grant Agreement; (ii) the Recipient has significant delays in the implementation of the sub-
project and the NPMU believes that the sub-project cannot achieve its objectives; (iii) the Recipient fails to 
submit complete financial report; (iv) the Recipient fails to submit copies of financial documents to complete 
financial reporting; (v) no proper accounting exists in financial records; (vi) false documents or information is 
provided; (vii) the Grant is used to finance expenses not approved by the NPMU, and conducting activities 
other than approved; and (viii) the Principal Applicant terminates engagement in the sub-project. 
76 
In the case of a cancellation of the Grant, all unused funds received under the sub-project shall 
9.2 
be returned to the SACP account. All amounts, which have not been paid, shall be cancelled by the NPMU 
and all equipment purchased by grant financing shall be returned to SACP. In the case of misuse of grant 
funds, the Principal Applicants will be liable for repaying any grant funds found to have been misused and all 
steps will be taken for recovery according to the legislation in power. 
10. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
The  parties  to  this  contract  will  use  their  best  effort  to  settle  amicably  any  dispute, 
10.1 
controversy, or claim arising out of or relating to this Grant Agreement.  Any such dispute, which is not settled 
by agreement of the parties thereto, will be finally settled in the applicable Court of the area in which the 
Grant is executed. 
11. LIMITATION AND CHANGES 
11.1 
It is expressly understood that the SACP has no obligation to provide other or additional support to 
the Recipient for the purposes of this activity or any other purposes. Any changes, additions, or deletions to 
the terms and conditions stated in this Grant Agreement may be made in writing only and must be jointly 
approved by the SACP and the Recipient. 
12. FORCE MAJEURE 
Neither the Recipient nor the IFAD project will be responsible to the other for delay or failure 
12.1 
in  performance of  any  of the obligations imposed  by  this Agreement when such failure is occasioned  by 
unintentional  fire,  flood,  explosion,  lightning,  windstorm,  earthquake,  subsidence  of  soil,  court  order  or 
government interference, civil commotion, riot, war, strikes, and labor disturbances, beyond the reasonable 
control and without the fault or negligence of either of the Recipient or SACP. 
13. CORRUPT AND FRAUDULENT PRACTICES 
13.1  IFAD  requires  that  all  beneficiaries  of  IFAD  funding,  including  the  employer  and  any  bidders, 
implementing partners, service providers, suppliers, sub-suppliers, contractors, sub-contractors, consultants, 
sub-consultants,  and  any  of  their  agents  (whether  declared  or  not)  and  personnel  observe  the  highest 
standards of ethics during the procurement and execution of such contracts, and comply with IFAD’s Policy 
on  Preventing  Fraud  and  Corruption  in  its  activities  and  operations,  revised  on  12  December  2018  (EB 
2018/125/R.6, hereinafter “IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy”). 
13.2 For the purposes of these provisions, and consistent with IFAD’s Anticorruption Policy, the terms set 
forth below are defined as follows, and sometimes referred to collectively as “prohibited practices”: 
(a)  “corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of 
anything of value in order to improperly influence the actions of another party;  
(b)  “fraudulent  practice”  is  any  act  or  omission,  including  a  misrepresentation,  that 
knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party in order to obtain  a 
financial or other benefit or to avoid an obligation;  
77 
(c)  “collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve 
an improper purpose, including improperly influencing the actions of another party; 
(d)  “coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of any party, to improperly influence the actions of 
that or another party; 
(e)  “obstructive  practice”  is  (i)  deliberately  destroying,  falsifying,  altering  or  concealing 
evidence that may be material to an investigation by the Fund or making false statements 
to  investigators  in  order  to  materially  impede  an  investigation  by  the  Fund;  (ii) 
threatening,  harassing  or  intimidating  any  party  in  order  to  prevent  that  party  from 
disclosing  its  knowledge  of  matters  relevant  to  an  investigation  by  the  Fund  or  from 
pursuing  such  an  investigation;  and/or  (iii)  the  commission  of  any  act  intended  to 
materially impede the exercise of the Fund’s contractual rights of audit, inspection and 
access to information. 
13.3 The Fund will deny approval of a proposed contract award if it determines that the firm or individual 
recommended for award, or any of its personnel or agents, or its sub-consultants, sub-contractors, service 
providers, suppliers, sub-suppliers and/or any of their personnel or agents, has, directly or indirectly, engaged 
in  any  of  the  prohibited  practices  in  connection  with  an  IFAD-financed  and/or  IFAD-managed  activity  or 
operation, including in competing for the contract.  
13.4 In accordance with IFAD’s Anticorruption Policy, the Fund has the right to sanction firms and individuals, 
including by declaring them ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period of time, to participate in any 
IFAD-financed and/or IFAD-managed activity or operation. This may include ineligibility to: (i) be awarded or 
otherwise benefit from any IFAD-financed contract, financially or in any other manner; (ii) be a nominated 
sub-contractor, consultant, manufacturer, supplier, sub-supplier, agent or service provider of an otherwise 
eligible firm being awarded an IFAD-financed contract; and (iii) receive the proceeds of any loan or grant 
provided  by  the  Fund.40  The  Fund  also  has  the  right  to  unilaterally  recognize  debarments  by  any  of  the 
International financial Institutions that are members to the agreement for mutual enforcement of debarment 
decisions if such debarments meet the requirements for mutual recognition under the agreement for mutual 
enforcement of debarment decisions. 
13.5 In addition, the Fund has the right to, at any time, declare a misprocurement and/or the ineligibility of 
any expenditures associated with a procurement process or contract if it determines that prohibited practices 
occurred in connection with this procurement process or contract and that the borrower/recipient has not 
taken timely and appropriate action, satisfactory to the Fund, to address such practices when they occur. 
13.6  Bidders,  suppliers,  consultants,  contractors,  and  their  sub-contractors,  sub-consultants,  service 
providers, suppliers, agents and personnel, are required to fully cooperate with any investigation conducted 
by the Fund into possible prohibited practices, including by making personnel available for interviews and by 
providing full access to any and all accounts, premises, documents and records (including electronic records) 
relating to the relevant IFAD-financed and/or IFAD-managed operation or activity and to have such accounts, 
40 For the avoidance of doubt, a sanctioned party’s ineligibility to be awarded a contract shall include, without limitation, (i) applying for 
pre-qualification, expressing interest in a consultancy, and bidding, either directly or as a nominated sub-contractor, nominated 
consultant, nominated manufacturer or supplier, or nominated service provider, in respect of such contract, and (ii) entering into an 
addendum or amendment introducing a material modification to any existing contract. 
78 
premises, records and documents audited and/or inspected41  by auditors and/or investigators appointed by 
the Fund. 
13.7 The bidder is obliged to disclose relevant prior sanctions and criminal convictions and any commissions 
or fees paid or are to be paid to any agents or other party in connection with this procurement process or 
the execution of the contract. 
13.8  The  bidder  shall  keep  all  records  and  documents,  including  electronic  records,  relating  to  this 
procurement  process  available  for  a  minimum  of  three  (3)  years  after  notification  of  completion  of  the 
process or, in case the bidder is awarded the contract, execution of the contract. 
14. SEXUAL HARASSMENT, SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE 
14.1  The  Fund  requires  that  all  beneficiaries  of  IFAD  Funding,  including  the  employer  and  any  bidders, 
implementing partners, service providers, suppliers, sub-suppliers, contractors, sub-contractors, consultants, 
sub-consultants, and any of their agents (whether declared or not) and personnel comply with IFAD's Policy 
on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. For the purpose of this 
provision,  and consistent  with IFAD’s Policy  on  Preventing  and Responding to  Sexual  Harassment, Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse as it may be amended from time to time, the terms set forth below are defined as 
follows: 
(a) 
(b) 
Sexual harassment means “any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favour or other verbal, 
non-verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature that unreasonably interferes with work, alters or is 
made a condition of employment, or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. 
Sexual exploitation and abuse means “any actual or attempted abuse of a position of vulnerability, 
differential power, or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, 
socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of others (sexual exploitation); the actual or 
threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive 
conditions (sexual abuse)”. 
14.2 Employers, suppliers and  bidders shall take  all appropriate measures  to  prevent and  prohibit sexual 
harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse on the part of their personnel and subcontractors or anyone 
else directly or indirectly employed by them or any of subcontractors in the performance of the contract. 
Purchasers, suppliers and bidders shall immediately report to the purchaser or IFAD any incidents of sexual 
harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse arising out of or in connection with the performance of the 
contract or prior to its execution, including convictions, disciplinary measures, sanctions or investigations. 
The purchaser may take appropriate measures, including the termination of the contract, on the basis of 
41 Inspections include all fact-finding activities deemed relevant by the Fund to address allegations or other indications of possible 
prohibited practices. Such fact-finding activities may include, but are not limited to: accessing and examining a firm's or individual's 
financial records and information, and making copies thereof as relevant; accessing and examining any other documents, data or 
information (whether in hard copy or electronic format) deemed relevant for the investigation or audit, and making copies thereof as 
relevant; interviewing staff and other relevant individuals; performing physical inspections and site visits; and obtaining third party 
verifications of information. It is the responsibility of the firm or individual under inspection to ensure effective compliance with their duty 
to cooperate vis-à-vis any potential local laws or regulations or other potentially conflicting obligations. 
79 
proven  acts of sexual harassment, sexual exploitation  and abuse arising out of or in  connection  with  the 
performance of the contract. 
14.3 The bidder or subcontractor or supplier is required to disclose any relevant prior sanctions, convictions, 
disciplinary measures or criminal records. 
15. MONEY LAUNDERING AND TERRORIST FINANCING 
15.1 The Fund requires that all beneficiaries of IFAD funding or funds administered by IFAD, including the 
employer,  any  bidders,  implementing  partners,  service  providers  and  suppliers,  observe  the  highest 
standards of integrity during the procurement and execution of such contracts, and commit to combat money 
laundering  and  terrorism  financing  consistent  with  IFAD’s  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Countering  the 
Financing of Terrorism Policy. 
This Agreement was executed on: 
{Date/Month/Year} 
Signed by: 
Principal applicant 
Signed by: 
NPMU director 
{Insert name of Principal Applicant} 
{Insert name of the NPMU director} 
80 
Annex 1 of the Grant Agreement: Investment Proposal (see template above, manual Annex 1) 
81 
Annex 2 of the Grant Agreement: Sub-project reporting templates 
APPLICANT’S MID-TERM REPORT 
 [as in the contract] 
[dd/mm/yy - dd/mm/yy] 
 [as in the contract] 
…………………….. 
Total Grant: 
……………………… 
Spent Grant 
amount:  
……………………… 
Project Title: 
Project Number: 
Report period:  
Total Project Cost: 
Reached 
implementation plan 
outputs as per Grant 
Agreement: 
Problems in the 
implementation and 
possible solutions: 
Notes on coming 
phase II 
implementation: 
Request to receive 
2nd tranche of grant 
amount: 
 Principal Applicant: 
Signature  and date: 
[FOR OFFICIAL ONLY] 
[dd/mm/yy] 
Received by the NPMU on date: 
Name and Signature of NPMU Specialist: 
APPLICANT’S FINAL REPORT 
82 
 [as in the contract] 
[dd/mm/yy - dd/mm/yy] 
 [as in the contract] 
…………………….. 
Total Grant: 
……………………… 
Spent Grant 
amount:  
……………………… 
Project Title: 
Project Number: 
Report period:  
Total Project Cost: 
Reached 
implementation plan 
outputs as per Grant 
Agreement: 
Problems in the 
implementation and 
possible solutions: 
Assessment on sub-
project impact on 
productivity and 
incomes: 
Notes on future 
work: 
Request receive 
ownerships rights to 
purchased goods: 
 Principal Applicant: 
Signature  and date: 
[ FOR OFFICIAL ONLY ] 
[dd/mm/yy] 
Received by the NPMU on date: 
Name and Signature of NPMU Specialist: 
83 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE 
To be submitted with both mid-term and final reports 
Grant Beneficiary: ……………………………………………… Grant Number: 
…………………………………………………………………….. 
Principal Applicant: …………………………………………….  Reporting Period: 
…………………………………………………………………. 
No 
Approved Budget Items 
I)  Consumable materials (inputs) 
Total 
Planned 
Cost 
Incurred 
Costs 
Date of 
receipts 
Difference 
(Remaining 
funds) 
Notes on Differences 
II)  BDS and Training 
III)  Non-consumable materials 
(equipment and machines) 
C. 
Total Cost 
Principal Applicant name: ………………………….………………………………………. 
Signature: ………………………………………………..  Date: ………………………….. 
84 
APPENDIX 3: Lead Enterprise and Value Chain potential, Agri-Export Statistics in Zimbabwe 
In course of the Project Design mission for the SACP project in Zimbabwe, the Project Delivery Team 
conducted a survey of Agribusiness SMEs regarding their business models, commodities, number of 
linked smallholder farmers, locations, as well as potential links/collaboration with the SACP. 
The PDT through national private consultants surveyed twenty-two enterprises and the summary of 
the results are presented below. In addition, as part of the SACP targeting mechanism, the SACP PIM 
describes how market access and agribusiness development was incorporated into the SACP 
geographic targeting system, implemented jointly with the government Agritex office. 
The enterprises surveyed included: 
1.  Afrideli Private Limited 
2.  Buntu Foods 
3.  Bloombest Investments (Pvt) Ltd 
4.  Brandhold Investments 
5.  Fresh Energy Enterprises 
6.  Gayarite Limited 
7.  Greens Agriculture Co 
8.  Galaway Trading t/a Homemade Peanut 
Butter 
9.  Hutano Foods (Pvt Ltd) 
10. J Vicks Farm Produce 
11. Kitchen Food Manufacturers (Pvt) Ltd 
12. Makonde Nutrition 
13. Masvingo Food Commodities Co-
operative Company 
14. Nyangani Farm Produce 
15. Primus Energy 
16. Sandringham Feeds 
17. Shek-Shalom Agribusiness 
18. Simton-SG Ltd 
19. Threefold Investment 
20. Zadzamatura Ltd 
21. Veterinarians for Livelihood 
22. Zimbabwe Super Seeds 
The 22 agribusinesses all responded they are interested to collaborate with a programme with 
components such as those foreseen in SACP. They all mentioned that access to finance and in 
particular forex are major issues in the current macroeconomic context of Zimbabwe, hindering the 
agribusinesses from investing and expanding. Furthermore, reliable supply of input materials is a 
constraint. The SACP project instruments are designed to address these issues for the Agribusiness 
enterprises, and thereby effectively attract them to join the value chain development effort in SACP 
clusters. 
The agribusinesses surveyed are involved in a broad range of commodities, including grains, beans, 
legumes, nuts, horticulture, baobab, fruits, poultry, goats, fisheries, potatoes, onions, vines, fruits, 
herbs and spices. Just 5 out of the surveyed are microenterprises without significant supply chain 
networks, while the other 17 are either “lead enterprises” in value chains or microenterprises that 
have a business model linked to smallholders. The volume of the agribusinesses’ smallholder supply 
chains ranges from small, just 50 suppliers, to one very large company with 50,000 supplier farmers. 
The most have supplier networks of between 300-2000 smallholders, which is appropriate scale for 
the type of partners SACP is looking for collaboration. 
85 
The PDT also made statistical analysis of agriculture commodity export, which shows that the overall 
promising agri-export sector collapsed in the years around 2007-2011. Thereafter the tobacco sector 
has been an exceptional success story for Zimbabwe, and more slowly, in the last two-three years 
other export commodities have started to pick a growth trend. 
 1 000 000
 800 000
 600 000
 400 000
 200 000
 -
Raw tobacco
Raw cotton
Sugar
Tea
Macadamia
Textiles
Wood
1
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
3
0
0
2
4
0
0
2
5
0
0
2
6
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
9
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
3
1
0
2
4
1
0
2
5
1
0
2
6
1
0
2
7
1
0
2
8
1
0
2
Paper products
Table 1: Agriculture commodity exports from Zimbabwe  
Data Source: ITC Trade Map (www.trademap.org) 
Analysis by IFAD SACP design PDT 
Tea
Macadamia
Textiles
Wood
Paper products
Oranges
Peas
Raw tobacco
Cut flowers
Raw cotton
Sugar
Tea
Macadamia
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
1
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
3
0
0
2
4
0
0
2
5
0
0
2
6
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
9
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
3
1
0
2
4
1
0
2
5
1
0
2
6
1
0
2
7
1
0
2
8
1
0
2
Table 2: Reviving agriculture commodity exports from Zimbabwe  
Data Source: ITC Trade Map (www.trademap.org) 
Analysis by IFAD SACP design PDT 
 1 000 000
 800 000
 600 000
 400 000
 200 000
 -
2006
2018
Table 3: Zimbabwe main exports comparison 2006 vs 2018  
Data Source: ITC Trade Map (www.trademap.org) 
Analysis by IFAD SACP design PDT 
86 
 12 000 000.00
 10 000 000.00
 8 000 000.00
 6 000 000.00
 4 000 000.00
 2 000 000.00
 -
Zambia
Namibia
Botswana
Kenya
Mozambique
Zimbabwe
Tanzania, United Republic of
Table 4: Zimbabwe exports trend in comparison with peer countries in SSA  
Data Source: ITC Trade Map (www.trademap.org) 
Analysis by IFAD SACP design PDT 
 7 000 000.00
 6 000 000.00
 5 000 000.00
 4 000 000.00
 3 000 000.00
 2 000 000.00
 1 000 000.00
 -
Total Exports
South Africa
United Arab Emirates
Area Nes
1
0
0
2
3
0
0
2
5
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
9
0
0
2
1
1
0
2
3
1
0
2
5
1
0
2
7
1
0
2
Table 5: Zimbabwe exports trend in comparison with peer countries in SSA  
Data Source: ITC Trade Map (www.trademap.org) 
Analysis by IFAD SACP design PDT 
 7 000 000.00
 6 000 000.00
 5 000 000.00
 4 000 000.00
 3 000 000.00
 2 000 000.00
 1 000 000.00
 -
Total Exports
South Africa
United Arab Emirates
Area Nes
Mozambique
Zambia
Netherlands
200120032005200720092011201320152017
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Table 6: Zimbabwe exports target countries  
Data Source: ITC Trade Map (www.trademap.org) 
Analysis by IFAD SACP design PDT 
87 
The following includes summary details for the surveyed 22 agribusinesses. Full details are available 
in a separate folder. 
Enterprise 1: 
Afrideli Private Limited  
Location and areas of operation:  
Harare, Zimbabwe  
Commodities of Focus:  
Small, grains, poultry and goats  
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
50,000 
Description of enterprise: 
Afrideli works through establishing groups and associations of smallholder farmers that produce 
and market produce at a profit. It provides technical support, value addition, marketing expertise 
and access to both local and international market. The local market composes of individuals, 
supermarkets, hospitals and clinics. The current export markets are in Japan, United Kingdom, 
America and South Africa. Current production volumes per annum are as follows; 60 tons small 
grains, 50,000 poultry birds and 20,000 goats. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Afrideli will benefit from improved capacity in acquiring raw materials, storage facilities and 
transport. The organization will be able to work with smallholder farmers in SACP target areas 
improving productivity and promoting linkages to markets for small grains, poultry and goats. 
Enterprise 2: 
Buntu Foods 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Location and areas of operation:  
Matabeleland, Midlands, Mashonaland West 
and Harare (prospects for Manicaland and 
Masvingo) 
Commodities of Focus: Sorghum Meal, Millet 
Meal, Mhunga and Poultry Mix stock feeds 
Description of enterprise: 
Traditional grain milling company products sorghum and millet meals and also stock feeds. Bantu 
procures small grains from smallholder farmers and value adds before supplying the Top Supply 
Chain. The major market is supermarkets and restaurants. Current through put is estimated 
around 90,000 tons for millet and slightly more for sorghum.  
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
502 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Bantu Foods provides a potential market for small grains smallholder farmers. It can also provide 
employment opportunities for women and youths. It requires capacity enhancement in storage 
facilities, processing equipment and transport logistics. 
88 
Enterprise 3: 
Bloombest Investments (Pvt) Ltd 
Location and areas of operation: 
Murambinda, Buhera District 
Commodities of Focus:  
Goat Farming (Meat Goat) 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
50 
Description of enterprise: 
Bloombest specializes in the production of goats in Murambinda and Buhera districts. Promotes 
consumer acceptance of goat meat in the country. Markets goats and goat meat to various 
customers and aiming for capacity to market goat meat at national level and promoting consumer 
acceptance of goat meat in the country. The local market comprises of Villagers, church 
gatherings, traditional ceremonies, butcheries. Current quantity of goats is 50 and has a potential 
to market 500 goats per year. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Bloombest can work as an integrator assisting smallholder farmers with breeds, handling facilities, 
technical support and access to markets  
Enterprise 4: 
Brandhold Investments 
Location and areas of operation: 
Harare 
Commodities of Focus:  
Small Grain Mealie – meal 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Not defined 
Description of enterprise: 
Brandhold Investments buys small grain then processes the grain into mealie-meal. Markets 
include selling to selling to individuals and open vegetable markets and in a few online delivery 
stores. Current Production volume of fast-moving line which is zviyo, is about 100 – 150kgs and 
about 30kgs mupunga per month. The rest (mhunga, mapfunde) is mostly about 10 – 20kgs as per 
demand. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
This micro-enterprise has potential to provide support to farmers and a market for small grains. It 
can be supported to have threshing machines and grading equipment to support harvesting, 
processing and marketing locally and export zones. 
89 
Enterprise 5: 
Fresh Energy Enterprises P/L 
Location and areas of operation: 
 57 Fife Ave, Harare, Zimbabwe 
Commodities of Focus:  
Solar Supplies & Installation 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Not defined 
Description of enterprise: 
Fresh Energy provides alternative energy to the scarce electrical energy by providing green energy 
solutions for both companies and individuals. Markets include including schools, commercial 
buildings and the agricultural sector.  
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Can supply green energy solutions to smallholder farmers in the form of solar pumps, battery 
banks, solar panels and lighting technologies. 
Enterprise 6: 
Gayarite Limited 
Location and areas of operation: 
6523 Westlea Industrial Area, Warren Park 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Commodities of Focus:  
Large and Small Grains Processing 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
1000 
Description of enterprise: 
Gayarite Limited focuses mainly in providing the solution tom the mealie meal shortages and 
affordability all through grinding large and small grains. The current volume is at 25% of capacity 
due to unavailability of grain and competition in the market but has a capacity to process one ton 
of grain a day. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Provide a market for maize and small grain for smallholder farmers. Can also supply livestock 
feeds and process mealie meal for households for consumption. 
90 
Enterprise 7: 
Greens Agriculture Con 
Location and areas of operation 
 Glendale 
Commodities of Focus: Sweet potato vines, 
tubers, flour, garlic seed and bulbs 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
200 targeting 400 
Description of enterprise: 
Greens Agriculture Con works with smallholder farmers to improve their livelihoods through 
promotion of sweet potato value chain system. The business embraces the cultivation of clean 
planting. Its major task is to multiply the planting material and availing the vines to smallholder 
farmers in most parts of the country. Current local markets include Mbare and export market is 
Tanzania. Annually, Greens Agriculture Con multiplies and sells between 250,000-300,000 sweet 
potato vines to small holder farmers. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
The company can work in target areas promoting root tubers as a measure to enhance food 
security. This is necessary especially in region 4 and 5. 
Enterprise 8: 
Galaway Trading t/a Homemade Peanut Butter  
Location and areas of operation:  
Bluff hill Harare 
Commodities of Focus:  
Peanut butter and snacks 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
No direct link 
Description of enterprise: 
Homemade Peanut Butter a subsidiary of Galaway Trading engages in manufacturing and 
distribution of peanut butter. The local market comprises of Bluffhill and surrounding 
communities. Current market production is averaging 500 (330mls) bottles a month and supplies 
of an average of about 20* 1liter bottles as per clients’ order. Groundnuts are mainly procured 
from Mbare musika. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
The business can be linked to smallholder producers in Mash East to buy directly from farmers 
bulking points to reduce levels of aggregation. With equipment support the business has potential 
to grow into a major enterprise. 
91 
Enterprise 9: 
 Hutano Foods (Pvt Ltd) 
Location and areas of operation: 48 Harvey 
Brown Ave, Harare, Zimbabwe 
Commodities of Focus: Small grains (e.g., white 
sorghum), local legumes (e.g., bambara nut), 
baobab 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
300 
Description of enterprise: 
Hutano Foods adds value to underutilized, drought resistant traditional crops and plants. It has 
two primary channels snacks and breakfast cereals and instant porridge. Current volumes are 16 
tons of porridge, white sorghum, Bambara nuts/nyimo beans, ground nuts and baobab powder in 
excess of 30 tons. Local markets include several supermarkets and schools. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
The organization can provide extension services for the under-utilized species and a market for 
small grains. With support in machinery and warehousing there is potential for the enterprise to 
grow its distributor channel and create a market for farmers. 
Enterprise 10: 
J Vicks Farm Produce 
Location and areas of operation: 
 Middle Sabi 
Commodities of Focus: fruit plantations, 
horticulture, livestock and fisheries 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
400 
Description of enterprise: 
J Vicks Farm Produce monitors and ensures good agronomic practices are being carried out on the 
ground so as to meet exportable quality. Also draws up programs, develop production guidelines, 
monitor and evaluate field progress during the production processes. Local markets consist of 
fresh markets and non-fresh markers in major towns and cities and regional markets in South 
Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Kenya, Tanzania lastly, International markets UK, Dubai, China, 
Netherlands, Germany. Current volumes are pegged as per annum as follows bananas (72000 
tons), citrus (900 tons), mangoes (500 tons) soya beans (1100 tons), sugar beans (400 tons), maize 
(1250 tons) and wheat (0 tons). 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Provides a technical skill base for consolidated production by smallholder farmers and access to 
domestic and international markets. Requires support with latest technology in agricultural 
equipment to enhance productivity and processing of export quality. 
92 
Enterprise 11: 
Kitchen Food Manufacturers (Pvt) Ltd 
Location and areas of operation: 
 Cranebone, 10 Kimpton Close 
Commodities of Focus:  
Culinary Herbs Spices, Condiments & Dry 
Vegetables.  
Description of enterprise: 
Kitchen Food Manufacturers (Pvt) Ltd focuses on manufacturing, processing and packaging of 
culinary (herbs and spices) products. Current volumes are between 1500kgs to 2000kgs of about 
2000 smallholders’ households.  
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
2000 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Supported with working capital, it can be an essential link with smallholder producers in 
horticulture providing a market and technical support to farmers to produce the market required 
standard products. 
Enterprise 12: 
Makonde Nutrition 
Location and areas of operation: 
 Harare 
Commodities of Focus: Maize, soya beans, pearl 
millet and sorghum 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Not defined 
Description of enterprise: 
Makonde Nutrition is a manufacturer and distributor of cereal and staple based food products. 
The local market composes of Non-Governmental Organizations, commercial and retail 
businesses. Current volumes are estimated 10000 tons. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Provides a huge market for farmers as it has a broad market with NGOs and other Top Supply 
Chain. It requires support in automated machines for processing and bagging to improve efficient 
and working capital to procure through-put. 
93 
Enterprise 13: 
Masvingo Food Commodities Co-operative 
Company 
Location and areas of operation: 
 Masvingo 
Commodities of Focus:  
Sugar beans, groundnuts, butternut, onion, 
millet, sorghum, maize   
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers: 
310 
Description of enterprise:  
Masvingo Food Commodities is a socio- economic enterprise that promotes production of 
commodities and provide sustainable markets in smallholder farming systems. Markets include  
Peak Trading, Zapalala Trading, National Tested Seeds, Prime Seedco, National Foods (potential), 
Netherlands (potential). Current volumes of (i) 50hectares of seed sugar beans, 40 hectares 
commodity sugar beans and 51 hectares of seed maize and 5 hectares of onion, (ii) 14tonnes of 
seed and 200bags of fertilizers, and (iii) number of smallholder supplier households: 
310households). 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Is a key partner for production and marketing of legumes, pulses and horticultural products. 
Requires support in grading, processing and warehousing equipment to improve efficient. 
Enterprise 14: 
Nyangani Farm Produce 
Location and areas of operation: 
 Nyanga Tombo 2 
Commodities of Focus:  
Horticulture 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Description of enterprise 
 Small scale farming entity, growing chilies, garlic, beans and fish. Markets include Schools, Hotels, 
Supermarkets and Restaurants and with potential to export to European countries. Current 
volumes are Chilies 2 Tons per Hectare Beans 15 Tons per Hectare and Garlic 3 Tons per Hectare. 
Intends to expand to out grower program if provided resources. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Can provide out grower support to SECP smallholders farmers in horticulture.  
94 
Enterprise 15: 
PRIMUS ENERGY 
Location and areas of operation: 
 HARARE 
Commodities of Focus:  
ENERGY 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Presently working with large scale farmers 
Description of enterprise: 
Primus Energy supply renewable solar energy equipment, install and service high voltage power 
generators from 5.5kVa up to 1000kVa units. Markets are commercial farms and smallholder 
horticulture schemes. Current output volumes include service of more than 30 households in a 
month and 15 commercial farms. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Primus can provide energy solutions to agribusinesses in SECP and also provide alternative green 
energy solutions to smallholder farmers who may not afford the large generator plants. 
Enterprise 16: 
Sandringham Feeds 
Location and areas of operation: 
 Mazowe 
Commodities of Focus:  
Stock Feeds 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Not quantified as yet 
Description of enterprise: 
Sandringham Feeds is involved in the production of stock feeds to include poultry, cattle, pig and 
fish feeds. Existing markets are in Harare for the feeds. Current volumes are very low due to 
droughts standing at 2000 tons. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Provides a guaranteed market for smallholder producers in cereal and legume production. Also, 
can provide low cost feed to livestock producers in SACP areas. 
95 
Enterprise 17: 
Shek-Shalom Agribusiness 
Location and areas of operation: 4 Market 
Street, Eastlea, Harare, 
Commodities of Focus:  
Poultry supplies (breeds, feeds and equipment) 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Not quantified as yet 
Description of enterprise: 
Shek-Shalom Agribusiness supply chicks and poultry equipment from reputable suppliers. There 
are no current markets and volumes as it is in 3 the introduction and growth stages. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Supplier to smallholder farmers of improved poultry breeds, vaccines, feeds and equipment  
Enterprise 18: 
SIMTON-SG ZIMBABWEPvt Ltd 
Location and areas of operation:  
Chegutu 
Commodities of Focus:  
Poultry 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Micro  
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Not quantified as yet 
Description of enterprise: 
SIMTON-SG procure day old chicks from reputable suppliers, purchase stock feed and vaccines. 
Markets include small traders and some small scale to medium size traders. Current volumes are 
7500 -10000 chickens after every 8 weeks, use about 300 haybales, charcoal, stock feeds and 
employ directly 4 employees. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Can be an integrator for poultry providing breeds, handling and bulking facilities for poultry 
produce from smallholder farmers. 
96 
Enterprise 19: 
Threefold Investment 
Location and areas of operation: 103 Mugabe 
Way. Bulawayo 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Commodities of Focus: Cow peas, Ground nuts, 
Nyimo beans, Sesame and Amaranth 
Number of linked smallholder farmers: 
302 
Description of enterprise: 
Threefold Investment is a commodity broker specializing in legumes, cowpeas, sesame and 
amaranth. It has local markets in in Fortwell, Greens, Spars and Choppies supermarkets. Current 
volumes are 1245MT, 1400MT, and 302 smallholder farmers. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Provides a market to smallholder farmers for Sesame, legumes, pulses and amaranth. 
Enterprise 20: 
Tocek Investments (Pvt) Ltd T/A Zadzamatura 
Location and areas of operation: 
Plot K, Oservatory Farm, Mt Hampden, Harare 
Commodities of Focus: Maize, small grains and 
pulses seed and hybrid production 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
2050 (legumes 600, pulses 400, sorghum 800, 
Sesame250) 
Description of enterprise: 
Zadzamatura’s drive is on food security and also development and empowering of the smallholder 
farmers. The main market is a farmer as it is a seed producing organization. Current output 
volumes are: Maize 3500MT, Soya Beans 600MT, Sorghum 1000MT, Groundnuts 200MT, Sugar 
Beans   500MT and Sesame 100MT. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Zadzamatura buys back 100% seed produced by farmers and also provides an essential market for 
cereal and sesame produce from farmers. 
97 
Enterprise 21: 
Veterinarians for Livelihood Development Trust 
Location and areas of operation:  
Harare, Zimbabwe 
Commodities of Focus: Veterinary and Rural 
Livelihoods support 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Description of enterprise:  
Veterinarians for Livelihood Development Trust is a non- profit-making organisation. Major focus 
is on professional animal health care, veterinary public health, enhanced sustainable livelihoods 
and self-reliance. Local markets include with Plan International in Manicaland Province, 
Zimbabwe, supporting their poultry and Masvingo Chicks offering trainings and extension support 
to smallholder farmers across Zimbabwe. Current volumes comprise of training over a thousand 
farmers and offering extension animal health support. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Training and extension services to smallholder farmers on animal health 
Enterprise 22: 
Zimbabwe Super Seeds 
Location and areas of operation: Masvingo, and 
Manicaland 
Type of Enterprise (Lead / Micro) 
Lead 
Number of linked smallholder farmers 
Commodities of Focus:  
Seed crops: Maize, sugar beans, cowpeas pearl 
millet and sorghum 
Description of enterprise: 
Zimbabwe Super Seeds Cooperative Company is smallholder farmers owned business. The 
company buys back all the seed produced by the farmers, process and pack it. The seed is 
distributed nationally and where markets are available regionally. For instance, Farm and City, 
Omnia, Major Family supplies and other small agro-dealers. Current volume of 800 Mt of seed 
mainly dominated by maize and sugar beans. The two crops account for 80% of the company 
production, while sorghum, groundnuts and cowpeas make the 20% of production. 
Potential area of linkage with SACP: 
Can provide OPV bio-fortified seed for cereal and legumes to smallholder farmers. Can 
contractors out growers for the same in SACP districts. 
98 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: COMPONENT 2: CLIMATE 
PROOFED VALUE CHAIN INFRASTRUCTURE 
Component 2: Detailed Sub-component and Activity Descriptions    
The  objective  of  Component  2  is  to  improve  irrigation  water  supply  and  management, 
domestic water supply, and local level feeder roads, to facilitate the commercialisation of 
smallholder  agriculture.  The  implementation  of  activities  under  this  component  will 
encourage  private  sector  investments  in  SACP  areas,  promote  the  production  and 
marketing of large quantities of quality produce and reduce the time and cost of transport 
to the markets. The component will invest in public and semi-public infrastructure. Value 
chain  infrastructure  of  a  strictly  private  nature  will  be  financed  under  Component  1. 
Component  2  will  apply  IFAD’s  Social  Environment  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures 
(SECAP).  The  compliance  to  the  SECAP  is  elaborated  following  the  detail  of  the  sub-
components, implementation arrangements and work flow.  
The  component  will  reduce  (a)  transaction  costs  of  inputs  and  outputs,  (b)  increase 
farmers'  incomes,  particularly  through  improved  market  access  and  (c)  enhance 
productivity. The successful implementation of Component 2 will, in many SACP clusters, 
be  a  key  prerequisite  in  reaching  SACP’s  productivity,  production,  and  eventually, 
household income, targets. 
The  expected  results  of  this  component  include:  (i)  prioritised  ward  level  community 
infrastructure  investments,  developed  through  participatory  stakeholder  consultations; 
and  (ii)  about  1800ha  equipped  with  improved  irrigation  systems;  (iii)  150km  of  roads 
rehabilitated  and  climate  proofed;  (iv)  100  wards  with  improved  water  supply  and 
sanitation facilities.  
The component consists of two sub-components: Sub-component 2.1: Participatory ward 
level  infrastructure  investment  planning,  and  Sub-component  2.2:  Climate  proofed 
infrastructure investments.  
Sub-component 2.1: Participatory ward level infrastructure investment planning 
The  SACP-supported  cluster  infrastructure  investments  will  be  identified  through 
participatory  planning  process  involving  both  women  and  men  beneficiaries.  The  final 
products of the planning process will be the identification of priority irrigation, roads and 
water  supply  investments  in  each  ward.  The  steps  in  the  planning  process  include:  (i) 
socio-economic data collection, (ii) ward and village meetings to prioritize activities and 
investments, and (iii) costing and feasibility assessments for priority investments to assess 
impact  and  investments  amounts;  and  (iv)  meetings  to  finalise  the  selection  of 
investments. 
The criteria for selection of appropriate investments under the components will be based 
on  (i)  linkage  with  selected  value  chains  and  production  clusters,  (ii)  the  climate 
vulnerability assessment maps, (iii) severity of deterioration of the infrastructure service 
required,  (iv)  the  environmental,  social  and  technical  requirements  of  particular 
intervention (e.g. availability of reliable water sources for agriculture, no land conflicts, no 
over abstraction of resources); (v) potential to increase resilience to climate change and 
reduce  environmental  degradation,  (vi)  the  identification  of  the  interventions  as  a  key 
priority  by  the  community  members,  particularly  for  women  and  youth;  and  (vii) 
investment cost within project budgets.  
99 
Sub-component 2.2: Climate proofed infrastructure investments  
The sub-component will support: (i) small-scale irrigation development investments, (ii) 
feeder road rehabilitation, and (iii) community water supply schemes based on gravity or 
solar power from protected wells/boreholes and springs.  
Small-scale irrigation Schemes  
The  objective  of  this  intervention  is  to  increase  agriculture  production  through  the 
rehabilitation and improvement of small-scale irrigation infrastructures for selected value 
chains.  Considering  selected  value  chains  from  Component  1,  irrigation  schemes  to  be 
rehabilitated will be selected through a communities-based prioritisation process explained 
above. The expected output will be improved irrigation for about 6,300 persons. Activities 
under this subcomponent may include the following features:  
  Use of existing dams for developing new irrigation land and modernizing irrigation 
systems at the farm level, will be priority investments. The irrigation systems will 
support crop production during the midseason drought and allow for production the 
dry season.  
  The  unreliable  rainfall  experienced  in  Zimbabwe  calls  for  a  need  to  modernise 
existing small-scale irrigation systems to improve irrigation efficiencies and water 
availability  during the  crop  season.  Emphasis  will  be  given  to  the introduction  of 
water savings irrigation systems such as drip and centre pivot sprinklers, and pipe 
conveyance systems. The selection and design of each irrigation system will be site 
specific.  The  DoI  engineer  will  carry  out  the  technical  feasibility  assessments, 
identify  and  design  suitable  system.  Solar  pumps  will  be  considered  as  the  main 
option to provide power requirement for irrigation systems. 
  The  rehabilitation  and  improvement  of  existing  irrigation  shallow  wells  and 
boreholes  can  be  undertaken  to  provide  supplementary  irrigation  during  the 
droughts  and  dry  season.  There  will  be  no  new  drilling  and  installation  of  wells 
unless geophysical survey and water potential investigation is carried out to confirm 
safe  groundwater  abstraction  rates  level,  in  line  with  SECAP  guidelines.  Solar 
pumps will be considered as an option to provide power requirement for irrigation 
wells,  as  well  as  use  of  modern  irrigation  technologies  to  improve  irrigation 
efficiency.  
Selection of irrigation schemes will be competitive, following an expression of interest and 
call of proposals by the project. An initial call for proposals will shortlist potential irrigation 
schemes  to  be  assisted  using  the  following  criteria:  (i)  reliable  water  source;  (ii) 
demonstrated link to a market for intended produce.  Possible link with Lead Enterprises 
and SMEs supported under Component 1 will be desirable; (iii) the investment encourages 
youth  participation;  (iv)  the  investment  benefits  women  farmers;  (iv)  potential  for 
increasing household income sustainably; and (v) agreement to contribute at least 15% 
of  costs  in  cash.  The  shortlisted  schemes,  new  or  for  modernising,  will  be  assisted  to 
undertake feasibility studies to be submitted for final selection. The feasibility will confirm 
the criteria indicated above and detail how each criterion will be met. The APG involved in 
the  irrigation  scheme  will  associate  with  a  lead  enterprise  or  indicate  a  confirmed 
marketing arrangement to submit a proposal. 
Irrigation schemes will typically have less than 50 participating farmers, with an average 
2 ha per farmer. The typical average size of irrigation schemes will be less than 100 ha. A 
total area of around 1,800 ha will be developed under this intervention. 
100 
Feeder road rehabilitation 
Climate  smart  feeder  road  rehabilitation.  The  objective  of  this  intervention  is  to 
provide  improved  and  reliable  access  to  markets  and  services  as  well  as  incorporating 
water  harvesting  into  road  drainage  structures  (for  livestock  drinking  water  and  small 
gardens, wherever feasible), based on identified need by the communities and interested 
private  sector  parties.  An  integrated  approach  to  support  rehabilitation  of  selected  last 
mile feeder  roads  will  combine  the following  options  of: (i)  road  should  be linked  to  an 
area producing a selected value chain; (ii) climate resilient design and construction with 
improved  surfaces  and  erosion  protection  works;  and  (iii)  utilizing  road  surface  as 
catchment areas to catch surface runoff for livestock drinking water and irrigation. 
There are no ready examples of road water harvesting in Zimbabwe, hence this can be an 
innovation that can be tried, especially in the Natural Region V, where there is low rainfall. 
Recharge  or  storage  using  borrow  pits,  percolation  systems  such  as  deep  trenches  and 
percolation ponds meant to increase ground water recharge, side-drain drainage used for 
irrigation, sand mining pits, road-side earth ponds are some of the techniques that can be 
tried in the country and have been successful in other countries. Several techniques are 
available to optimise the use of roads for water harvesting, such as: water harvesting from 
cross drains and side drains; water harvesting from road surfaces; use of borrow pits and 
quarries  for  storage  or  recharge;  erosion  protections  from  road  drainage  water;  use  of 
roads as flood control mechanisms; and use of the road body as retention dykes/dams or 
small retention ponds. 
Developing road water harvesting and ponds for livestock drinking and agricultural use will 
help  improve  on  livelihoods  in  rural  communities  and  help  address  the  water  shortage 
problems in dry regions.  The ward leaders and community members, in collaboration with 
DDF and DoI engineers, will play an active role in assessing the road conditions for selected 
wards to identify road to repair and maintenance and identify the technique(s) to utilize 
the road surface as a water harvesting means. The project will facilitate the training of DoI 
and DDF engineers in road water harvesting. 
A  total  of  150km  of feeder  roads  will  be  developed  under  this  intervention.  The  priority 
feeder roads will be selected by the community, APGs and participating enterprises. It is 
anticipated that the feeder roads will have an average length of less than 5km. 
Community water supply  
The  design  of  the  water  supply  systems  will  consider  the  number  of  beneficiaries  and 
potential yield of the source. For this purpose, the project will recruit a short-term national 
water  engineer  consultant  for  identification  and  design  of  the  water  schemes  in 
consultation with beneficiaries. 
Individual  household  water  supply  from  rooftop  water  harvesting.  The  primary 
objective is  to increase  household  water  availability for  domestic  and  gardening  use for 
the  households  in  the  dry  season.  This  technology  will  be  an  option  for  selection  by 
communities  in  all  areas  with  households  having  houses  suitable  for  water  harvesting, 
particularly in Matebeleland North wards, where rainfall is below 600mm/year. The water 
harvested can be stored in an underground tank within the household yard. Rooftop water 
harvesting is an adaptive measure to the impact of climate change on water scarcity. 
101 
The  selection  of  household  for  rooftop  and/or  open  catchment  water  harvesting  should 
meet  the  following  criteria:  (i)  adequate  average  annual  average  rainfall  for  intended 
purpose of water harvesting; (ii) household meets the poverty criteria for the project; and 
(iii) the households invest in roofing suitable for water harvesting and invests in digging 
pond/taking. The cistern can be used for domestic use and gardening irrigation, depending 
on size.  Appropriate water treatment will be needed before using the collected water for 
drinking  and  other  domestic  uses.  The  requirements  for  water  harvesting  will  be 
determined  during  design  but  may  include  covering  existing  mud  roof  with  layer  of 
concrete, water collection pipes and cisterns. 
Communal  multi-purpose  water  schemes.  Villages  level  water  supply  systems  for 
providing multi-purpose water for a community of about 150 households can be considered 
for investment under the project. Water storage capacity will consider multipurpose uses 
by the community (for human (50l/person/day), livestock (5-50litres/day/unit depending 
on the type of livestock), and a determined volume for small nutrition gardens.  
Existing  village  water  supply  projects  based  on  shallow/boreholes  and  spring  water 
delivery  systems  may  also  rehabilitated  or  built.  The  village  water  supply  projects  are 
generally a borehole with a hand pump. These systems may be converted to be equipped 
with solar electric pumping units, elevated water tanks and water distribution network, as 
necessary  and  depending  on  the  management  and  operation  arrangements  and  cost  of 
water. The installation of solar energy units, particularly to replace diesel pumping, will be 
a key investment area.  
The sustainability of these water systems depends on 3 pillars: the water source, the cost 
of water and the management arrangements. Technical studies shall be done to ensure a 
reliable water source for the planned water demand is available. Use of solar electricity for 
pumping  and  potential  use  of  pre-paid  cards  can  help  in  making  the  water  affordable. 
Appropriate  management  arrangements  for  the  system  are  vital  to  maintain  enough 
revenues  to  cover  the  operation  and  maintenance  expenses.  Trust  on  the  management 
shall  be  maintained  through transparency in  accounting  and  opening  books  to  a  village 
elected committee. The project will discuss with the community the options of RDC, DDF 
or ZINWA to manage the water supply systems on behalf of farmers, whenever feasible. 
A handover certificate to the selected management entity will be signed at completion of 
construction activities. 
It  is  anticipated  that  about  100  wards  will  be  assisted  to  have  improved  domestic 
multipurpose water supply. 
Detailed Implementation Arrangements and Workflow by Activity 
This  component  will  be  implemented  by  an  interdepartmental  team  comprising  of 
Department of Agritex, DoI, DDF and RDCs, with their widespread country presence and 
experience in similar activities in other projects over many years of operation in Zimbabwe. 
The  interventions  under  this  component  will  be  determined  by  communities  following  a 
community mobilisation and planning process and consideration of the technical feasibility 
and development costs.  
The activities under the Component 2 will be carried out in coordination with the activities 
of Component 1 and will follow the sequence described in Table 2. 
102 
Table 2: Detailed of the community dialogues for climate resilient community 
infrastructure 
Diagnostic 
Process 
Location  
Participants  
Purpose 
Next Task 
Project staff analyse 
long list and prepare 
shortlist based on 
agreed criteria, and 
prepare 
requirements for for 
further studies.  
Brief community of 
shortlit criteria and 
process for 
endorsement.  
Undertake feasibility 
studies for selected 
priority investments 
in infrastructure – 
irrigation, feeder 
roads and water 
supply and 
sanitation. 
To agree on the 
Terms of partnership 
in the various 
activities and fix 
community 
contribution and 
responsibility. 
For irrigation 
development, at 
least 15% cash 
contribution 
mandatory 
For roads and water 
supply, RDC 
commits to 
contributing 15% of 
costs. 
Exploratory 
Visit 
Ward level 
Ward level 
First Dialogue: 
Introduction 
and 
Dissemination  
Ward leaders 
(councillor, village 
head), including 
meetings with 
leaders of women 
and youth groups. 
Agritex, DoI, DoM, 
RDC, DDF, APGs, 
agriculture SMEs 
and lead 
enterprises 
At least 50% of the 
HHs from the Ward 
Unit. 
Ward leaders, 
Agritex, DoI, DoM, 
RDC, DDF, APGs, 
Agri-SMEs amd 
lead enterprises 
A separate session 
with women and 
youth groups as 
necessary. 
Inform them about the 
project and get long list 
of possible locations for 
community infrastructure 
needs in following areas: 
irrigation, feeder roads 
and water supply and 
sanitation. 
Communicate selection 
criteria and targets for 
inclusion of women and 
youth. 
Inform the participants 
about project activities  
Discuss and agree 
shortlist priorities for 
interventions for the 
community 
Select a lead person from 
the community to take 
responsibility for each 
prioritised intervention 
Series of 
Dialogues: 
Technical 
Feasibility and 
implementatio
n plans. 
Intervention 
locations; 
Ward level  
District and 
Provincial 
government 
offices.  
Lead persons and 
households 
selected for specific 
activities. 
Determine the key 
stakeholders for each 
intervention and get buy-
in.  
Ward leaders 
APGs, Agri-SMEs 
Identify beneficiary 
households for each 
selected intervention.  
Feasibility 
assessments 
Infrastructure 
sites 
Prepare implementation 
plan with activity timing, 
and location.  
Assess technical 
feasibility, costs and cost 
effectiveness and finalise 
intervention selection 
Agritex, DoI, DoM, 
RDC, DDF 
A separate session 
with women and 
youth groups as 
necessary 
APGs, Agri-SMEs 
Agritex, DoI, DoM, 
RDC, DDF 
A separate session 
with women and 
youth groups as 
necessary 
Consulting 
companies 
Irrigation, 
water supply 
Infrastructure 
sites 
APG in  production;  PMU issues call for 
proposals 
103 
and roads 
selection  
Signing of the 
terms of 
partnership 
with 
participants 
and begin 
sub-
component 
activities.   
Agreed 
location of 
community 
interventions, 
and recipient 
household 
sites. 
Fourth and 
Final 
Dialogue: 
Beneficiary 
Feedback and 
Assessment 
Ward unit 
Private sector lead 
enterprises 
Agritex, DoI, DoM, 
RDC, 
APGs, in association with 
lead enterprises, as 
necessary, submit 
proposals including works 
specifications and BoQs. 
Provincial 
interdepartmental team 
evaluates proposals and 
awards grant 
Project affected 
people, beneficiary 
households, 
contractors (if 
needed)  
Implementation of 
activities in 
implementation plan and 
terms of partnership 
agreement. 
Participate in 
implementation of 
activities, monitoring 
and handover. 
Signed partnership 
agreements with 
APGs, RDC and Lead 
enterprise, as 
necessary. 
To assess project 
performance and obtain 
beneficiary feedback 
To incorporate the 
findings in next 
round of 
implementation. 
and  
Ward leaders, 
Agritex, DoI, DoM, 
RDC, DDF, 
depending on 
intervention type. 
Beneficiaries, 
participants and 
Lead persons  
Ward leaders, 
Agritex, DoI, DoM, 
RDC, DDF, 
depending on 
intervention type 
Agritex will be the main implementing partner for this component. Agritex will work with 
an interdepartmental team made up of Agritex, DoI, DDF and RDC to identify and screen 
eligible  beneficiaries  and  interventions,  prepare  studies  and  designs  and  monitor 
implementation in  each ward  following the  process  outlined  above for  the  selection  and 
implementation  of  community  investments.  The  team  will  be  assisted  by  technical 
assistance recruited at each provincial PMU and at NPMU. 
The  Agritex,  RDC  and  DDF  district  staff  will  lead  the  implementation  of  the  community 
consultation activities and Agritex, DoI and DoM at provincial level will participate, monitor 
and follow up implementation. Specific interventions in each ward will be identified through 
community dialogues led by the RDC and Agritex, with participation of all members of the 
inter-departmental  team.  The  interdepartmental  team  (DoI,  DDF,  RDC  and  Agritex),  in 
consultation  with  beneficiary  households  and  community-based  organizations  and  with 
local consultants, will assess the feasibility of selected prioritized proposals and select for 
implementation. The selection process will be simple and transparent. 
The technical feasibility studies will be undertaken by the Department with the necessary 
competence for the selected activity. The DoI will undertake irrigation feasibility studies, 
and DDF will undertake the feasibility assessment for roads and water supply systems. 
104 
SECAP compliance for SACP financed infrastructure development  
Rehabilitation of irrigation schemes requires an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)42 
to be developed. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is required based on the 
scope of works particularly where expansion is envisaged. Rural roads do not have 
specific EIA requirements though they can be included in the assessments for irrigation 
scheme development and agro-industries. The following steps will be followed.  
a)  screening of infrastructure sub-projects, as a result a prospectus will be 
produced; 
b)  submission of prospectus for Environment Management Agency (EMA) review;  
c)  desk review by EMA with feedback provided within 30 days;  
d)  ground truthing by EMA;   
e)  development of Environmental Management Plan if required. 
Sample Terms of Reference (ToR) for EIA Preparation  
Based on the screening and scoping results the ToR   will   have   the   following   
contents.    
I. Objective of the ToR: This section should state the scope of the EIA in relation to the 
screening category and the proposed program activities. It needs to stipulate the process 
and the timing of the EMP preparation and implementation stages in order to adequately 
address the safeguards requirements of the GoZ and IFAD. 
II. Introduction and Context: The ToR needs to provide information on project activity 
objective, the name of the project activity proponent, the rational for the EIA, specific 
components of the project activity, project activity area with location map, short briefing 
of social and environment of settings and applicable safeguard policies. 
III. Location of the study area and likely major impacts: State the area involved and the 
boundaries of the study area for the assessment. Identify adjacent or remote areas 
which should  be  considered  with  respect  to  impacts  of  particular  aspects  of  the  
program activity. 
IV. Tasks:  The EIA study team/consultant should effectively execute the following tasks. 
Task A:   Description of the proposed program activity:   Describe the location, size and 
nature of the project activity, environmental assessment category, brief description of 
project activity alternatives, time schedule for phasing of development and resources 
required for the program activity, among others. 
Task B: Baseline information/Biophysical and social-economic description: Describe the 
baseline/biophysical and socio-economic characteristics of the environment where the 
project activity will be implemented; and area of influence. Include information on any 
changes anticipated before the project activity commences. 
Task C: Administrative and legal Policy framework: In addition  to  the required 
administrative and institutional setup for the implementation of the program activity, this 
part needs to identify pertinent policies, regulations and guidelines pertinent to the 
study.  
42 To ensure compliance with the SECAP, the social risk analysis and mitigation measures will be included and thus an 
Environment and Social Management Plan developed as detailed in the ToR.  
105 
Task D: Identification of potential impacts of the program activity: Identify all potential 
significant impacts that the project activity is likely to generate. Assess the impacts from 
changes brought about by the project activity on baseline environmental conditions as 
described under Task B. The analysis should address both the positive and negative 
impacts of the activity. Wherever possible, describe impacts quantitatively, in terms of 
environmental and social costs and benefits. 
Task E: Propose project activity alternatives: Alternatives extend to site, design, 
technology selection, construction techniques and phasing, and operating and 
maintenance procedures. Compare alternatives in terms of potential environmental and 
social impacts; capital and operating costs; suitability under local conditions; and 
institutional, training, and monitoring requirements. 
Task F: Preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP): Describe 
the mitigation measures for adverse environmental and social impacts, capacity building 
requirements, schedules, and other necessary support services to implement the 
mitigating measures. Provide environmental and social protection clauses for application 
by contractors and consultants, if any. The ToR should state that the concerned and 
affected parties should agree on the proposed mitigating measures before they are 
included in the ESMP. 
Task G: Monitoring Plan: This organizes a comprehensive plan to monitor the 
implementation of mitigating measures and the impacts of the program activities.  It 
should also address an estimate of capital and operating costs and a description of other 
inputs (such as training and institutional strengthening) needed to implement the plan. 
V. Qualification of the EIA study team/Consultant: The ToR should provide clear 
guidance on the qualification of the EIA study team. 
VI. Duration of the EIA Study: This should be determined according to the type of the 
program activity. 
106 
Appendix 3 – Screening Checklists and Procedures 
Below is the list of the IFC exclusion list applicable to SACP: 
Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws or regulations 
or international conventions and agreements.  
Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding beer and wine).  
Production or trade in tobacco43.  
Trade in wildlife or wildlife products regulated under CITES44. 
Purchase of logging equipment for use in primary tropical moist forest.  
Production or trade in pesticides/herbicides subject to international phase outs or bans. 
Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labour /harmful child 
labour45 
This section outlines the selection criteria and associated Environmental and Social risk assessment 
to be applied when screening infrastructure activities financed by SACP. 
Annex 3.1 Information for screening potential environmental and social impacts 
I. Basic Data: 
Name of the Project: 
Name of the proposed project activity: 
Name of the Beneficiary: 
Address: 
Civil Works to be constructed: 
Proposed Date for Commencement of Work: 
Site Selection: 
Description 
II. Site Description 
Site Features 
Size of infrastructure to be developed  
Physical description of the site 
Proximity to existing water points, wells and other 
water resources 
Presence and type of vegetation 
What is the current land use? 
Who identified the site? 
Who is the owner or user of the land? 
Who occupies the land? 
Completeness of the Application: 
Does the application document contain, as appropriate, the following information? 
Issues to be considered 
Description of the proposed  project activity and where it is located 
Reasons for proposing the project activity 
The estimated cost of implementation  
Information about how the site was chosen, and what alternatives were considered 
Yes  No 
N/A 
43 This does not apply to project sponsors who are not substantially involved in these activities. "Not substantially 
involved" means that the activity concerned is ancillary to a project sponsor's primary operations. 
44 CITES: Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. A list of CITES listed 
species is available from the Environment Division. 
45 Forced labor means all work or service, not voluntarily performed, that is extracted from an individual under threat of 
force or penalty. Harmful child labor means the employment of children that is economically exploitive, or is likely to be 
hazardous to, or to interfere with, the child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health, or physical, mental, 
spiritual, moral, or social development. 
107 
Yes  No 
N/A 
Issues to be considered 
A map or drawing showing the location and boundary of the proposed project activity 
including any land required temporarily during construction 
Any new access arrangements or changes to existing road layouts 
Any land that needs to be acquired, as well as who owns it, lives on it or has rights to use it 
A work program for construction, operation and decommissioning the physical works, as well 
as any site restoration needed afterwards 
Construction methods 
Resources to be used in construction and operation (e.g. materials, water, energy) 
Information about measures included in the proposed project activity plan to avoid or 
minimize adverse environmental and social impacts 
Details of any permits required for the proposed project activity 
Annex 3.2. Checklist for environmental and social impact rating for Proposed project activities of 
environmental and social concerns.  
Impact rating will be considered both in terms of consequence of impacts and probability of impacts 
so as to avoid subjective impact analysis.  
No.  Will the proposed project activity: 
A 
If Yes, Rate of Impacts 
None 
Low  Medium  High 
Unknown 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Build or rehabilitate any rural roads (SACP can only 
finance Category B roads i.e. max. 10 kilometers 
continuous stretch)? 
Build or rehabilitate any irrigation schemes (SACP can only 
finance Category B schemes i.e. max 100 ha)? 
Build or rehabilitate any structures or buildings? 
Be located in or near an area where there is an important 
historical, archaeological or cultural heritage site? 
Be located within or adjacent to any areas that are or may 
be protected by government (e.g. national park, national 
reserve, world heritage site) or local tradition, or that 
might be a natural habitat? 
Depend on water supply from existing reservoirs, weir, or 
other water diversion structure? 
Have risk of causing the contamination of drinking water? 
Cause poor water drainage and increase the risk of water-
related diseases such as malaria or bilharzias? 
Be located within or near environmentally sensitive areas 
(e.g. intact natural forests, mangroves, wetlands) or 
threatened species? 
Create a risk of increased soil degradation or erosion? 
Produce, or increase the production of, solid or liquid 
wastes (e.g. water, medical, and domestic or construction 
wastes)? 
Affect the quantity or quality of surface waters (e.g. 
rivers, streams, wetlands), or groundwater (e.g. wells)? 
Result in the production of solid or liquid waste, or result 
in an increase in waste production, during construction or 
operation? 
Require that land (public or private) be acquired 
(temporarily or permanently) for its development? 
101 
15 
16 
17 
18 
Use land that is currently occupied or regularly used for 
productive purposes (e.g. gardening, farming, pasture, 
fishing locations, forests) 
Displace individuals, families or businesses? 
Result in the temporary or permanent loss of crops, fruit 
trees or household infrastructure such as granaries, 
outside toilets and kitchens? 
Result in the involuntary restriction of access by people to 
legally designated parks and protected areas?  
When considering the location of a proposed project activity, rate the sensitivity of the proposed site 
as shown in the table according to the given criteria. Higher ratings do not necessarily mean that a 
site is unsuitable. They do indicate a real risk of causing undesirable adverse environmental and 
social effects, and that more substantial environmental and/or social planning may be required to 
adequately avoid, mitigate or manage potential effects. The following table should be used as a 
reference.  
Summary of assessment (based on screening criteria):  
Environmental Category (B or C) of the proposed project activities(with justification): 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________ 
Recommendation  
 The Proposed project activity can be considered for approval.  The application is complete, all significant 
environmental and social issues are resolved, and no further planning of proposed project activity is required:  
Approved without condition (Project activity is not of environmental and social concern and is ready for approved)       
           Safeguards instrument(s) required: ESMP or others (please specify)   
           ESMP required: 
           Rejected; reasons for rejection: 
           Others (specify):       
           A field appraisal is required. 
102 
Free, Prior and Informed Consent 
Free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) is an operational principle empowering local 
communities to give or withhold their consent to proposed investment and development 
programmes that may affect their rights, access to lands, territories and resources, and 
livelihoods (IFAD, 2015). FPIC is solicited through consultations in good faith with the 
representative institutions endorsed by communities. In the context of the SACP, it will 
ensure that community members, particularly the indigenous and marginalised groups 
participate in decision-making processes for the agricultural productivity and 
infrastructure development activities. 
Consent being sought in a way that is “free, prior and informed” 46 requires the 
following:  
  no coercion, intimidation or manipulation 
 
consent sought sufficiently in advance of any decision point or commencement of 
activities  
information  provided  covers  all  relevant  issues  to  make  decision  maker  fully 
enlightened.  
 
  an  outcome  of  the  consultation,  participation  and  collective  decision-making 
process by the local communities 
General guiding principles 
a)  Responsibility and institutional capacity for seeking FPIC  
The IFAD general policies and procedures, stipulate that the borrower or grant recipient 
is responsible for seeking FPIC. In this case the GoZ through the MLARR, as the lead 
Ministry, will be responsible for seeking FPIC. FPIC will be based on laws that regulate 
the rights to land and resources in Zimbabwe.  
b) 
Identifying representative institutions 
In order to ensure legitimacy, it is crucial that FPIC be obtained from the representative 
institutions of local communities, which for the SACP includes both the APGs and the 
WaDCos. However, the important criteria is that representation should be determined by 
the concerned peoples and communities themselves to avoid misrepresentation or 
manipulation. Therefore, additional community representation can be included in the 
start-up phases of the project.  
c)  Consultation, participation and consent 
SACP will follow a participatory approach for implementation of both Components 1 and 
2 as articulated in the detailed descriptions above, to ensure that local communities are 
included in business plan development and infrastructure prioritisation. SACP processes 
will give appropriate attention to women and young people in these consultations. 
46 United Nations Development Group (UNDG), Guidelines on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues, 2009:30 
103 
As a result of the participatory approach and processes outlined under each component, 
each specific activity will be an outcome of the collective decision-making process by the 
local communities. The Project Management Unit will seek recorded consent agreements 
with the concerned communities through their freely chosen representative bodies to 
engage in the FPIC process. 
The consent agreement and record will document the outcome(s) of the process and 
terms and conditions agreed upon. It will also document any dissent to the overall 
project or project activities. The agreement must be independently verified as fair and 
true by the communities and follow the process agreed by them. 
d)  Documenting consultation, participation and FPIC 
MLARR, through the PMU, will undertake to document all consultations, participations 
and consent in the following manner: 
  Keep record of consultations undertaken how participants were selected and 
invited; what documentation/information they received beforehand and in which 
language; who participated; what was discussed; and what was agreed.  
  Keep record of participation: when did representatives of indigenous and 
marginalised peoples and local communities participate; how they were selected; 
what institutional roles or accountability links to constituents do they have; what 
commitments do they assume; and what agreements were made.  
Document specific instances that express FPIC such as agreements between the MLARR 
and the concerned local communities. These agreements should clearly articulate what 
has been agreed (issues, commitments, time frames, budgets, roles, responsibilities, 
etc.); who entered into the agreement (clearly identifying the individuals involved as well 
as their title and role (or the duly designated implementing agency or entity such as the 
PMU); and what mechanisms have been set up to maintain dialogue and address 
disagreements. 
Since investments in specific communities and areas were not identifiable during the 
SACP design stage, FPIC will further be solicited during the implementation phase. The 
outline for the FPIC plan includes the following steps in the process and include timeline:  
 
 
 
 
Sociocultural and land tenure assessment, which will be part of the standard 
poverty analysis and beneficiary identification process. This will also be part of 
the targeting strategy for the SACP and thus conducted within the first year of 
project implementation.  
Identification of decision-making institutions and representatives to ensure full, 
effective and equal participation of stakeholders. This will be done during the 
start-up phase of the project as part of the stakeholder identification and 
engagement planning.  
Consultation process leading to FPIC. This will be part of the implementation 
process detailed for both component 1 and 2. The consent will be obtained for the 
APG participation and infrastructure prioritisation work flow.  
Formalized consent agreement. These will be obtained prior to any investment 
activities through the business plans, matching grant proposals and infrastructure 
prioritisation list and feasibility assessments.   
104 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: SUB-COMPONENT 3.1: 
SUPPORT TO POLICY AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Objective and Overall Implementation Approach 
The purpose of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to support the efforts to create a conducive 
policy  and  institutional  environment  for  private  sector-led  smallholder  agriculture 
transformation  in  Zimbabwe.  SACP’s  accumulated  experience  and  evidence-based 
recommendations  will  be  documented  by  the  project.  Strategic  partnerships  will  be 
initiated  with key  stakeholders  to  ensure  enabling  conditions for  smallholder  agriculture 
commercialization. Specialists will be recruited to develop relevant knowledge products, 
policy proposals as well as investment opportunity papers and briefs on new, promising 
crops  and  commodities.  Based  on  the  accumulated  knowledge  and  information,  policy 
dialogues and other discussion forums and events will be organised, aiming particularly at 
the  diversification  and 
the  development  of  action-oriented  plans 
commercialisation of smallholder agriculture.  
to  support 
Sub-Component 3.1 Implementation Arrangements 
The nature of each policy and thematic development activity will define the type of support 
that  SACP  support  and  the  appropriate  implementation  modality  required  in  each  case. 
During  the  design  process  it  was  agreed  that  Sub-component  3.1  are  organised  at  two 
inter-related levels.  
Institutional  Support 
for  Policy  Implementation.  SACP  supports 
the 
(a) 
operationalisation of policies and institutional arrangements relevant to smallholder value 
chains. In particular, capacity building and TA will be recruited for the strengthening of the 
Ministry of Agriculture operations in the areas of: (i) implementation of agribusiness one-
stop-shop  approach  for  full  range  of  agriculture  SME  public  support  services,  (ii) 
operationalization  of  the  horticultural  sector  policy,  to  support  this  key  sub-sector  with 
major  opportunities  for  productivity  and  smallholder  income  enhancement;  and  (iii) 
support  the  operationalization  of  the  National  Agriculture  Policy  Framework  2018-2030 
(NAPF)  through  transformative  investment  opportunity  papers  on  new,  innovative 
smallholder-based  commodity  chains  and  subsequent  action  planning  and  capacity 
building based on the analysis and recommendations. 
(b)  Demand Driven Policy Solutions for Smallholder Value Chain Development. 
In  its  initial  year,  SACP  will  identify  gaps  and  demands  in  the  legal  and  institutional 
framework for smallholder value chain development. Subsequently, the project will provide 
resources  to  development  of  appropriate  policy  and  institutional  solutions  to  the  issues 
identified.  Based  on  discussions  held  during  the  design  mission,  the  possible  areas  of 
intervention include: (i) contract farming  best  practices in  enterprise-led,  climate-smart 
value chain development, based on recent experiences in successful sub-sectors including 
smallholder  tobacco,  to  ensure  significantly  wider  use  of  formal  contracts  between 
smallholders  and  VCLEs;  (ii)  establishment  of  appropriate  and  practical  farmer  group 
registration  mechanism  to  enable  smallholders’  full  participation  in  commercial  and 
financial  transactions,  to  ensure  that  registered  groups  can  fully  participate  in  legally 
binding financial and trading contracts; and (iii) nutrition sensitive solutions for the SACP-
supported value chains, including actions/policies to reduce food loss and waste. 
Sub-components 3.1 budgets and intervention types are described in the Cost Tables of 
the SACP PDR. Resources are provided for carrying out surveys and studies, production 
and  publication  of  policy  papers  and  commodity/sub-sector  briefs,  as  well  as  for  the 
facilitation of workshops, forums, study tours and other events that supports the positive 
105 
change  to  take  place  in  the  policy  and  institutional  environment  for  smallholder 
transformation. 
Implementation responsibility for Sub-component 3.1 activities is with the National Project 
Management  Unit  (NPMU)of  SACP,  particularly  with  the  Project  Coordinator  and  the 
Knowledge  Management  and  Communication  Specialist.  Before  the  preparation  of  each 
AWPB,  these  SACP  officers  will  discuss  with  the  Permanent  Secretary  of  MLAWRR  (the 
Responsible Officer for SACP and the Chairman of the PSC) and the relevant directors of 
MLAWRR about the policy and VC development-related themes and topics that would be 
appropriate SACP support the following budget year with Sub-component 3.1 resources. 
After  the  supported  policy  efforts  and  themes  are  selected,  the  SACP  management  will 
design a detailed work plan for this SACP support activity for the following budget year. To 
achieve successful and sustainable results, adequate resources are provided in the SACP 
budget to recruit high quality local and international experts to support the conduct the 
required  studies  and  surveys  and  to  assist  in  the  facilitation  of  the  related  workshops, 
discussion forums, study visits and other policy development events. 
106 
KEY PROJECT PROCEDURES 
A.  PLANNING AND M&E PROCESS AND SACP SURVEYS 
Overall Planning and M&E Approach 
The logframe of SACP (see Annex 1 of PDR), incorporating Core Indicators (CI) relevant 
to the measurement of project output and outcomes in line with Core Indicator framework, 
complemented by Project specific indicators, will be the key guide in the development of 
work plans and budgets for the project. Planning and budgeting will be integrated in the 
GoZ processes and cycles and will be based on Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs). 
These,  together  with  the  logframe’s  quantified  Core  Indicators  (CI)  complemented  by 
Project specific indicators (PSI) and SACP MIS database, will provide the primary basis for 
monitoring  the  SACP  progress.  The  COI  measurement  guidelines  provide  a  rigorous 
methodological  framework  that  to  collect  Core  Outcome  Indicators  (COI)  data  and  thus  measure 
attributable changes in CIs through dedicated surveys. 
SACP  will  develop  a  robust  M&E  system  in  compliance  with  IFAD’s  Core  indicator 
framework and the GoZ requirements. The SACP M&E system will (i) collect, analyse and 
update  information  based  on  the  COI  outcome  surveys  at  baseline,  midterm  and 
completion; (ii) support PCU and the Steering Committee in planning and making informed 
decisions  on  SACP  strategies  and  actions;  (iii)  maintain  and  strengthen  strategic 
partnerships  with  stakeholders;  and  (iv)  create  opportunities  for  learning  and  sharing 
results.  The  system  will  be  participatory,  gender  sensitive  and  results-oriented  while 
enabling  the  integration  of  physical  and  financial  progress  reporting.  In  addition,  the 
system will enable the analysis of climate change vulnerability among the beneficiaries. 
Annual Workplan and Budget (AWPB)  
NPMU  will  prepare  AWPB  following  evidence-based  performance  review  during  the  final 
quarter of each fiscal year to serve as the basis for project planning, implementation and 
progress  monitoring  for  the  following  year.  Provincial  Implementation  Units  (PIU)  will 
prepare  their  AWPBs  and  submit  to  NPMU  to  consolidate int  one the  annual  plan.  Upon 
finalisation, the NPMU will share the final version with the Project Steering Committee for 
approval and then submit to IFAD for ‘no objection’ approval no later than 60 days prior 
to the start of the next fiscal year. Below, a Table is presented with the list of institutions, 
reports and deadlines that the project needs to report to: 
Institution  
Reports 
IFAD 
AWPB (IFAD template) 
Frequency 
Every last 
quarter  
Narrative, Physical Progress and Financial Reports 
against AWPB (IFAD templates) 
Semi-annual, 
Annual 
Narrative, Physical Progress and Financial Reports 
against AWPB) 
Quarterly, 
Semi-annual, 
Annual 
Ministry 
of 
Agriculture  Water 
and 
Rural 
Resettlement 
(MLAWRR 
107 
Ministry 
Finance 
Economic 
Development 
of 
and 
Narrative, Physical Progress and Financial Reports 
against AWPB) 
Quarterly, 
Semi-annual, 
Annual 
M&E Plans  
The  project  M&E  will  be linked to  highly  effective management information  system/MIS 
that  provides  project  management  team  and  supply  chain  (SC)  teams  with  timely  and 
reliable  data  on  developments  against  the  logframe  core  indicator  and  project  specific 
indicator  targets  at  individual,  household,  cluster  and  buyer/supplier  level.  The  project 
M&E  processes  will  integrate  IFAD’s  Core  Indicator  frameworks47,  project  logical 
framework,  principles  of  the  Donor  Committee  for  Enterprise  Development  Standard 
(DCED  Standard)48  and  the  National  Agriculture  Policy  Framework  for  Zimbabwe.  The 
NPMU’s Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist will lead all internal M&E and together with 
the component leads, M&E and data management officer, design the M&E plan, MIS and 
progress reporting templates. A National Specialist in M&E and KM will also assist the team 
as part of the project technical assistance when required. SACP will submit quarterly, semi-
annual  and  annual  progress  reports  to  Government  of  Zimbabwe  and  IFAD  as  per  the 
requirements. 
Once  the  project  staff  is  on  recruited,  the  NPMU  will  prepare  an  M&E  Plan  that  will 
encompass the following: 
i. 
ii. 
Preparation of M&E matrix with details on how the project will collect 
timely and realistic data on CI at outcome level at baseline, midterm 
and completion stages. 
Procedures,  tools  and  templates  for  data  collection,  entry  and 
analysis including MIS; 
iii.  Details of how the indicators will be measured; 
iv. 
v. 
Flow of communication and reporting along with timelines;  
Assessment  of  the  capacity  of  staff  (NPMU,  PIU  and  field  staff)  in 
undertaking M&E responsibilities;  
Capacity building on M&E data collection and analysis for staff based 
on the needs assessment. 
vi. 
Design of the M&E system. As part of designing the project M&E system, the M&E team 
will: 
i. Finalise the design of project M&E processes that integrate IFAD’s Core Indicators 
framework49,  project  Logical  Framework,  principles  of  the  Donor  Committee  for 
Enterprise Development Standard (DCED Standard)50 and the National Agriculture 
Policy Framework for Zimbabwe. The M&E system will include the use of regularly 
updated results chains and M&E frameworks for each priority cluster to compliment 
the overall M&E and project logical framework. The use of results chains will enable 
the  identification  and  tracking  of  intermediate  change  indicators  and  allow  for 
evidence-based understanding of the opportunities and challenges in the sector. 
47IFAD’s Core  Outcome Indicators Measurement Guidelines (COI) 
48 The DECD Standard for Measuring Results in Private Sector Development 
4949IFAD’s Core  Outcome Indicators Measurement Guidelines (COI  
50 https://www.enterprise-development.org/wp-content/uploads/DCED_Standard_versionVII_Apr15_bluecover.pdf 
108 
ii.  Develop  survey  tools  and  formats  for  tracking  of  data  to  monitor  and  analyse 
the  overall  performance  at  household,  group  and  cluster  level  and  the  wider 
commodity industry.  
iii. Design of a Management Information System (MIS) which will be an important 
element in improving the efficiency, and reliability of the M&E of SACP. The project 
will develop a robust online web-based MIS system hosted in the NPMU linked to 
online/offline tablet-based direct data entry in the field.  
iv.  Ensure  the  financial  management  system  is  able  to  tag  all  expenditures  by 
commodity/ cluster/ district and type of activity to allow for segmented analysis of 
the costs and benefits for the different clusters, commodities and locations. 
v.  Design  and  deliver  capacity  building  trainings  on  M&E  system,  data  collection 
tools and formats and use of tablets to NPMU and PIU. The NPMU M&E assistant 
will further train the BDS/Agritex Mentors to use tablets for data collection.  
Data collection tools. SACP  will  build  on  IFAD’s  growing experience  of  mainstreaming 
household  and  group  tracking  as  part  of  the  self-learning  process  for  supported  farmer 
households and producer groups. This will be achieved through the business skills training 
activities and follow-up which will encourage the majority of project supported households 
to maintain household record books of their farm / non-farm enterprises. The experience 
to date is that the individuals and households themselves place a very high value on the 
insights they gain from their own enterprise records and a large majority are keen to keep 
their records books up to date once they are given the skills and support to do so. A similar 
process of self-assessment and data gathering will be used to track key indicators from 
activities. All project data will be collected through tablets and linked to an effective MIS 
that provides project management team and supply chain teams with timely and reliable 
data  on  developments  against  the  logframe  indicator  targets  at  individual,  household, 
cluster and buyer/supplier level.  
All  M&E  data  will  be  disaggregated  by  gender,  age  and  poverty  and  assessed  against 
project’s targets in logframe and checklists51. 
Household and Group Tracking will be an integral part of the project M&E to ensure that 
household and group level data tracking on seasonal basis is embedded into the everyday 
operation of the project. The data will be VC specific and focus on improved production, 
post-harvest  and  marketing,  sources  of  financing  and  loans  obtained  and  improved 
household relations. All households participating in project-supported groups will be given 
a unique identification number in the MIS so that activities and results can be traced back 
to the specific household. 
Other reports for the project will include field visit reports (farmer groups/processors/road 
construction sites etc.), monthly meeting minutes of the different implementation units, 
meeting minutes, specific reports and information generated during supervision missions, 
and joint reviews of IFAD and the GoZ.  
Data will be collected through sample-based survey for two groups: sample of beneficiaries 
and a comparison group. A questionnaire with questions related to COIs and PSI reflected 
in the log frame will be administered at baseline, midterm and completion stages.  
Data collection and entry. Agritex, Business  Skills  Mentors  and  GALs  Mentors  will  be 
provided  with  tablet  computers  with  project  MIS  data  entry  forms  and  tools  installed. 
51 See Gender and Targeting Checklist on page xx in PIM 
109 
Tablet-based data entry forms will be geo-referenced and will include data screening and 
built-in data validation prompts to reduce data entry errors at source.  Data entry will be 
done either off-line or with a live connection to the internet via mobile networks. Data will 
then be sent automatically from the tablets to the centralised MIS database once a network 
connection  is  established.  Data  received  at  the  central  MIS  will  reviewed  and  verified 
before it is  uploaded into  the  main  MIS  database.  In  case  of  errors  and  anomalies,  the 
relevant mentor will be required to recheck and resubmit the data. All M&E data will be 
disaggregated  by  gender,  age  and  poverty  and  assessed  against  project’s  targets  in 
logframe  and  checklists52.  In  addition,  NPMU,  PIUs  and  field  staff  will  be  encouraged  to 
use  social  media  tools  to  improve  communication  and  information  sharing  within  the 
project and among stakeholders.  
Baseline, Midterm and Completion Evaluations 
The project will conduct COI survey at baseline, midterm and completion using the steps 
in the following table below:  
Main steps to develop and conduct a project-specific COI survey 
Main Steps  
STEP 1: Reviewing the project 
and 
the 
determining 
preparation of interest and CI 
STEP 
questionnaire.  
2: 
Building 
the 
STEP 
population sample  
3:  Designing 
the 
STEP  4:  Conducting 
survey.  
the 
STEP 
5: 
reporting.  
Analyzing 
and 
Action  
  Review and validate the Theory of Change and 
the log frame 
  Eligible population 
Identify CI 
 
  Select  CIs 
questions 
questionnaire template 
from 
the  COI 
  Adapt and contextualise the COI questions 
  Complement the COI questions 
  Determining the sample frame 
  Define sample design 
  Choose sample size methodology 
  Determine the probability sampling 
  Elaborate the TOR 
  Review the questionnaire 
  Selection and training of enumerators 
  Field test and finalise the COI questionnaire 
  Field data gathering 
  Data quality control 
  Computer entry 
  Analysis and reporting 
Under the first step, the Project staff, in coordination with IFAD should review and validate 
the project targeting strategy and define clear selection criteria.  Project staff should also 
define the eligible population based on the selection criteria of the targeting strategy. The 
review and validation of the project ToC and logframe should lead to the identification of 
the  project  CIs.  the  log  frame  incorporates  the  CI  relevant  to  the  measurement  of  the 
project outputs and outcomes and provides information relevant for the theory of change.  
The CIs are complemented by project specific output, and outcome indicators to measure 
results  not  covered  by  the  CIs.    In  step  2,  based  on  the  selection  of  the  outcome  CIs 
identified  in  the  project  logframe,  the  questionnaire  automatically  generates  the 
associated mandatory questions to be administered in person to respondents. The project 
staff  in  coordination  with  IFAD  team  define  the  reference  periods  and  adapt  the 
52 See Gender and Targeting Checklist on page xx in PIM 
110 
questionnaire  according  to  the  stage  of  implementation  (baseline,  mid-term  and 
completion), also taking into account the project’ specific context eg fragility situtation.  
In  step  3,  the  staff  should  build  a  list  of  all  units  and  provide  all  available  information 
related to the selection criteria, based on the available information. The project will also 
choose  sampling  method  and  define  use  of  comparison  group  according  to  project´s 
characteristics and stage of implementation ie baseline, midterm or completion. Based on 
the project characteristics, the team should determine the probability sampling to be used 
and  define  which  clusters  or  strata  to  be  considered  in  the  sampling.  The  project  will 
develop TOR for the survey and prior to issuing the ToRs, the Project staff should submit 
the ToRs for IFAD´s review and clearance. Based on the TOR, a detailed methodology will 
be determined.  
Step 4 requires the translation of the questionnaire and design of the questionnaire forms.  
Test  on  the  field,  adapt  and  then  finalize  the  questionnaire.  Carryout  the  surveys  and 
collect  data.  In  step  5  there is need  to cntrol  the  quality  of  data  collected.   The  data is 
computer analysed followed by interpretation and report writing. The report summarizes 
the  conclusions  emerging  from  the  analysis  and  includes  the  following  elements:  (i)the 
description  of  the  methodology  used;  (ii)  the  questionnaire  (iii)  the 
list  of 
villages/communities surveyed; (iv) the results of the survey; (v)updated logframe ( at 
least CIs at outcome levels); (vi) the ToC and its description based on the results of the 
survey; (vii)  the  analysis  and interpretation  of  the  results.  The  survey  database  should 
also be provided to project staff and IFAD. 
IFAD’s empowerment indicator will be used to measure empowerment. This is an index 
based of the project level Women Agricultural Empowerment Index (pro-WEAI), developed 
by IPFRI, OPHI and USAID. Pro-WEAI is a survey -based tool for measuring empowerment, 
agency and inclusion of women in the agriculture sector. It is composed of 12 indicators 
of  women’s  empowerment  in  agriculture:  autonomy  in  income,  self-efficacy,  attitudes 
about domestic violence, input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, 
access  to  and  decisions  on  credit,  control  over  use  of  income,  work  balance,  visiting 
important  locations,  group  membership,  membership  in  influential  groups,  and  respect 
among  household  members.  IFAD’s  empowerment  indicator  incudes  10  of  the  12 
dimensions for pro-WEAI, focusing on those IFAD can influence in the supported activities.  
The pro WEAI dimensions are mapped to three domains: intrinsic agency (power within), 
instrumental agency (power to), and collective agency (power with), which are linked to 
the  definition  of  empowerment.  Surveys  will  be  carried  out  in  conjunction  with  socio-
economic baseline survey above.   WEAI seeks to identify constraints and obstacles faced 
by  households  and  to  track  gender  equality  and  measure  empowerment,  agency  and 
women inclusion in the agricultural sector.  
A respondent is considered adequate in a particular indicator if she or he reaches a certain 
threshold. For example, a respondent is adequate in group membership if she or he is an 
active  member  of  at  least  one  group  in  the  community.  The  indicators  are  weighted 
equally, and a respondent is considered empowered if she or he is adequate in at least 75 
percent – or at least 9 out of 12 – of the indicators. 
The Three Domains of Empowerment score (3DE) is calculated from these 12 indicators 
and  reflects  how  many  respondents  are  empowered  across  the  three  domains  and  the 
extent of their empowerment. Pro-WEAI is a composite index that tells us how empowered 
the women surveyed are as a group. Pro-WEAI combines the 3DE score with the Gender 
Parity  Index  (GPI),  which  assesses  how  empowered  women  are in  comparison  with  the 
men in their households. 
111 
The  original  WEAI  and  abbreviated  WEAI  (A-WEAI) are  based  on  five  domains  of 
empowerment:  production,  resources,  income,  leadership,  and  time.  In  pro-WEAI,  we 
measure many of the same areas of empowerment, but organize them into domains that 
are more explicitly based on the existing literature on empowerment. Empowerment is  a 
dynamic  process:  resources  enable  women  to  have  agency,  or  the  ability  to  make 
decisions,  through  which  women  can  achieve  outcomes.  The  three  domains  of 
empowerment  of  pro-WEAI  focus  on  measuring  three  types  of  agency:  intrinsic  agency 
(autonomy  in  income,  self-efficacy  and  attitudes  about  intimate  partner  violence), 
instrumental agency (input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, 
access to decisions on financial services, control and use of income and  work balance), 
and collective agency (group membership, membership in influential groups). Pro-WEAI 
includes new indicators of empowerment that were not part of WEAI, assessing areas such 
as  self-efficacy,  domestic  violence,  mobility,  and  intra-household  relationships.  Further, 
many of the indicators of pro-WEAI have stricter cut-offs for adequacy than WEAI to allow 
for  projects  to  detect  changes  in  empowerment  over  time.  For  example,  in  WEAI,  a 
respondent is considered adequate in control over use of income if she or he has input in 
decisions about at least one source of income. In pro-WEAI, a respondent is considered 
adequate in this indicator if she or he has input in decisions about income from all of the 
income-generating activities in which she or he participates. 
Pro-WEAI is intended to measure changes in women’s empowerment over the course of 
an agricultural development project, and it focuses on indicators of empowerment that a 
project could change. In addition, pro-WEAI includes optional add-on modules to look at 
women’s  empowerment  in  projects  that  focus  on  outcomes  related  to  nutrition,  health, 
and livestock. 
Nutrition empowerment indicators baseline. The development of a nutrition specific 
module  within  pro  WEAI  and  collection  of  related  data  provide  a  unique  opportunity  to 
better  understand  the  relationship  between  woman’s  empowerment  and  nutrition  and 
identify the types of interventions that empower women and improve nutrition outcomes 
for women children and their families.  
Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be carried out towards the end of the project’s third year. 
The  MTR  will  cover  physical  and  financial  progress  as  measured  against  AWPB, 
performance and financial management of implementing partners and assessment of the 
technical  assistance, training  programmes  and  delivery  of  project  benefits to  the  target 
groups. In addition, it is expected that the MTR would look at the effectiveness of GALs to 
high risk families and assess in detail the socio-economic status of women and youth. The 
findings  and  recommendations  from  MTR  will  inform  the  project  on  decision-making  on 
any adjustments, scaling up and further expansion of project modalities. 
Annual Outcome Surveys. The project will commission annual outcome surveys will be 
commissioned  to  complement  mandatory  COI  surveys:  baseline,  mid-term  and 
completion.  Survey data will be mutually supplemented as appropriate through regular 
exchange with government  statistics, and other relevant sources of information such as 
the Living Standards Measurement Surveys. The outcome surveys will also compare the 
impact of the project on SACP beneficiaries versus other non-SACP beneficiaries.  
Project Completion Report/Impact Assessment (PCR) will be conducted during the 
final  year  of  project  implementation.  The  M&E  data  collected  over  the  project 
implementation  period  will  be  used  as  part  of  a  thorough  assessment  to  measure  the 
changes  in  the  livelihoods  of  the  target  groups,  and  for  sharing  of  lessons  learned  and 
good  practices.  The  project  completion  process  will  include  reflection  workshops  where 
stakeholders  have  the  opportunity  to  evaluate  the  performance  of  the  project,  identify 
success  factors  and  areas  of  further  interventions  and  discuss  the  way  forward  for 
112 
to 
sustainability.  Key  outcome 
productivity/profitability of specific value chains and household income and assets will also 
include resilience to shocks and women’s empowerment (specifically impact of GALS). 
impact  assessment 
in  addition 
indicators 
for 
Knowledge Management and Communications 
After the project start-up, SACP will, with support from technical IFAD experts, develop an 
effective SACP Knowledge Management (KM) Strategy that is linked to the M&E and MIS 
system  to  ensure  knowledge  products  are  generated  and  used  to  improve  project 
performance and results. Lessons learnt in implementation will be actively shared between 
provinces, clusters and districts. Relevant information will also be disseminated to farmers 
and other stakeholders. In addition to social media portals, the project will use pictorial 
farming  and  production  manuals,  farmer-to-farmer  and  farmer-to-private-sector  digital 
networking.  Semi-annual  review  meetings  with  national  and  provincial  staff  and 
implementing partners will be organised by NPMU to discuss progress towards results in 
relation to each semi-annual progress report, the format of which will explicitly include a 
focus on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc. Study tours, exchange 
visits  and  learning  routes  will  be  organised  for  lateral  knowledge  transfer.  An  effective 
downward  and  upward  flow  of  information  about  project  progress  to  beneficiaries  and 
implementing  partners  in  the  field  is  of  utmost  relevance  in  fostering  ownership  and 
participation. 
The KM Strategy will have a strong focus on documenting best practices as well as positive 
and  negative  lessons  from  SACP  implementation  experience,  supported  by  reliable 
evidence  and  analysis. Resources for  studies  and  reviews  and  VC  and  policy  workshops 
and  events  are  provided  under  Sub-component  3.1.  The  wider  adoption  of  SACP’s 
documented  best  practices  will  be  an  important  measure  of  its  success  in  knowledge 
management,  especially  as  SACP  is  expected  to  represent  a  start  for  a  programming 
approach in smallholder-based VC development, with other investments of the same type 
to follow with funding from key international financiers. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
SACP’s grievance redress mechanisms will build on the existing structures at Ward, District 
and Provincial levels. Any grievances will initially be registered and resolved through the 
APG  committees  or  the  Ward  Development  Committees  (WaDCos)  for  the  community 
infrastructure. Any grievances that cannot be resolved at these levels will be reported to 
the Rural District Councils, which will have representation in the project implementation.  
Beyond the District Councils, grievances will be addressed through Provincial Councils. The 
project  teams,  at  the  national  and  provincial  levels,  will  provide  information  on  the 
grievance  redress  mechanism  available  as  well  as  convey  the  zero  tolerance  for  sexual 
exploitation and abuse (SEA) as well as the preventing fraud and corruption policies. The 
information on the policies will be made available through all SACP contracts and on project 
documents such as leaflets and matching grants proposal templates.  
The  table  depicted  below  shows  a  generic  grievance  redress  mechanism  that  can  be 
applied to the proposed project activities. 
Steps   Process  
Description  
1   
Identification of 
grievance   
Face to face; phone; letter, e-mail; 
recorded during public/community 
interaction (APG/WaDCo);   
Time 
frame  
Other 
information  
 1 Day     Telephone 
number; Email 
address / contact 
information    
113 
Steps   Process  
Description  
Time 
frame  
Other 
information  
2   
Grievance 
assessed and 
logged   
Significance assessed and grievance 
recorded or logged (i.e. in a logbook)   
 4-7 
Days   
Significance 
criteria Level 1 –
one off event; 
Level 2–
complaint is 
widespread or 
repeated; Level 
3- any complaint 
(one off or 
repeated) that 
indicates breach 
of law or policy 
provisions 
3   
4   
5   
6   
Grievance is 
acknowledged   
Acknowledgement of grievance through 
appropriate medium   
 7-14 
Days   
Development of 
response   
Grievance assigned to appropriate party 
for resolution  
 4-7 
Days 
Response development with input from 
committees/ relevant stakeholders 
10-14 
Days   
Response 
signed off   
Redress action approved at appropriate 
levels   
 4-7 
Days   
Senior committee 
representative  
Implementation 
and 
communication 
of response   
Redress action implemented and update 
of progress on resolution communicated 
to complainant   
 10-14 
Days   
7 
Complaints 
Response  
Redress action recorded in grievance log 
book. Confirm with complainant that 
grievance can be closed or determine 
what follow up is necessary 
 4-7 
Days 
8 
Close grievance    Record final sign off of grievance. If 
grievance cannot be closed, return to 
step 2 or refer to Rural District Council/ 
Provincial Council or recommend third-
party arbitration or resort to court of law 
 4-7 
Days   
Final sign off  by 
Senior Committee 
member 
The grievance record will also be maintained by the Provincial project team where these 
are  brought  to  the  Rural  District  or  Provincial  Councils.  The  grievances  relating  to  the 
matching grants, particularly those under category 2 and 3 will be managed through the 
contracts that will be signed. 
114 
DRAFT SACP PROCUREMENT GUIDELINES 
General Provisions 
This section of the PIM defines the operational basis for undertaking SACP procurement 
activities. The volume of contacts for works (% to be extracted from the PP once finalized) 
is  predominant,  followed  by  Consulting  services  (%  to  be  extracted  from  the  PP  once 
finalized). The procurement of goods is estimated at (% to be extracted from the PP once 
finalized). 
SACP procurement activities for commodities (goods, works and services) will be carried 
out in accordance with the provisions of the country’s procurement regulations governed 
by Statutory Instrument 5 of year 2018 (CAP. 22:23 Public Procurement and Disposal of 
Public  Assets  (General)  Regulations)  to  the  extent  such  provisions  are  consistent  with 
IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines  and  other  provisions  stipulated  in  the  Financing 
Agreement. Where divergences appear, IFAD procedures prevail. All procurement of goods 
(including non-intellectual services), works and consulting services financed by IFAD loan, 
OFID loan and grants will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement Handbook, 
December  2010  edition,  as  updated  from  time  to  time,  and  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions  mentioned  in  the  Financing  Agreements  or  as  subsequent  officially  approved 
version. 
In Appendix 1 of this Procurement Section of the PIM, the identified divergences between 
IFAD  Procedures  and  the  key  statutory  procurement  instruments  in  Zimbabwe  are 
presented,  with  guidance  on  how  to  organise  the  SACP  procurement  activities  in  cases 
affected by these divergences.  
Prior to undertaking any project procurement activity, the NPMU will publish the General 
Procurement Notice (GPN) on the following communication channels:  
-  At least one national newspaper with wide audience for at least one day; 
-  MLAWRR official web site for 30 calendar days;  
- 
IFAD web site for 30 calendar days; and  
-  UNDB for 30 calendar days.  
Procurement Plan 
The  first  project  procurement  plan  covering  the  first  eighteen  (18)  months  and  any 
subsequent version of it shall be prepared, in line with the Annual Budget and Work Plan 
activities;  and  submitted  by  the  unit  for  IFAD’s  approval  at  least  1  months  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  each  fiscal  year  (1st  of  January  of  each  year).  Similarly,  all  ad  hoc 
amendments to the plan will be prepared and submitted for IFAD’s endorsement.  
For the purpose of this project, the financial thresholds will be those define by IFAD and 
as agreed with the borrower in the Financial Letter and Financing Agreement documents 
respectively. For  each  commodity,  the procurement  plan  will set  forth  IFAD’s  thresholds 
for prior review as well the threshold for the use of the procurement method. All activities 
with an estimated budget falling above the specified threshold are subject to IFAD’s explicit 
No  Objection  which  must  be  requested and  granted  through  NOTUS.  All  other contracts 
shall be subject to post review by IFAD. 
115 
The thresholds for prior review and use of the procurement method, respectively, shall be 
reviewed  (either  by  increase  or  decrease)  throughout  the  project  lifetime  at  IFAD’s 
discretion and based on the results of the Procurement Risk Matrix.  
When preparing the PP, the reported estimated amounts will be revised and updated by 
the NPMU in consultation with the relevant stakeholders to reflect the prevailing market 
prices. The estimated amounts contained in the plans approved by IFAD will be used as a 
basis for assessing the reasonableness of the price.  
A  copy  of  the  procurement  plan  shall  be  communicated  to  the  Special  Procurement 
Oversight Committee by the NPMU for information and acknowledgement. 
Relationship, Roles and Responsibilities 
All procurement activities will be conducted by National Project Management Unit (NPMU) 
based  in  Harare  which  will  include  one  Procurement  Officer,  reporting  to  the  Project 
Coordinator, supported by one Procurement and Administrative Assistant.  
Owing  to  the  fact  that  the  project  activities  will  be  implemented  in  five  provinces 
(Mashonaland  Central;  Mashonaland  East;  Mashonaland  West,  Matabeleland  North  and 
Midlands), one Junior Procurement Officer will be appoint in each of the four Provincial PIU 
(PPIU)  to  support  the  project  procurement  activities.  The  responsibilities  of  the 
procurement section within the NPMU responsibilities will include: 
-  Prepare the annual project procurement plan including any subsequent revision of 
it, in line with the AWBP, and submit it in time for IFAD’s review;  
-  Supervise the execution of the procurement activities at the NPMU and District level 
and report directly to the Project Coordinator; 
-  Liaise  with  the  various  stakeholders  (both  upstream  and  downstream)  in  Harare 
and at the district level for the execution of the procurement activities; 
-  Manage the implementation of all the procurement activities up to the conclusion 
of the contract; 
-  Prepare and request IFAD’s No Objection for cases requiring its prior review; 
-  Ensure the contract management register is updated and maintained regularly; and 
-  Maintain adequate records and filing for each project procurement case. 
The project has three components, all of which include procurement activities and will be 
implemented through the NPMU with the support of the Provincial PIUs. These components 
are:  
-  Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 
-  Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 
-  Component 3: Institutional and Policy Support Coordination 
Procurement under the matching grants sub-component are subject to IFAD’s procurement 
participation  rules  and  procedures.  To  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the  project,  the 
following procurement arrangements for the components will prevail. 
116 
I. 
PROVISIONS  RELATED  TO  PROCUREMENT  ACTIVITIES  MANAGED 
DIRECTLY BY NPMU 
Component 1: Inclusive Value Chain Development 
Procurement  under  this  component  will  involve  contracting  individual  consultants  under 
sub-component  “Business  Development  Services”.  IFAD’s  rules  and  procedures  for  the 
selection  of  individual  consultants  will  apply.  The  requesting  unit  will  be  in  charge  of 
monitoring the contract’s implementation. 
Sub-component  MSME  Business  Development  Services  will  be  implemented  through 
Business  Development  Companies.  The  NPMU  will  recruit  in  total  two  companies,  each 
covering two provinces under a framework agreement for a total duration of four (4) years. 
In this line, IFAD rules and procedures for the selection of consulting services will prevail.   
Sub-component “Improved Nutrition and Food Security” will be implemented through up 
to four service providers, one per province. The arrangement under this sub-component 
are  similar  to  the  MSME  Business  Development  Services  ones.  All  contracts  under 
Component 1 are subject to IFAD’s prior review. 
Force  account.  Sub-component  “CSA  Productivity  Enhancement”  will  be  executed 
through Force Account modality. Under this arrangement, the Government is expected to 
use its own internal human and financial resources for implementing the activities falling 
under  this  component.  Prior  to  commencing  the  activities  under  this  component,  the 
executing  government  department  must  prepare  a  detailed  work  plan  for  the  NPMU 
approval. The work plan must include details on the cost of personnel to be used, cost of 
the indirect overheads, and the costs the equipment and supplies to be used, using market 
rates. 
All supplies necessary for this component will be procured through a shopping modality 
and a minimum of three (3) quotations must be collected. The supervision of the execution 
of the activities under this component falls under the responsibility of  NPMU through the 
Project  Coordinator.  The  NPMU  will  retain  a  copy  of  all  documentation  pertaining  to  the 
undertaking of all force account activities as well as all related payments incurred.  Any 
residual amount or budget under this activity shall be returned to IFAD or re-affected to 
other project activities.   
Component 2: Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure 
Procurement  under  this  component  will  involve  exclusively  procurement  of  civil  works 
which will include design, construction and design supervision. The project will conclude 
framework contracts following mini competition modality for design and design supervision 
under a single contract. Contracts for civil works will be launched and concluded through 
two or more lots per district and according to the beneficiary’s geographical distribution to 
minimise  the  administrative  burden  of  repeating  processes  multiple  times  a  year.  A 
guideline for launching and managing framework contracts under mini competition will be 
developed before launching activities under Component 2. 
NPMU will ensure contractors strictly abide by the revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud 
and  Corruption  in  its  Activities  and  Operations  as  well  as  its  Policy  to  Preventing  and 
Responding  to  Sexual  Harassment,  Sexual  Exploitation  and  Abuse.  Environmental 
safeguards  will  be  included  in  the  tender  document  and  contractors  will  be  required  to 
comply with them. In this line, tenders will be supplemented with provisions related to the 
environmental and social management plans. 
117 
All  procurement  for  civil  works  will  be  launched  under  the  one  envelope  modality.    The 
project  will  use  FIDIC  contracts  for  the  management  and  implementation  of  both  the 
design and supervision contracts (White Book) and construction contract (Red Book). 
Component 3: Institutional and Policy Support Coordination 
Procurement  under  this  component  will  involve  purchase  of  goods,  services  and 
recruitment of individual consultants. 
The procurement of goods will include mainly purchase of vehicles, office furniture and IT 
furniture for the NPMU and the districts offices. To the extent feasible, the NPMU will group 
each  activity  per  lot  according  to  their  respective  nature  and  complexity.  The  NPMU, 
through  the  Project  Coordinator,  will  liaise  with  the  Central  Mechanical  and  Equipment 
Office  on  the  technical  aspects  pertaining  to  preparing  and  evaluating  tenders.  The 
reception of the goods is expected during the first 12 months of the project life cycle. 
Services  under  Component  3  involves  the  recruitment  of  two  categories  of  individual 
consultants. The first type of the individual consultants will perform the daily and routine 
project  activities  and  include  a  mix  of  individuals  recruited  externally  and  internally 
through  secondment.  All the  recruitment  of  these  consultants,  whether  externally  or  on 
secondment,  will  be  carried  in  accordance  with  IFAD’s  rules  and  procedures  for  the 
selection of individual consultants. The threshold for IFAD’s review will be considered by 
reference to estimated budget of the total contract duration and not annually. 
The  second  type  of  individual  consultants  will  support  the  National  and  VC  Policy 
Development, thematic VC Issues as well as KM products and communication activities. 
These  consultants  will  be  recruited  on  ad  hoc  basis  and  will  follow  IFAD’s  procurement 
procedures  for  recruiting  individual  consultants’  services.  Where  feasible  the  use  of 
framework agreement will be privileged to avoid duplication of administrative efforts. 
Contract  Management.  The  management  of  the  contracts  and  the  oversight  of  the 
implementation its activities will be the responsibility of the requesting unit or department, 
which can seek guidance from the Procurement Officer when needed. 
II. 
SPECIFIC  PROVISIONS  FOR  PROJECT  COMPONENT  1:  INCLUSIVE 
VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT 
SACP  will feature,  among  others,  the involvement  of  community  participation53.  For  the 
purpose of this PIM, “community” is defined as a physical individual or group of individuals 
living in close proximity to each other. SACP Community participation in procurement will 
be guided by IFAD’s procurement principles.  
There  are  three  categories  of  direct  SACP  stakeholders  under  this  component,  namely: 
APG Climate Smart Co-Investments (Category 1); Local MSME Co-investments (Category 
2);  and  VC  Lead  Enterprise  Co-investments  (Category  3).  Category  2  and  Category  3 
involves the selection of lead and micro enterprises which will be undertaking through a 
multi-stage proposal selection over to their special nature, respectively.  
During the first stage, an initial screening of the proposals will be undertaken  based on 
the proposed investment idea. Subject to the respective Technical Assessment Committee 
53  In  the  meaning  of  IFAD’s  procurement  procedures,  “community”  refers  to  refers  to  individuals  or  groups  of  project 
beneficiaries, community groups with no legal status, associations or groups with legal status but with or without separate 
legal personality as a group, small-scale artisans and other small commercial organizations and guilds, and small local-
level organizations that support and facilitate rural agricultural and social activities. 
118 
conducting either initial screening and field verification or both and clarification meetings 
to learn about possible solutions a short list will be established and communicated to NPMU 
for validation. In the second stage, the qualified/ shortlisted proposers will be requested 
to submit final proposals, based on which the respective Technical Assessment Committee 
(TAC) will select/recommend the matching grants beneficiaries. 
The assignment of TAC members will be subject to IFAD’s no-objection, with rotation of 
some TAC members at province level. SACP will provide training for all TAC panel members 
at all levels regarding the selection of MG, with focus on smallholder inclusive value chain 
development, eligibility criteria of SACP MG mechanism, and integrity principles, conflict 
of interest, and anti-corruption measures 
Both Categories 1 and 2 will include procurement of supplies and small equipment which 
will be purchased by the beneficiary. A full procurement guideline must be developed  at 
the SACP start-up to assist beneficiaries in their purchases process and ensure value for 
money of the investment. The process of contracting enterprises under each category  is 
presented below. 
STEPS 
LEAD ENTERPRISE INVESTMENTS 
LEAD TIME 
STEPS 
Step 1 
Step 2 
Step 3 
Step 4 
Step 5 
Call for proposals  
SACP announces the Matching 
Grants opportunity and 
conditions, and calls for 
investment proposals from 
Agribusiness Enterprises. 
Response to Call for proposals  
Agribusinesses communicate 
their investment ideas in short 
concept notes. Investment ideas 
to upgrade any smallholder-
inclusive value chain are 
welcome, including not 
previously identified. 
Proposal screening and short 
listing  
SACP conducts an initial 
screening of the expressions 
received: (i) eligibility of 
applicants, (ii) correctness of 
proposals, and (iii) field 
verification. 
Preparation of full proposal 
Pre-selected agribusinesses 
develop full proposals including 
(i) business plans, (ii) financial 
analysis, (iii) development 
benefits to smallholder 
households. 
Technical Assessment 
Committee 
SACP Technical Assessment 
Committee (i) conducts scoring of 
the full proposals against agreed 
criteria, and (ii) makes 
recommendation for selection. 
1 day  
(following GPN 
advertisment of 
30 days) 
Step 1 
30 days 
advertisement 
Step 2 
15 days  
Step 3 
30 days 
Step 4 
15 days 
Step 5 
119 
SMALLHOLDER / 
MICROENTERPRISE 
INVESTMENTS 
Smallholder support system 
established 
Local level project 
implementation units 
established and capacitated on 
SACP strategy and instruments. 
Identification of APGs 
Community consultations held 
on SACP. Existing Agriculture 
Producer Groups (APG) and 
potential new APGs identified. 
APG formalization supported. 
LEAD TIME 
1 day  
(following GPN 
advertisment of 
30 days) 
After receipt of 
agribusiness 
expresssions of 
interest 
Advertisment for the Call for 
proposals 
SACP announces the Matching 
Grant opportunity and 
conditions, and calls for 
investment proposals from APGs 
and Microenterprises. 
Response to Call for Proposals 
APGs and Microenterprises 
communicate their investment 
ideas in short concept notes. 
Investment ideas within any 
value chain are welcome, 
including not yet identified. 
APG/Microenterprise 
Technical Assistance 
Agribusiness and agriculture 
specialists to provide APG TA 
regarding (i) business plan 
development, (ii) climate smart 
agriculture, (iii) financial literacy 
and planning, (iv) nutrition. 
30 days after 
APG 
identification. 
Thereafter 
twice per year 
30 days 
advertisement 
42 days 
Step 6 
Step 7 
Step 8 
IFAD No Objection 
The recommended Agribusiness 
Proposals proposals and TAC 
reviews are sent to IFAD for no-
objection. IFAD reviews, 
comments and/or provides no-
objection. 
Investment Committee and 
Investment Start-up 
Investment Committee formally 
decides on the investment. SACP 
informs the Agribusiness. First 
tranche of the financing made 
available. Implementation. 
Implementation, Reporting, 
Monitoring, Evaluation 
The Agribusiness implements its 
business plan, and reports to 
SACP. SACP facilitates and 
conducts M&E. 
8 days  
Step 6 
15 days 
Step 7 
Depending on 
the contract 
terms 
Step 8 
APG/Microenterprise business 
plans 
As result of the technical 
assistance, the APGs and 
Microenterprises complete their 
investment proposals and 
submit these to SACP. 
Technical Assessment 
Committee and Start-up 
Provincial TAC (i) conducts 
scoring of the full proposals 
against agreed criteria, and (ii) 
makes decision for selection. 
First financing tranche made 
available. Implementation. 
Implementation, Reporting, 
Monitoring, Evaluation 
The APG/Microenterprise 
implements its business plan, 
and reports to SACP. SACP 
facilitates and conducts M&E. 
20 days 
30 days after 
receiving the 
business plans. 
Depending on 
the contract 
terms 
Category  1,  related  to  APG  Climate  Smart  Co-Investments,  will  target  mainly  small 
farmers.  Supplies  under  this  category  will  include  mainly  commodities  such  as  seeds, 
farming  materials  and  small  construction  materials  to  be  purchased  by  the  grantees 
themselves acting as procurement agents. Each grantee will be required to include a micro 
plan along his/ her business plan. For all purchases above US$ 500.00, the grantees will 
be  required  to  collect  3  quotations  and  retain  all  the  evidence  of  their  purchase.  This 
threshold will be revised based on the results and lessons learnt of the first round of grants. 
120 
APPENDIX 1  
Identified Divergences Between IFAD Procedures and Statutory Instrument 5 of 2018 [CAP. 22:23 
Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (General) Regulations, 2018 
Article 
n. 
Subject 
PART I – PRELIMINARY 
Observations/ Identified Divergences 
Article 1  Title 
Article 2 
Article 3  Non-application of regulations 
Interpretation 
No observations. 
No observations. 
No observations. 
in certain circumstances 
PART II – PREPARATION FOR PROCUREMENT 
Article 4  Registration of bidders and 
No observations. 
contractors 
Article 5  Engagement of procurement 
No observations. 
agent 
Article 6  Shared procurement 
Article 7  Procurement plans 
Article 8  Domestic preference 
Article 9  Market consultations 
Financial thresholds 
Article 
10 
Article 
11 
Article 
12 
Framework Agreements 
Procurement by embassies and 
public bodies operating outside 
Zimbabwe 
Not applicable. 
No indications on the timeline for preparing the PP or reporting line for approval. 
Derogation. IFAD Model to be adopted and updated throughout the project life cycle. Procurement 
plans to be advertised on IFAD’s website, Gazette, Borrower’s website and newspapers, as 
applicable. 
Not applicable. 
Not applicable. 
Derogation. SACP to use IFAD’s financial threshold for the use of the procurement methods 
Derogation. SACP to use IFAD’s guidance in concluding FAs 
Not applicable. 
PART III – METHODS OF PROCUREMENT 
121 
Subject 
Observations/ Identified Divergences 
Article 
n. 
Article 
13 
Use of two-stage method of 
competitive bidding 
Article 
14 
Article 
15 
Use of pre-qualification in 
competitive bidding 
Use of restricted bidding 
method 
Article 
16 
Article 
17 
Use of direct procurement 
method 
Use of request for quotations 
method 
PART IV – INVITATION TO BID 
Article 
18 
Domestic and international 
bids 
Article 
19  
Article 
20 
Article 
24 
Article 
26 
Timeline for advertising 
Content of the bidding 
documents 
Investigation into unsuccessful 
procurement proceedings 
Bid security 
Provisions under this method are insufficiently detailed. Circumstances where to use this method; no 
provisions on the criteria for selection/ evaluation at the first stage; extension of bid revision (as 
provided for in the article); conditions and procedures for conducting pilot study not defined (risk of 
conflict of interest). 
Derogation. IFAD’s thresholds for the use of national and international procedures to prevail, as 
established in the 18-month PP of the design and later on in the latest approved PP. 
Establishment of the standing list is unclear. No requirement for call for Expression of Interest to 
establish the list (explicit no requirement for advertisement). No provisions surrounding the criteria 
for inclusion and modalities for enrolment in the standing list. No provision for the criteria of selection 
from the standing list.   
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedures under Framework Agreements instead. 
No detail on the situations under which this modality is applicable. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s rules for single sourcing. 
No observations. 
No specific observation.  
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s threshold for the selection of the appropriate method to prevail and as 
agreed in the latest approved Procurement Plan.  
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s respective minimum timeline for advertisement. 
No award criteria. 
Derogation. All SBD to include the award criteria (including shopping modality). 
Provisions concerning investigations undertaking are imprecise. The constitution of the panel 
members and the undertaking of the process. 
* Contradicting provisions. 26 (1) provides bid securities not to exceed 2% however 26 (2) allows 
contracting authorities to consider additional factors which renders this clause subject to the 
authority’s own judgement. 
Comments on the following bid security forms: (iii) a cash deposit to the Authority: risk of money 
laundry; (iv) any alternative form permitted by the Authority to facilitate participation by small 
enterprises in procurement: not precise. 
Bid validity twenty-eight days after the end of the bidding period: validity period is too low. 
** Paragraph (5): forfeiting a bid against “(b) the bidder refusing to accept a correction of an 
122 
Article 
n. 
Subject 
Observations/ Identified Divergences 
arithmetical error appearing on the face of his or her bid” is not a practice. 
*** Does not provide for the requirement to request an extension of the bid performance security.  
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance in matter related to bid security. 
PART V – OPENING AND EVALUATION OF BIDS AND AWARD OF CONTRACT  
Article 
27 
Article 
28 
Article 
29 
Article 
30 
Bid opening requirements 
Examination of bids 
Correction of arithmetical 
errors 
Evaluation of bids 
Article 
31 
Correction of arithmetical 
errors 
Article 
32 
Article 
33 
Article 
34 
Scrutiny by Special 
Procurement Oversight 
Committee 
Notification of contract award 
Performance security 
The Act requires the “procurement management unit” to proceed to the bid opening witnessed by 
quoted “one or more persons appointed by the entity’s accounting officer”. No further precisions on 
the constitution and entitlement to be part of the committee.  
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
No observations. 
Clarification of bids – requested timeline for reverting (from bidder’s side) of 48 hours only is 
restrictive.  
Evaluation of bids para “4” – statement “minor deviation” is not well defined – risk of 
misinterpretation and/or abuse. 
Not sufficiently detailed. No explicit requirement to apply evaluation criteria in the assessment of the 
tenders. No provisions under two envelop modality. Provisions suitable for one envelop procedure 
only. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
The Act does not require the committee to revert to the bidder for confirming arithmetical errors. No 
provision on the type and nature of information to be requested under clarifications. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
No observations. 
No requirement for publication but 14 calendar days stand still period. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
Performance security amount remains at the contracting authority discretion. No detailed provisions 
on the reduction of the performance security. Possibility for Cash performance securities (risk of 
money laundry). 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
PART VI – Procurement of Consultancy Services 
123 
Article 
n. 
Article 
35 
Article 
36 
Article 
37 
Subject 
Observations/ Identified Divergences 
Interpretation in Part VI 
No observations. 
Thresholds for expressions of 
interest and scrutiny by Special 
Procurement Oversight 
Committee 
Terms of reference 
Potential conflict with IFAD’s threshold. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
Deviation from IFAD’s procedures (includes a cost estimate, no provision for the evaluation criteria, 
no provision on the modality for evaluating and ranking offers, no provision on the minimum 
advertisement timeline, purpose of provision 37- e not clear).  
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
No minimum period for submission of proposals under the single-source selection method. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
Article 
38 
Deadlines for submission of 
proposals 
PART VII – Integrity and Transparency 
Article 
39 
Article 
40 
Article 
41 
Article 
42 
Procurement records 
No observations. 
Reports to Authority 
No observations. 
Code of Conduct for 
procurement officers 
Ethical responsibilities of 
bidders and contractors 
No observations. 
Insufficient details provided by the article.  
PART VIII – Challenge Proceedings 
Article 
43 
Article 
44 
Article 
45 
Article 
46 
Interpretation in Part VIII 
No observations. 
Security for costs 
Applicable Charges for challenging a process.  
Procuring entity to give 
reasons for decision regarding 
challenge 
Review of procurement by 
Authority: preparation of lists 
of 
No timeline for providing a response. In case where the procurement authority concedes a challenge, 
the Act provides for the possibility of selecting a new bidder (it is not clear whether this assumes that 
the process will be re-advertised).  
No provisions on the profiles required in the panel. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
124 
Article 
n. 
Subject 
Observations/ Identified Divergences 
Article 
47 
Article 
48 
Article 
49 
Article 
50 
Article 
51 
Article 
52 
Article 
53 to 
Article 
55 
Article 
56 
Article 
57 to 
Article 
58 
Article 
59 
Article 
60 to 
Article 
61 
Article 
62 
panellists 
Disqualifications for 
appointment as panellist 
Provision b) assumes a moral person to be part of the panel. No provision under conflict of interest. 
Constitution of the panel does not preclude members from the contracting authority to be part of it.  
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
Publication of lists of panellists  No observations. 
Training of panellists 
No observations. 
Review panels 
No observations. 
Conditions of service of 
panellists 
Duty of panellists to be 
impartial and independent 
Secretariat and secretarial 
services for review panels 
No observations. 
No observations. 
No observations. 
Application for review 
Does not provide under which circumstances the application for review will be sought. 
Respondent’s reply 
No observations. 
Meetings of review panel 
No provisions related to the timeline for the case review.  
Evidence in review proceedings  No observations. 
Appeals to the Administrative 
Court or other Courts 
No detailed provisions related to the conducting of appeals at the administrative court level or the 
impact of the decision on the procurement process. 
125 
Article 
n. 
Subject 
PART IX – Contract Management 
Article 
63 
Article 
64 
Article 
65 
Procurement contracts 
Advance payments 
Reports on performance of 
procurement contracts 
PART X – Disposal of Public Assets 
Observations/ Identified Divergences 
63 (a) – ambiguity “unless the bidder has offered more favourable terms and conditions”, potential 
bias/ lack of transparency, equal treatment among tenderers.  
Lack of clear provisions related to variations. 
63 (4) – unfair treatment to international suppliers (potentially deterring their interest) 
64 – 2 (unfair treatment between national and international contractors) 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. 
No observations. 
Not assessed as not falling within SACP’s procurement mandate. 
Article 
66 to 
Article 
67 
PART XI – Debarring of Bidders and Contractors 
Interpretation in Part XI 
No observations. 
When bidders and contractors 
may be debarred 
Recommendation to debar 
bidder or contractor 
Debarment committee 
69 (a) & (b) – conflict of interest. 
No provision on the circumstances or ground justifying the debarment. 
No provision on the conduct of the debarment. 
71 (c) – No precisions are provided for this panel member. 
Procedure for debarring bidder 
or contractor 
No observations. 
Article 
68 
Article 
69 
Article 
70 
Article 
71 
Article 
72 to 
Article 
77 
PART XII – Joint-Ventures 
Article 
78 
Interpretation in Part XII 
No observations. 
126 
Article 
n. 
Article 
79 
Article 
80 
Article 
81 
Article 
82 
Article 
83 
Article 
84 
Article 
85 
Article 
86 
Subject 
Observations/ Identified Divergences 
Accounting officer for certain 
joint venture projects 
Expressions of interest from 
counterparties 
Expressions of interest from 
counterparties 
Request for proposals 
Unclear provision 
No observations. 
Requests for proposals listed un Joint Ventures PART XII of the Act 
No observations. 
One-stage bidding 
No observations. 
Two-stage bidding 
Evaluation of proposals 
Negotiations for joint venture 
agreement 
Possibly erroneous use of the term (Two stage bidding) – procedure seems to refer to 
prequalification instead 
No provisions specific to the undertaking of the negotiations with the suppliers. 
Derogation. Use of IFAD’s procedure and guidance on the matter. (two stage bidding) 
Restricted mainly to proposal financial cost. 
Procurement modality not provided for in IFAD’s rules and procedures. 
PART XIII – General 
Article 
87 to 
Article 
94 
Accounting officer for certain 
procurements/ Special 
Procurement Oversight 
Committee/ Licensing/ 
Discipline/ Forms/ Fees/ Trust 
accounts/ Offences 
No observations. 
First Schedule (Sections 2 and 39) – CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PROCUREMENT OFFICERS ARRANGEMENT OF PARAGRAPHS 
Not assessed as not falling within SACP’s procurement mandate. 
Matters not covered by the Instrument 
where IFAD’s provisions prevail. 
Procurement of individual consultants. 
Provisions for single sourcing. 
Applicable Procurement principles. 
Evaluation methods.  
Applicable weighting. 
127 
B.  DRAFT SACP FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES/MANUAL 
The  detailed  draft  SACP  Financial  Management  Guidelines  are  presented  below  in  the 
attached Annex 1 to the PIM of SACP.  
128 
Annex: SACP Draft Financial Management Manual 
INTRODUCTION 
I. 
1. 
The  Financial  Management  Manual  (FMM)  outlines  the  necessary  financial  procedures  and 
practises  to  be  followed  by  the  Programme  Coordination  Unit  (PMU)  during  implementation.  This 
manual  is  to  be  considered  a  living  document  and  it  is  to  be  reviewed  and  updated  during 
implementation.  It  is  to  be  read  together  with  the  Programme  Implementation  Manual,  and  the 
Procurement  Manual. It is  also important  to note  this  manual makes  references  to  the  following  key 
documents: (i) SACP Financing Agreement, (ii) IFAD General Conditions, (iii) Letter to the Borrower, 
(iv)  IFAD  Guidelines  on  Project  Audits,  (v)  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook,  (vi)  GoZ  Public  Finance 
Management Act (vii) Treasury Instructions, (viii) Audit Act, (ix) SACP design report and (x) Accounting 
Officers  Instructions.  Therefore,  it  is  fundamental  that  the  project  staff,  especially  the  National 
Programme Coordinator (NPC) and the Chief Accountant    master these documents in the early stages 
of programme implementation. Below are links for the generic documents listed above  
Loan Disbursement Handbook 
General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing 
Conceptual Framework on Financial Reporting and External Audit of IFAD-
Financed Projects 
IFAD  Handbook  for  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing  of  IFAD-financed 
Projects 
2. 
Financing package. The Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project (SACP) is a US$ 70.27 million 
with a goal to reduce vulnerability to food insecurity, to climate change effects and to economic shocks. 
The Programme Development Objective is to  “Increased smallholder participation  in market-oriented 
and  climate-smart  value  chains”.  This  will  be  achieved  by  using  private  sector-led  value  chains  as 
crucial instruments for climate smart and commercially viable smallholder transformation. It is a six year 
Programme  with  five  funding  sources  some  of  which  will  not  pass  through  PMU  but  will have  to  be 
accounted for in the SACP accounting system. 
Smallholder Agricultural Cluster Project 
 Figure 1: Summary of SACP cost structure 
129 
   By Financier USD 'Million % of total IFAD Loan              35.7  51 OFID              15.0  21 Smallholders                7.1  10 Agribusiness              10.9  15 GoZ                1.6  2               70.3  100    By Component USD 'Million % of total Inclusive Value Chain Development              48.3  69 Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure              15.0  21 Institutional Support and Project Coordination                7.0  10               70.3  100%    By Category USD 'Million % of total Works              14.0  20 Grants & Subsidies              45.6  65 Goods, Services & Inputs                1.9  3 Equipment and Materials                1.6  2 Consultancies                0.0                            -    Training and Workshops                3.9  6 Recurrent Costs                3.2  5               70.3  100  
Fiduciary  responsibility:  The  key  implementers  in  the  SACP  financial  management  have 
3. 
fiduciary  responsibility  to  ensure  that  SACP  funds  are  used  exclusively  for intended  purposes.  Poor 
financial  management  in  the  implementation  of  SACP  could  result  in  failure  to  achieve  its  intended 
impacts. IFAD will undertake supervision missions that will include a review of all fiduciary aspects, will 
undertake  review  of  audit  reports,  and  may  commission  own  audits/  reviews.  The  GOZ  as  well  has 
systems and structures to ensure that public funds are used for intended purposes. 
4. 
Transparency,  governance,  anti-corruption.  The  SACP  Governance  and  Anti-Corruption 
Framework are in line with IFAD’s Anticorruption Policy54, with the aim to mitigate the risk of corruption 
and promote effective utilisation of resources, including the following aspects: 
a)  The  provisions  of  this  financial  management  manual  articulating  the  type  of 
towards 
internal  controls  and  administrative  systems 
transparency and accountability;  
the accounting system that will substantially reduce the scope for human error;  
the risk-based implementation reviews of programme financial management and 
staff; 
the back-up procedures kept on the PMU’s computers to avoid the loss or damage 
of financial data; 
to  be  established 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e)  SACP  will  also include  a  systems  audit  in  the TORs  of  the  auditors  and  in  the 
f) 
supervision plan; and 
Internal  audit  department  of  MLAWRR  will  include  the  programme  in  its  yearly 
internal  audit  oversight  plans.  The  implementation  status  of  the  internal  audit 
recommendations will be addressed and made available to the fund. 
5. 
IFAD zero tolerance policy for corruption and fraud urges persons observing concerns of irregular 
practices in IFAD funded projects to report to the IFAD Office of Audit and Oversight through any of the 
following means: 
  By telephone: +39 0654592888 
  By confidential fax: +39 0654597888 
  By confidential email: anticorruption@ifad.org or by using the online complaint form 
 
In person or by mail to: IFAD - Office of Audit and Oversight (AUO): Investigation Section - Via 
Paolo Di Dono, 44 - 00142 Rome, Italy 
6. 
Supervision. SACP will be jointly supervised by GOZ and IFAD every six months. The financial 
management  Specialist  will  review  the  performance  of  the  project  with  providing  guidance  in  areas 
where  problems  or  challenges  are  noted  as well  where  the project  will  need  further  guidance  in  the 
adherence to IFAD guidelines. The aim will be to resolve all issues related to the financial management 
of the project during or shortly after each supervision mission. Terms of reference for the supervision 
missions will be prepared by the IFAD Country Director. 
7. 
Users of the Manual. Within the PMU, the finance team will include the following: Programme 
Coordinator;  Chief  Accountant  and  Financial  Accountant.  Non-finance  staff  will  be  involved,  in  their 
capacities as users, providing technical inputs in expenditure justifications. The Procurement Unit (PU) 
will  play  a  special  role in  contractual  certification  of  payments  before  these  are  passed  to  the  Chief 
Accountant        for  payment  processing.  As  such,  even  non-finance  staff  should  be  cognisant  of  the 
contents  of  the  financial  management  section  of  the  PIM  because  they  also  have  a  fiduciary 
responsibility to ensure SACP funds are used only for intended purposes. 
Organisation and Staffing: SACP PMU finance team will comprise of a Chief Accountant    who 
8. 
will be competitively recruited and tasked to set-up the financial management systems of SACP. The 
GoZ  will  also second to SACP a Financial Accountant at the national PMU from the first year of SACP. 
The PMU finance team will be responsible for the accounting function of the Programme, such as funds 
flow (including following up justifications), preparation of annual financial statements, periodic financial 
reporting and overseeing the arrangements for audits in accordance with GoZ procedures and IFAD’s 
audit guidelines. The engagement of the SACP recruited or seconded finance team   will be subject to 
IFAD’s  prior  approval  with  their  responsibilities  clearly  defined  in  TORs  which  will  form  the  basis  of 
annual performance evaluations. 
54 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40189363/fraudpolicy_eb86_e.pdf/e2ae80aa-e423-4d7c-a582-
c01c1917b427 
130 
Figure 2: Finance team reporting structure within PMU 
9. 
SACP will pursue a team work approach as part of integrated programme coordination. Under 
the integrated programme coordination approach the segregation of duties for financial control will need 
to  be  maintained.  The  finance  team  will  work  closely  with  the  non-finance  staff  to  achieve  a  sound 
financial control system.  
10.  With respect to organisation and staffing, IFAD supervision missions will be interested in: 
a)  Adequacy of organizational structure to meet functional needs of the programme. Therefore, 
the structure above should not be changed without IFAD concurrence; 
b)  Availability of clear job description for key programme positions, including fiduciary positions; 
c)  Adequacy of project financial management staff (numbers and skill) matching functional needs 
of programme; 
d)  Availability and adequacy of operating manuals and guidelines for staff; 
e)  Existence  of  a  performance  based  evaluation  system  in  place  and  timely  completion  of 
performance evaluation for all staff; 
f)  Adequacy of health insurance coverage for all staff; 
g)  Timely payment of social security fees; and 
h)  Staff adequately informed about IFAD’s anti-corruption policy and relevant contact details. 
II.  FLOW OF FUNDS   
11.  Designated  and  Operating  account:  MLAWRR  will  open  a  US$-denominated  designated 
account at a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD to receive loan funds from IFAD. Upon approval and 
signing of a separate Financing Agreement in respect of the OFID loan, MLAWRR will open a separate 
US$  designated  account  at  a  commercial  bank  to  receive  loan  funds  from  OFID.  The  designated 
accounts will be managed by the PMU which will be charged with the preparation of all disbursement 
requests  and  justifications.  SACP  financial  obligations in  foreign  currency  will  be  paid  from  the  US$ 
designated  accounts.    MLAWRR  will  also  open  operating  bank  accounts  at  a  commercial  bank  to 
receive and hold the financing transferred from the designated accounts for the IFAD funds and OFID 
funds respectively from which SACP financial obligations in local currency shall be met. 
12.  GOZ  will  fund  taxes  and  duties  on  programme  expenditures  through  tax  waivers  on  imported 
goods and services. The government will maintain separate dollar account to provide for funds to cover 
for taxes. Transfers of these funds to the project operating account to meet the taxes will be done on a 
quarterly  basis  in  the  foreign  currency  to  mitigate  potential  currency  mismatch  risks.  Other  GoZ 
contributions shall be in form of salaries to seconded staff and provision of office space.  
131 
       Programme Coordinator             Procurement Officer   Chief Accountant                    Financial Accountant   
Figure 3: SACP flow of funds 
Accounting implications of the above funds flow chart are as follows: 
13.  The  disbursement  of 
the 
imprest/replenishment  mechanism,  whereby  an  authorized  allocation,  sufficient  to  cover  six  months’ 
worth of expenditure (based on an approved AWPB) shall be advanced and subsequently replenished 
upon the submission of Withdrawal Application by the Borrower to IFAD.  
IFAD  Designated  Account  will 
follow 
funds 
into 
the 
14.  The PMU will have the responsibility of coordinating and ensuring the smooth flow of funds so 
that  funds  are  available  as  and  when  necessary  to  meet  programme  financial  obligations  towards 
suppliers, service providers and contractors. This will involve: (i) establishing the liquidity requirements 
of  each  implementing  agency  based  on  the  approved  AWPB;  (ii)  preparing  and  dispatching  bank 
transfer instructions to MLAWRR to ensure that there is sufficient liquidity in the operational accounts 
at all times; (iii) following up on any funds advanced to implementing agencies and ensuring the timely 
justification thereof; (iv) maintaining the supporting documentation underlying expenditures incurred by 
the programme in order to prepare Withdrawal Applications for submission to IFAD; and (v) ensuring 
that the Authorized Allocation is fully accounted for at all times through regular preparation of periodic 
reconciliation statements for the designated account. 
15.  The day-to-day expenditures incurred by each of the programme’s implementing agencies at the 
national, provincial and district levels will be settled from these accounts. The operational accounts will 
be managed by PMU and MLAWRR with the Director of Finance as a Principal Signatory. For a payment 
to go through at the programme accounts  it must have two signatures; one from category A and another 
from Category B The signatories to the bank accounts will be as follows:  
132 
GoZOFID LOANDirect PaymentsGrantees ,Service Providers, Suppliers, Contractors etcIFAD LOANOperating account in local currency at a commercial bank- IFAD- fundsPrefinanced Tax refunds ZW$ operating account at a commercial bank OFID fundsUS$  Designated Account at a commercial bank operated by MLAWRR- OFID FundsUS$ Designated Account at a  commercial bank operated by MLAWRR- IFAD Funds 
Category A Signatories 
Category B Signatories 
  Director of 
Finance/MLAWRR. 
  Programme Accountant 
  Three officers from 
MLAWRR appointed by 
the Accounting Officer 
of MLAWRR and 
approved by MOFED. 
  Programme 
Coordinator 
16.  The programme will procure services from public/private institutions through calls for expression 
of interest to deliver some aspects of programme activities in the capacity of Service Providers (SPs) 
and will be governed by output-based performance contracts. Funds for implementation of activities in 
such relationships will be disbursed by the PMU directly to the SPs .Any advance payment will be in 
line with public procurement provisions and stipulated in the contracts for service provision.  
17.  Programme grantees under the Inclusive Value Chains Investments matching grant facility will 
be required to open specific bank accounts for receipt of grant funds and for banking their own matching 
contribution. Transfers of grants will be in tranches based on achievements of certain milestones by the 
grantees  as  defined  in  the  grant  agreements.  Matching  grants  will  be  expensed  at  the  point  of 
disbursements  and  will  be  included  in  the  withdrawal  application  at  that  point.  Utilisation  of  grant 
proceeds will be monitored for consistency with the terms and conditions under which the grant would 
have  been  awarded.  The  Matching  grants  will  be  subject  to  a  performance  audit  after  a  an  agreed 
milestone of disbursement that will be included in the Financing agreements. 
18.  With respect to funds flow, IFAD missions will always be interested in the following aspects: 
a)  Timeliness of funds disbursed by different sources (and co-financiers funding if applicable).  
b)  Timeliness of counterpart funds disbursed. 
c)  Efficiency of the funding channels. Timeliness and traceability of funds flows.  
d)  Designated Account(s) and Operating Account Management, Disbursements. 
i)  Adequacy of the authorized allocation to ensure a smooth flow of funds;  
ii)  Appropriateness of disbursement methods used; 
iii)  Adequacy  of  documentary  support  for  SOE  disbursements,  reimbursements,  directs 
payments and Special Commitments;  
iv)  Timely preparation and accuracy of Withdrawal Applications; 
v)  Authorization of WA preparation; 
vi)  Status  on  expenditures  withdrawn  from  Designated  Account  but  not  yet  claimed  for 
replenishment (old cases will be queried); 
vii)  Regularity of Designated Account(s) monitoring and monthly reconciliations signed by the 
project Coordinator. Mission will always review and assess the reconciliations; and 
viii) Disbursement rate compared to the AWPB and whether satisfactory given the remaining 
implementation time. 
III.  The SACP financial management cycle 
19.  Financial  management  in  Government  Programmes  such  as  SACP  is  to  be  established  as  a 
routine and highly standardised process and will follow an annual cycle of inter-dependent steps. It will 
start  with  planning  and  budgeting.  In  financial  control,  any  expenditure  incurred  outside  the 
approved  budget  will  be  declared  ineligible  for  IFAD  financing.  After  the  AWPB  is  approved 
together with the procurement plan, the next step is the process of committing funds. While this largely 
is a procurement function, the finance team will have a role to play. Following on from commitments will 
be  the  treasury  functions,  payments  to  eligible  contractors,  service  providers,  suppliers.  The  finance 
team will have to exercise efficiency in turnaround of withdrawal applications to IFAD to ensure liquidity 
challenges  do  not  hamper  implementation.  The  final  routine  in  financial  management  is  financial 
reporting and auditing. This manual has been arranged as to cover each of these aspects of the annual 
financial management routine as presented in chart 4 below. 
133 
Figure 4. The SACP annual financial management cycle 
A.  Step 1: SACP Annual Work Plan and Budgeting 
20.  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  is  the  key  instrument  for  SACP  implementation  and 
operational control. The PMU, therefore, gives particular attention to budget preparation and control. 
During day-to-day financial management, an approved AWPB is the most important document, and the 
principal guide on what to do and how to use resources. In the context of SACP financial management, 
the AWPB is more than a guideline. It represents: 
a)  a commitment of PMU and implementing agencies to carry out a set of activities, 
produce specific outputs and achieve certain targets; and 
b)  Agreement by GoZ and IFAD that the planned activities are appropriate in light of 
the SACP objectives and approval to spend the necessary money as specified in 
the annual budget. 
21.  The AWPB is a means by which Government of Zimbabwe and IFAD will have provided “prior 
approval” to PMU to spend resources on the activities included in the AWPB. It should be taken very 
seriously,  as  any  expenditure  incurred  outside  the  AWPB  will  be  queried  by  auditors,  supervision 
missions and will be declared ineligible for IFAD financing. 
22.  The  detailed  steps  to  be  followed  in  the  preparation  of  the AWPB  are  included  in  the  IFAD 
guidelines for preparation of AWPBs and progress reporting. The  Procurement planning aspects are 
covered under the Procurement Manual. 
23.  Timing: The draft AWPB should reach IFAD two  month before commencement of the year in 
question, that is, by 31 October of each year. It is equally important that AWPB preparation schedule 
be  in  tandem  with  Government  budgetary  process  since  SACP  budget  should  pass  through 
Government  budgetary  approval  process  and  SACP  must  be  included  in  the  GoZ  printed  budget 
estimates. 
24.  The following AWPB preparation schedule is provided for guidance. It should be reviewed and 
modified as may be necessary in consultation with the MLAWRR and other key stakeholders. 
134 
Table 1: ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGET SCHEDULE 
Activity/ steps 
Schedule 
Responsibility 
(i)  Briefing on preparation of AWPB, 
provision of guidelines and format to key 
implementing agencies. 
End April 
(ii)  Call letter from PMU for the preparation of 
Early May. 
AWPB to participating institutions. 
(iii)  Preparation of AWPB by participating 
institutions. Submission of AWPB 
proposals to PMU 
May/June. 
(iv)  Preparation of consolidated Annual Work 
Mid-July 
Plan and Budget. 
end July 
Early August 
Mid-August 
(v)  Review/Agreement on draft AWPB by 
participating institutions 
(vi)  Review by PSC 
(vii)  Finalization by PMU 
(viii) Submission to MLAWRR for incorporation 
into MLAWRR budget 
(ix)  Submission to Parliament 
(x)  Submission of draft AWPB to IFAD 
(xi)  Comments from IFAD 
(xii)  Approval by Parliament/information 
(xiii) Finalization of AWPB/Distribution to 
implementing institutions 
PMU, PC, M&E Specialist  
supported by Chief Accountant    
and Director, Agricultural 
Economics and Markets 
Letter drafted by PM&E Specialist 
and sent under the signature of 
Programme Coordinator. 
Focal point identified by the 
respective institutions. 
Head of participating Institutions 
M/E Specialist and Chief 
Accountant   with support from 
PMU members 
Meeting called by Programme 
Coordinator 
PSC 
PM&E Specialist or PC 
Last week August 
Programme Coordinator 
Mid-September 
MLAWRR 
October 
Programme Coordinator 
IFAD CPD 
Mid November 
November/December  Parliament 
End December  
Programme Coordinator Office 
25.  Role of finance offices in AWPB preparation: In the planning and budgeting stage, the SACP 
finance officers perform the four functions below: 
Roles of SACP finance staff in budgeting process 
26.  Role  1:  Avail  SACP  Budgeting  teams  the  status  of  available  balances:  Technical 
coordinators will play an important role in facilitating budget preparation for activities in their respective 
realm.  This  does  not  however  imply  that  they  can  solely  dispose  of  the  component  budget  as  the 
respective  sub-components  are  interrelated  with  others.  SACP  will  adopt  an  integrated  team  work 
programme management approach.  
135 
1234Avail the technical coordinators status of available balances Quantify  other restricting factorsconsolidation and presentation of budget tablesTreasury planning 
SACP Budgeting holders 
27.  Prior to the start of the planning and budgeting exercise, the Chief Accountant    (CA) provides 
each  of  the  above  budget  holders  the  respective  sub-component  status  of  available  balances  and 
overall category-wise implications. The CA does this by making extracts from the accounting system 
and obtains from IFAD a status of funds balances available category-wise. From the accounting system, 
the CA also obtains balances component-wise, including up to the major activities as described later in 
the manual. The status of funds available should be adjusted by deducting commitments, WAs in the 
pipe line and projected expenditure for the remaining part of the current year. The adjusted information 
about  the  status  of  funds is  provided to  the above  named  budget  holders  so  that  they  are  aware  of 
budget ceilings. A working form that can be used in Ms Excel to determine the available balance is as 
given below. The accounting software shall assign historical expenditures to each of the planning units 
as described above and in the tables below. 
Working  Form  to  determine  status  of  available  balances  (US$)  by  category  of  expenditure 
analysed separately for IFAD loan, OFID loan and GoZ counterpart contribution  
Category 
Available 
cash 
balance)55 
Less 
Commitments56 
Works 
Grants and Subsidies  
Goods, Services and 
Inputs 
Equipment and 
materials  
Training and workshops 
Consultancies  
Recurrent Costs  
Total 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Less 
WA’s in 
Pipe 
Line 
X 
X 
X 
Less 
Projected 
Expenses 
to the end 
x 
x 
x 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Net 
Available 
Balance 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
28.  The  net  available  balance  should  also  be  broken  down  according  to  components,  sub-
components and major activity headings so that planners are able to determine the relative weights for 
each component/ sub-component in the AWPB as illustrated in the table below. It is important to keep 
a relative balance between components so that some components do not lag behind.  
55 IFAD Flex cube Statement of Funds (convert to US$) plus balances for domestic financiers well 
reconciled to the computerized accounting system to be installed by SACP 
56Take care to roll-over commitments into next year’s budget 
136 
1.1: Cluster Identification and VC Mobilization Senior Social Inclusion Specialist/Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor 1.2: Technical Services for APGs and Agribusinesses Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor  1.3: Matching Grants for Inclusive VC Investment Senior VC and Agribusiness Advisor   2.0 Climate Proofed Value Chain Infrastructure Senior CSA Advisor  Senior Infrastructure Specialist  3.1: Policy and Institutional Support KM and Comms Specialist/ Programme Coordinator   3.2: Project Coordination Project Coordinator/ PMU   
Working Form to deduce status of available balances budget units (US$) by sub-component of 
expenditure analysed separately for IFAD loan, OFID loan and GoZ counterpart contribution 
Budget unit 
Available 
cash 
balance)57 
Less 
Commitments58 
Cluster Identification and VC 
Mobilization 
Technical Services for APGs and 
Agribusinesses 
Matching Grants for Inclusive VC 
Investment 
Climate Proofed Value Chain 
Infrastructure 
Policy and Institutional Support 
Programme Coordination 
Total 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Less 
Projected 
Expenses 
to the end 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Net 
Available 
Balance 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
29.  Role  2:  Other  disbursement  restricting  factors:  Whereas  available  balances  may  set  the 
ceiling of what to include in the AWPB, there are other restricting factors. The CA will quantify these 
and  communicate  to  the  budget  holders/  sub-component  heads  at  the  start  of  the  planning  season; 
examples will include: 
a)  The realistic amount that can be replenished from IFAD.  
b)  Time lag between commitment and disbursement.  
c)  Existing obligations to complete on-going works. 
30.  Role 3: Consolidating the SACP AWPB: In the AWPB there is a number of finance tables that 
have to be consolidated by the CA and his or her team, working closely with the PM&E Specialist. While 
the consolidation of the AWPB into one document will be led by the M & E Specialist, the finance tables 
will be a responsibility of the CA. These tables will include: 
a)  Past year financial performance and cumulatively 
b)  Consolidated Annual Budget Summary 
c)  Component of expenditure/receipts summary 
d)  Category of expenditure/receipts summary  
e)  Category of expenditure/receipts summary by financier 
f)  Component of expenditure/receipts summary by financier 
g)  Detailed  Activity  based  annual Work  Plans  and  Budgets  for  each  budget  responsibility 
centre 
31.  The  formats  for  each  of  the  above  summary  are  available  in  the  IFAD  guideline  for  AWPB 
preparation and progress reports. 
32.  Treasury  planning:  This  will  be  part  of  the  AWPB  preparation.  The  CA,  as  part  of  AWPB 
processing, will earmark the bigger items that can be paid for through direct payments and those that 
have to be paid for from the operational bank accounts. This will be translated into a monthly cash flow 
forecast  to  ensure  there  is  sufficient  liquidity  even  in  peak  periods.  Sample  AWPB  templates  are 
included at Appendix 1 
33.  Under Work plan and budgeting IFAD supervision missions will always be interested in: 
a)  Timely preparation and approval of AWPB. 
b)  AWPB in line with expenditure categories in Financing Agreement Schedule 2. 
c)  Financing sources and implementing agencies for each category in the AWPB are identified. 
d)  Linkage between AWPB and Procurement plan.  
57This will be as per SACP accounting system 
58Take care to roll-over commitments into next year’s budget 
137 
B.  Step 2: Committing funds 
34.  Commitment of funds is largely a procurement function covered under a separate procurement 
manual. The finance team will have a role to play in the procurement cycle including: 
a)  Providing the status of available balances ahead of each procurement launch to avoid over-
committing SACP/ GoZ. This will require CA to maintain a detailed analysis of commitments. 
b)  This means contracts cannot be signed off without the CAentering them into his/her system. 
c)  The authentication, custody and execution of any financial instruments such as performance 
bonds, advance guarantees will be a responsibility of the Programme Accountant. 
d)  The financial progress elements of the contract monitoring forms will be a responsibility of the 
Programme Accountant. 
C.  Step 3: Treasury function including the accounting system 
35.  The NPMU will operate a fully functional accounting software in form and substance satisfactory 
to  IFAD  for  maintaining  its  accounts  .SACP  shall  deploy  an  off-the  shelf  accounting  software  to  be 
procured  at  the  onset  of  the  programme  and  installed  at  the  NPMU  with  customisation  to  generate 
financial reports for GoZ and for IFAD to disclose use of funds by component, sub-component, activity, 
cost category and each of the funding sources, and will incorporate budgetary control at activity level. 
IFAD will continuously review the Grants Module of the Public Financial Management System (PFMS) 
during implementation to determine its readiness for SACP accounting. The PFMS is currently being 
used by GOZ donor-financed projects such as by World Bank and by the Global Fund. 
36.  The  project  will  adopt  the  IPSAS  accrual basis  accounting  standards in accordance  with GoZ 
accounting requirements  for externally financed projects. SACP will maintain a multi-currency general 
ledger to facilitate automatic generation of financial reports in US$ and ZW$.   
37.  Setting the chart of accounts: SACP will sufficiently code the off-the-shelf accounting package 
to optimise its use. In setting the chart of accounts: 
a)  The customisation will be in such a way as to disclose use of SACP funds by component, sub-
component, activity, cost category and each of the funding sources to be collated through the 
software. 
 Customization  will  also  include  reference  to  the  GoZ’s  Chart  of  Account  (COA).  Budgetary 
control at activity level to be incorporated.  
b) 
c)  The system shall be set to produce auto Statement of Expenditures (SoEs).  
d) 
It should be set to print at a click of a button, the designated account reconciliation at any one 
time; and 
e)  They key activities and codes allocated should be agreed with M&E Specialist as the key ones 
that  the  latter  will  be  monitoring  from  physical  progress  side.  This  will  ensure  that  there  is  a 
convergence  between  the  Chief  Accountant     ’s  monitoring  (financial  progress)  and  the M&E 
Specialist  (physical  progress).  This  coding  approach  will  be  applied  consistently  across  the 
entire  PMU  from  the  coding  of  the  AWPB,  procurement  requisitions  and  other  documents, 
payment vouchers, the accounting system and PM&E physical input level monitoring. 
38.  Expenditure-attribution.  Use  of  the  accounting  software  will  ensure  the  traceability  of  the 
funding. In this, activities will be traced – right from planning to be followed through by the accounting 
system  up  to  withdrawal application  –  to  either  OFID,  or  to  the  IFAD loan.  Activity level expenditure 
codes in the accounting system shall be aligned to activities codes contained in the AWPB. 
39.  Accounting  for  Beneficiary  Contribution:  all  project  financing  sources  (IFAD  financing, 
counterpart contributions, beneficiary cash contributions and co-financier funds, whether in cash or in 
the form of tax exemption) and all in-kind contributions must be duly valued and accounted for in the 
project financial statements. Such contributions shall be subject to external audit.  
a.  Recognition: The contribution by an individual, unit or organisation of a service or product to 
SACP free of charge shall be classified as in-kind contribution. All in-kind costs must be eligible, 
actual, evidenced and essential to the delivery of the project. For SACP beneficiary contribution 
may  in  the  form  of  cash  deposited  by  participating  communities  to  match  grant  funds  of  the 
share of the sub-project costs, labour, construction materials, agricultural products, plots of land 
138 
etc. The GoZ  contribution will be in form of tax exemptions, salaries for GoZ staff seconded to 
SACP and provision of office space.  
b.  Measurement:  In-kind  contributions  should  be  recognised  at  fair  market  value.  “Fair  market 
value”  is  defined  as  the  agreed-upon  price  in  an  open  and  unrestricted  market  between 
knowledgeable and willing parties who are dealing at arm’s length and who are fully informed.  
c.  Disclosure:  It  is  the  ultimate  responsibility  of  SACP  Chief  Accountant        to  ensure  that  the 
reported  fair-market  value  for  all  items  involving  an  in-kind  contribution  is  reasonable  and 
correctly and fully disclosed in its financial statements.  
It is incumbent upon the SACP Chief Accountant    ensure that in-kind contributions recognised  
at the grant proposal  evaluation stages are incorporated in the  milestones defined in the grant 
agreements so that they  are measured in the  normal course of the grant monitoring  process 
for  subsequent  disclosure in  the  financial  statements  Example  of  information  required  for 
beneficiary contribution is included at Appendix 5 
Records Management 
40.  Financial records must be created and preserved for every financial transaction performed under 
the programme. Financial records are defined as any financial information including written, computer 
data, internal forms, e-mails, or any other form of storage information originated from the PMU such as 
internal  forms,  journal  vouchers,  financial  reports  (Monthly  &  quarterly)  copies  of  cheques  and 
withdrawal  applications  etc.  or  received  by  the  PMU  such  as  supplier  invoices  and  receipts,  bank 
statements, IFAD documents etc. within the framework of the project's official activities. The objective 
of this procedure is to preserve the financial records and files for further official use by the  PMU, for 
financial audit and for review by the Fund during the supervision missions. The programme’s financial 
records are the property of the MLAWRR and cannot be removed or destroyed.  
41. 
maintain the original records for a minimum 10 years after SACP completion. 
It is important to note that in accordance with the IFAD general conditions, the GoZ has to 
42.  Filing of the financial records. The Finance team will maintain chronological files in which the 
financial documents have to be filed for future reference. Filing should be performed daily to prevent 
the  accumulation  of  papers and to  ensure  that  the  financial records  are  maintained in an up-to-date 
manner at all times. Each financial record should be filed under its code in a chronological order, with 
a sequential number assigned to every document. Any kind of additions or amendments to the financial 
document  should  be  filed  in  a  chronological  order  immediately  following  the  principal  document.  A 
separate series of vouchers will be filed for each operational account opened. 
43.  Storage  of  financial  records:  The  financial  records  of  the  project  should  be  stored  in  the 
PMU/and/  or  MLAWRR  for a  minimum  of  10  years  after  the  project  completion.  The  data  should  be 
stored within the accounting software, as paper copies, as scanned copies and as computer disc copies. 
The Chief Accountant    should allocate an appropriate storage area for the financial records in paper 
format and maintain them in locked cabinets, safe from water and fire, to which access is controlled and 
limited. The CA should also classify the financial records as "Confidential", or "General". All important 
correspondences should be filed. 
44.  Archiving of financial records: In order to prevent an unnecessary pile-up of files in a limited 
office  space,  the  Chief  Accountant      should  make  sure  that  the  financial  records  are  archived  on  a 
regular basis. Once a year, the Chief Accountant    should make sure that the completed or inactive 
files are archived in a manner that will allow for easy retrieval of the files in case they are required at 
some future date.  
45.  Back- up procedures: To avoid the loss or damage of financial data, the information should be 
kept in two copies: i) at the computer server and ii) in the locked cabinets of the PMU. Only authorised 
personnel  should  be  allowed  to  access  the  financial  records.  The  access  of  external  persons  is 
prohibited except for authorised persons such investigators, auditors& IFAD staff/ consultants with prior 
arrangement.  
46.  Under the area of accounting system, IFAD missions will be looking out for the following aspects: 
a)  Basis of accounting- SACP should comply with the cash basis of accounting with the required 
disclosures; 
b)  Adequacy and reliability of accounting system- therefore the project should ensure to comply with 
the internal controls around the accounting system; 
139 
c)  Recordkeeping (including documentation and filing/archiving); 
d)  Fixed assets register maintained and reconciled; 
e)  Adequate  documentation  and  controls 
for 
Information  Systems, 
including  documented 
accounting procedures, backup of financial records, integration of all sub-systems; 
f)  Adequacy of chart of accounts for SACP accounting purposes; 
g)  Timeliness of recording transactions, regularity of performance and approval of reconciliations, 
controls on erroneous recordings; and 
h)  Appropriate/ adequate accounting and reporting of counterpart funds contributions (including tax 
and tax exemptions) as well as beneficiary contributions. 
Internal controls and expenditure documentation 
47. 
It is emphasised that SACP is GoZ programme and, therefore, will comply with GoZ allowances 
applicable to externally financed projects for travel and accommodation unless otherwise specifically 
agreed formally between IFAD and GoZ.  
Payment Documentation 
48.  For all payments, the Chief Accountant    should ensure that the following steps are performed: 
a)  A payment request voucher should be prepared for each payment.  
b)  Validation of invoice. The following validation checks should be performed by the Finance Team 
Invoice arithmetically correct; and 
on invoice: 
 
  Quantity and price recorded on invoice should be checked back to contract, order, and 
certification  of  completion/delivery.  If  there  is  any  discrepancy  identified,  it  should  be 
raised with the vendor prior to proceeding with invoice processing, 
c)  Supporting  documentation:  the  following  documents  should  be  attached  to  the  payment 
invoice;  
voucher to support validation: 
 
  Required approvals; 
  Purchase order, goods received note and contract if applicable; and 
  Copy of required guarantees 
49.  Minimum documentation. To ensure that the finance unit collects all the supporting documents, 
the following checklists are provided; they should be ticked-off carefully and attached to each payment 
voucher. 
Table 2:  Payment Checklists 
Standard Goods 
(Tick) 
1.  Complete written voucher, duly approved 
2.  Confirmation by Procurement Officer that the 
Procurement was properly done in accordance with 
GoM and IFAD procedures 
3.  Attach copies of relevant No Objections from IFAD, 
where applicable 
4.  Availability of supporting documentation 
a)  Contract 
b)  Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d)  Bank guarantee 
140 
e)  Delivery notes/reports (Make Cross Reference 
where bulky) 
5.  Fund availability in: 
a)  Budget.  Ensure  - the accounting system’s 
budget controls have been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
6.  Accuracy of computations / footings 
7.  Reviewed optimality of the disbursement method 
8.  Banking instructions 
9.  Correspondence bank 
10. Percentage of financing 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
1. 
 Attendance sheets 
 Attendance sheets should be 
2. 
reconciled to DSA paid 
3. 
 Availability of supporting documentation 
a)  Training report 
b)  Hotel receipts / bills for meals and 
accommodation (should be reconciled to 
attendance sheets) 
 Procurement record on how the venue 
4. 
was selected 
5. 
related support 
6. 
 Justification for any fuel refunds and 
 Fund availability in 
a)  Budget.  Ensure PMFS budget controls have 
been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
7. 
 Accuracy of computations / footings 
a)  Invitations and related IFAD’s No Objection  
b)  Availability of supporting documentation 
-  Boarding passes reconciled DSA days taken 
-  Back to Office Reports 
c)  Fund availability in 
- Budget.  Ensure accounting system’s budget 
controls have been updated 
- Category(ies) 
141 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
d)  Accuracy of computations / footings 
Consultancies 
(Tick) 
1.  Timesheets in comparison with the work done  
2.  Attach copies of relevant No Objections from IFAD, 
where applicable 
3.  An acceptable / approved report  
4.  Availability of supporting documentation 
a)  Contract 
b)  Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
d)  Bank guarantee for advances 
5.  Fund availability in 
c)  Budget.  Ensure accounting system’s budget 
controls  have been updated 
a)  Category(ies) 
6.  Accuracy of computations / footings 
7.  Banking instructions 
Correspondence bank 
Adequate segregation of duties: SACP financial management system shall be  designed to assure adequate 
segregation of duties . No single officer shall be  allowed to originate, process, approve or sign off payments or to 
certify the receipt of any related goods and services all by him/ herself The payment cycle for works and goods 
will follow the following pattern: 
142 
Figure 5:  SACP segregation of duties in the Payment Cycle
50.  Payments  for  Consultant  Services:  There  are  two  types  of  consultants'  services;  a) 
Consultants  with  a  lump  sum  contract,  and  b)  Consultants  with  a  time-based  contract.  For  type  (a) 
consultants, payments will be made against the delivery of outputs as detailed in their contracts.  For 
type (b) consultants, payments will be made against the submission of a time sheet, a report on activities 
performed and the assurance (by a technical coordinator) of the adequacy of services rendered. Both 
time sheets and reports will need the technical approval of the technical component head before the 
payment can be entertained. 
51. 
Similar  arrangement  above  to  assure  segregation  of  duties  will  apply  for  regular  office 
supplies and travel related expenditures. Detailed TORS for the SACP finance staff  are attached at 
Appendix 9. 
Fixed assets control 
143 
Technical  Departments make payment requisitions with all supporting documents and justifications  Procurement Specialist:  Prepare payment Request  Attach technical approval & other supporting documents  Attach contractor’s/ supplier invoice and Delivery Notes      Accounts Assistant  Verifies availability of budget  Reviews the status of contract monitoring forms  Reviews the status of securities (advance/ performance bonds)  Checks reliability of banking instructions  Makes entry in the computerised accounting system  Reviews the work of the Assistant accountant  Prepares payment vouchers ensuring checklists in this manual and fully ticked off  Prepares payments or types out a withdrawal application in case of direct payment  Undertakes chronological filing in a series for each funding source disbursed on a parallel basis  Makes entries in manual registers   Programme Accountant  Checks the accuracy of payment request and supporting documents  Verify the payment request’s compliance with the contract  Reviews the work done by the Accounts Assistant  Checks vouchers or forwards direct payments for further action of Director of Finance and Programme Coodinator  Review open entries passed by Accounts Assistant and if satisfied updates the computerised system        Other PCU Staff Follow up and provision and accountabilities  Programme Coordinator  Reviews work of the Programme Accountant and Procurement Specialist  Checks Approves payments   Request Chief Accountant/Director of Financeauthorised signatories  to sign  off withdrawal applications in case of direct payments     
52.  Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets for the purposes 
of financial accounting and to ensure preventive maintenance, and theft deterrence. Adequate Fixed 
asset maintenance also increases the sustainability of the project. 
53.  Asset  Register.  The  Chief  Accountant      must  maintain  a  register  of  all  (material)  SACP 
equipment.  The  asset  register  should  record  the  following  information  for  each  individual  piece  of 
equipment: 1) Asset description, 2) Asset number, 3) Serial number of the item, 4) Officer responsible 
for asset, 5) Funding of asset (IFAD, Government etc.), 6) Location; Date of purchase; and 7) Estimated 
life. Sample forms for asset records are included at Appendix 4. 
54.  Asset Verification Review. The Chief Accountant   must ensure that a verification count of all 
equipment recorded in the fixed asset register is performed at least once a year. This should include 
the following checks: 
a)  Verify that all equipment is still held in the location recorded on the register; and 
b)  Check that equipment is still in a reasonable state of repair. 
c)  Discrepancies  between  the  verification  exercise  and  the  fixed  asset  register  should  be  investigated. 
Where assets are missing or seriously damaged, they should be removed from the asset register. The 
removal  should  be  formally  documented  and  approved by  the  Programme  Coordinator  and  notified  to 
PSC. 
d)  The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who use the equipment, to ensure 
adequate segregation of duty. 
55.  Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel. The drivers are required to record all trips and fuel refills in a 
logbook and collect all the supporting documentation (different if fuel cards/vouchers are used). The 
vehicle logbook provides control over the use of the vehicles as well as fuel consumption. For official 
field trips, a special cash provision is given to drivers to allow them to purchase fuel during the trip and 
payment of tollgate fees.. 
56. 
 The safety of cars is the responsibility of the recipient staff members and drivers assigned to the 
vehicles. Consequently, they must ensure that the cars are parked in a secure area when not in use or 
outside working hours. The drivers are required to monitor the maintenance of their assigned vehicles 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Administrative  Assistant.  The  drivers  must  notify  the  Administrative 
Assistant of  maintenance  needs  (including periodic  servicing)  so  that  the  cars  can  be  serviced  on  a 
timely basis. Sample documents for vehicle and fuel management are included at Appendixes 6 
and 7. 
57.  The Chief Accountant   should on a monthly basis review the mileage and fuel usage as well as 
any  undertaken  service  as  reported in  the log  book  of  each  car  and  compare  these  with the  official 
invoices and travel authorizations etc. to make sure the numbers are accurate. These should be signed 
off by the Programme. 
58.  An insurance policy must be taken by the PMU to cover all cars and passengers against all risks, 
including damage, theft, and fire, as well as injury and property damage to third parties.  
59.  Under internal controls, IFAD missions will be keenly interested in the following aspects:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Segregation of duties- are the following functional responsibilities performed by different 
units or persons:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
authorization of a transaction; 
execution of a transaction; 
recording of the transaction; and  
Custody of assets involved in the transaction. 
Clarity and adequacy of decision processes and sequence of events for control functions 
in project implementation reflected in the Financial Manual (or equivalent there-of). 
Adherence to Project Management manuals. 
Effectiveness and efficiency of internal controls over inflows of funding sources other than 
IFAD. 
Adequacy of contract management  (use of contracts register and monitoring form)  and 
filing there-of. 
Effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  internal  controls  over  expenditures  (full  cycle  from 
commitment,  payment,  receipt  of  goods  and  services,  approval  of  payments, 
classification, etc.)  
144 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
k) 
l) 
m) 
n) 
o) 
p) 
q) 
r) 
s) 
Documentary evidence to confirm delivery and acceptance of contracted goods, works or 
services. 
Physical controls over cash, documents and records. Adequacy of filing systems. Missions 
will review  the  petty  cash  subject  to  monthly  reconciliation as  well  as  surprise checks; 
custody of cash box and control of keys. 
Adequacy of physical management of cash. 
Timely payment to suppliers and consultants. 
Eligibility of expenditures with respect to Financing Agreements. 
Legality/eligibility of advances from project funds and timely justification for use thereof.  
Compliance with financial management covenants in the Financing Agreement and Letter 
to the Recipient (LTR). 
Adequacy of up-to-date record keeping for fixed assets and inventories. 
Adequacy of controls concerning project assets including: 
i. 
Vehicle  and  other  assets  management  (assets  should  be  property  tagged  and  a 
physical inventory count done on a regular basis) 
Fuel management (Drivers should maintain a vehicle log book)  
Travel authorisations (including Daily Subsistence Allowance (DSA) paid to staff) 
Adequacy of vehicles and assets insurance. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Workshops:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Availability of list of participants 
DSA paid to participants 
Receipts for workshop expenditure 
Adequacy  of  controls  and  authorisation process  for  use  of  funds  (payments,  transfers, 
Cash/Bank balance management) / and other operational accounts. 
Banking  arrangement  and  controls  (reconciliation  of  bank  statements  with  financial 
accounts). 
Existence of a proper IT support unit in place. 
D.  Step 4: Withdrawal Applications 
60.  The  authorised  allocations  for  SACP  will  be  based  on  projected  disbursements  per  semester 
which  will  be  determined  during  the  final  stage  of  the  design.  The  threshold  for  statements  of 
expenditures (SOEs) is proposed at US$25,000 in line with the overall high inherent fiduciary risk rating 
the programme has attained at design.  
61.  The replenishment of the Special Account will be done in accordance with the disbursement rules 
and  procedures  of  the  IFAD. The  programme  will  make  use  of  the  standard  disbursement  methods 
including:  i)  direct  payment  method  for  bigger  payments  over  US$  100,000;  ii)  use  of  designated 
account; and iii) reimbursement if the GOM has pre-financed any transactions. Detailed instructions for 
disbursements  will  be  included  in  the  Letter  to  The  Borrower  (LTB)  issued  by  IFAD  for  SACP  the 
contents of which will be discussed and agreed with the GOZ. 
62.  The finance team must be efficient in submission of the withdrawal applications to IFAD otherwise 
liquidity can be a hindrance to implementation. A tool that can be used to measure the efficiency of a 
replenishment process is the designated account reconciliation as shown below. Thus the designated 
account reconciliation should not always be prepared for inclusion in a WAs and should be used, on a 
monthly basis, as a performance measure as illustrated below. 
145 
Figure 6: Illustrating that Designated Account Reconciliation is good Treasury Management 
Tool 
 US$   Management Tips 
1  Total initial advance by IFAD 
2  LESS: Amount Recovered by IFAD 
- 
3  Outstanding Advance to Designated 
Account 
4  Balance of Designated Account as per 
Bank Statement from the Commercial 
bank 
5  Balance on Project Operational 
Accounts as per Bank Statements  
Total of Bank Balances 
6  Plus Total Amount claimed in this 
Application No.  
xxx  
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx  
This  reconciliation  should  give  the  whereabouts  of  this 
advance and the CA should always on a monthly basis be 
interested to know the whereabouts of the initial deposit. 
If less than 50% of the initial deposit can be traced to bank 
statements,  this  can  always  alert  the  CA  and  SACP 
Coordinator of lingering cash flow problems by looking at 
lines 4 and 5 
If this amount is materially higher than 30% of the initial 
deposits  it  would  point  at  laxity  in  the  replenishment 
system. If for example, this amount is twice or more than 
the minimum amount for replenishment, It would tell PC 
that the CA could have lodged a WA when expenditure 
reached the minimum amount of 30% of the initial deposit 
and there could be over bulking/ inefficiency. 
7  Plus Total Amount withdrawn from 
bank accounts not yet claimed 
8  Plus Amounts claimed in previous 
Applications not yet credited at date of 
Bank Statement 
xxx   This should cause the SACP Coordinator to demand why 
money to this magnitude has been withdrawn but is not 
being included in the WA. The PC should always demand 
for a schedule of this amount—it reflects inefficiency and 
results  in cash  flow  problems to  have  large  amounts  of 
money  from  bank  accounts  and  take  a  long  time  to  be 
replenished back. Secondly care should be taken that this 
figure  is  not  only  inserted  as  a  balancing  figure,  which 
would  reflect  that  the  designated  account  is  not  well 
managed. 
xxx  The WAs in the pipeline, if they take long to be processed, 
could reflect that IFAD raised many queries on the quality 
of the WAs, in which case the SACP Coordinator could 
request for staff training; or it could be delays on the side 
of  IFAD  and  in  which  case  the  PC  would  still  have  to 
initiate follow-up from IFAD. It is advisable for the PA to 
always follow the status of the WA on IFAD’ Client Portal. 
9  Minus Interest Earned 
10. TOTAL ADVANCE ACCOUNTED FOR 
xxx  
If  this  total  does  not  equal  to  the  outstanding  initial 
deposit,  the  PC  should  demand  explanation.  It  is  so 
serious to fail to reconcile the initial deposit 
It is key for CAto know SACP treasury position at all times in order to better manage the SACP’s 
63. 
liquidity position in a timely and efficient manner. The key goals are to ensure that: 
a)  There are sufficient funds in treasury to meet the SACP’s field activities for implementation.  
b) 
c) 
the disbursement rate of the project closely follows the physical activity progress; 
Increase in the performance level of SACP and meeting its objectives as in the PDR. 
64.  The key elements on project treasury position are: 
a)  Status of Designated accounts balances (Using the cash books as at reporting date) 
b)  Status of the operation accounts balances (Using the cash books as at reporting date) 
c)  The status of cash in hand (Using the cash book as at reporting date)  
d)  The money value of WA with IFAD for reimbursement 
e)  The money value of WA to be submitted to IFAD 
65.  CA should prepare regular cash and expenditures rolling monthly cash flow forecasts. This will 
help to detect periods of liquidity gaps so that appropriate adjustments in work scheduling or any other 
remedial actions can be taken proactively. 
146 
E.  Step 5: Financial reports and auditing 
66.  Periodic financial progress reports are a requirement of the IFAD Financing Agreement. Sufficient 
information must be made available about what the money is spent on, how much is spent and what 
the  results  are.  The  major  financial  reports  include  the  following:  AWPB,  monthly  financial  reports, 
periodic financial progress reports, supervision reports, annual financial statements and audit reports. 
IFAD  has  now  developed  guidelines  for  Interim  Financial  Reporting  (IFR)  to  guide  the  progress 
reporting. These have been included in the resource pack. Sample reporting templates are included 
at Appendices 2 and 3 
67.  Under financial reporting, IFAD missions will be looking for: 
a)  Completeness, accuracy, usefulness, and timeliness of financial reports; 
b) 
Interim FM reports and linkage to progress reports - timely preparation, submission to IFAD; 
c)  Preparation of reports showing actual vs budget income/expenditure and AWPB execution 
rate;  
d)  Follow up of previous aide-memoirs fiduciary recommendations; and 
e)  Reasonable  alignment  between  disbursement  rate  of  recurrent  versus  investment  cost 
categories. 
Audit arrangements. 
68.  The project audit is an ex-post review of financial statements, records of transactions & financial 
systems;  It  examines  the  adequacy  of  accounting  systems  &  procedures,  capacity  to  maintain 
appropriate accounts & documentation of the project expenditures. The objective of the project audit is 
to provide credibility and assurance of accountability.  
69.  External audits:  External audits for the project will be performed by independent private firms 
during  the  initial  years  of  implementation  in  line  with  guidelines  spelt  out  in  the  IFAD  Handbook  on 
Financial Report and Auditing for IFAD funded projects. IFAD will continuously perform reviews together 
with  the  Office  of  the  Auditor  General  of  Zimbabwe  to  assess  its  readiness  in  staffing  capacities  to 
conduct audits for IFAD funded projects. The audit will provide an opinion on the financial statements 
as  well  as  ensure  a review  of  the internal control  framework  of  the project  for  which  a  management 
letter will always be issued together with the audited financial statements. IFAD Guidelines for Project 
Audit  provide  a  comprehensive  guide  for  both  PCU  and  the  auditor  and  include  audit  Terms  of 
Reference. A draft TOR has been appended to this manual as a guide at Annex 9. Under the area 
of external audits, IFAD missions will be looking out for: 
a)  Adequacy of scope and ToR. 
b)  Adherence to ToR. 
c)  Timeliness of audit report. 
d)  Quality of audit. 
. 
Internal  audits: Internal  audit  will be  covered  by  the lead  agency/MLAWRR internal auditors. 
70. 
However, there is also the option of outsourcing to an internal audit firm should the Lead Agency fail to 
provide the services. Under the area of internal audit, IFAD missions will be looking for the following: 
e)  Existence of Internal Audit arrangements.  
f)  Adequacy of internal audit arrangements (organization - staff capacity).  
g)  Adequacy of internal audit scope of work and quality of reports. 
h)  Assessment of matters raised in audit reports. 
71. 
 In accordance with the IFAD general conditions and the IFAD guidelines for project audits, 
the PMU must have SACP financial statements audited by an External auditor acceptable to IFAD. The 
Audited financial statements need to be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after the end of the fiscal 
year.  The  detailed  instruction  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD  guidelines  for  project 
audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
147 
F. 
LOAN COMPLETION AND CLOSING 
72.  The closing of the loan is due six months after the project completion date. Both the completion 
and  the  closing  date  of  the  loan  have  financial  implications  on  the  project  management  such  as: 
development and submission of a recovery plan, ensuring eligibility of expenditures and submission of 
the  necessary  documents  outlined  below.  Please  also  refer  to  section  1.3  of  the  Disbursement 
Handbook.  
73. 
 Recovery plan. To ensure that the designated account is completely and timely justified, the 
Chief Accountant   /PMU has to develop and submit to the Fund a so called recovery plan outlining the 
percentages per withdrawal application that will be recovered and paid respectively. The recovery plan 
should be submitted to the fund around 6 months before the completion date or when the outstanding 
balance (amount still undisbursed by IFAD) is less than the double of the authorised allocation. Please 
refer to Appendix 8 for a sample recovery plan. 
74.  Loan Completion. The IFAD loan completion date will be defined in the Financing Agreement.  
By the completion date all the project activities must have been finalised. The payments can be done 
also after the completion date, as long as the commitments/ contracts are signed prior to the completion 
date. Activities that have continued after the completion date are considered as ineligible expenditures 
and can therefore not be financed by the IFAD funds.  
75.  After the completion date but no later than the closing date (six months after the completion date) 
the  PMU  can  still  incur  expenditures  related  to  so  called  winding  up  expenditures  e.g.  Final  Audit, 
Project completion report, Project staff salaries involved in the winding up activities, PMU maintenance 
cost, project completion workshop. 
76.  Loan Closure. The Fund requires the following to be provided by the PMU in order to close the 
loan: 
a)  Confirmation of last withdrawal application; 
b)  Submission of final audit report; 
c)  Submission of project completion report 
The Final Audit Report has to cover, the final project year up to the final expenditures and it 
77. 
can be paid from the loan available balance by using, for example, direct payment or reimbursement of 
pre financed expenditures 
148 
Appendix 1: Sample annual work plan and budget templates 
Table 1: Detailed AWBP Template  
Table 2: AWBP Summary Table by category and financier 
Table 3 : AWPB  Summary  Table by component and by category 
149 
UnitUnit (US$)Sub -Component/ ActivityQrt 1Qrt 2Qrt 3Qrt 4Qrt 1Qrt 2Qrt 3Qrt 4TotalIFAD LoanOFID LoanSmallholdersAgribusinessGoZTotalCluster Identification and VC MobilizationActivity XTechnical Services for APGs and AgribusinessesActivity X Matching Grants for Inclusive VC InvestmentActivity X Policy and Institutional SupportActivity X Project CoordinationActivity XExpenditures by Financiers (US$ '000)Total Planned QuantitiesBudget (US$'000)IFAD LoanOFIDSmallholdersAgribusinessGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Works--2. Grants & Subsidies3. Goods, Services & Inputs4. Equipment and Materials5. Consultancies6. Training and Workshops7. Recurrent CostsTotal CategoryI.  Category 1II.  Category 2III. Category 3III. Category 4III. Category 5TotalSub Component 1.3Component 2.0Sub Component 1.1Sub Component 1.2Sub Component 3.1Sub Component 3.2Total 
Appendix 2: Sample templates for monthly report for management 
use 
Table 1: Monthly Budget Execution Report 
 Monthly Budget Execution Report 
Budgeted 
Actual 
Variance 
Current  
Month  
 Year- 
To date  
Cumula 
tive -  
To date  
 Current  
Month  
 Year-To  
date  
 Cumulative  
- To Date  
 Current  
month  
 Year-To  
date  
Cumul 
ative-  
TO  
date  
Commitme 
nts Entered  
(not payed)  
To - Date 
 Cash Payments  
per component  
/subcomponent  
4 
Project Management 
Total 
 Cash Payments per  
Expenditure category  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Total 
150 
Table 2: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Project ________________________ 
Date of reconciliation ________________ 
Part I. Petty cash reconciliation 
Petty cash balance brought forward (a) 
           ______________ 
Replenishments during the current month (b) 
            ______________ 
Total petty cash balance (c = a + b) 
______________ 
Disbursements during the current month (d)  
             ______________ 
Petty cash book balance (e = c – d) 
______________ 
Cash count balance (f) – see part ii. below 
______________ 
Difference (G = E – F) 
______________ 
Explanation Of Difference 
___________________________________________________________________ 
___________________________________________________________________ 
Part II - Cash Count 
Description 
Quantity 
Total amount 
bank notes 
 100 
  50 
  10 
coins 
Total in local currency 
Counted/reconciled by (Financial Accountant) ___________ 
Reviewed by (CA) ________________ 
Date _________________ 
151 
Table 4: Monthly fuel consumption report 
Project Name:  
Lead Project Agency: MLAWRR 
Reporting period:  
Monthly fuel Consumption report as at DD/MM/YYYY 
Vehicle 
Location 
Quantity 
(litres) 
Cost (reporting 
period in US$) 
Annual Planned 
(US$) 
Cumulative  Cost 
(annual in US$) 
Variance (%) 
Total 
152 
Appendix 3: Sample periodic financial progress report 
Table 1: Statement of cash receipts and payments  
(by category and by financier) 
notes 
20xx 
20xx-1 
US$ 
XX 
US$ 
XX 
Cumulative to 
date 
US$ 
 1 - Initial cash balance / or cash balance brought forward 
FINANCING: 
 - IFAD funds received: 
 - Initial deposit 
 - Replenishment of the Designated Account 
 - IFAD Direct Payments 
 - Funds received by the government - if any 
 - Funds received by the beneficiary - if any 
 - Other receipts - if any 
 2 - TOTAL FINANCING 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
PROJECT EXPENDITURES (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) 
Category 
IFAD Loant  (separate analysis if different sources of IFAD's funding) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Consultancies 
Goods, Services and Inputs   
Training and Workshops 
Works 
Operating expenses 
Salaries and allowances 
Subtotal IFAD loan 
Government Funds 
Consultancies 
Goods, Services and Inputs 
Training and workshops 
Works  
Operating expenses 
Salaries and allowances 
Subtotal Government Funds 
Beneficiary Funds 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
1 
Consultancies 
xx 
xx 
153 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Goods, Services and Inputs 
xx 
xx 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Training and workshops 
Works 
Operating expenses 
Salaries and allowances 
Subtotal Beneficiary Funds 
 3 - TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
Balance brought forward (1 + 2 - 3) 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Table 2: Statement of comparative budget and actual amount by component. 
FINANCING: 
 - IFAD funds received: 
 - Initial deposit 
 - Replenishment of the Special Account (SA) 
 - IFAD Direct 
Payments 
 - Funds received by the government - if any 
 - Funds received by beneficiaries - if any 
 - Other receipts - if any 
 2 - TOTAL FINANCING 
Component 
IFAD Loan  
1 
1.a 
1.b 
2 
2.a 
2.b 
3 
1 
1.a 
Subtotal IFAD Funds 
Government Finance 
notes 
20XX 
BUDGET 
20XX 
ACTUAL 
VARIANCE 
US$ 
US$ 
US$ 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
154 
Subtotal Government Funds 
Beneficiary Funds 
1.b 
2 
2.a 
2.b 
3 
1 
1.a 
1.b 
2 
2.a 
2.b 
3 
Subtotal beneficiary  Funds 
 3 - TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES 
The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the budget of X% was due to…. 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Table 3 : Designated Account Reconciliation 
3 
Designated Account No: 
Bank Name: 
1. Total Advanced by IFAD 
2. Less total amount recovered by IFAD 
US$ 
US$ 
3. Equals present outstanding amount advanced to the designated account (line 1 less line 
2) 
US$ 
4.Balance of designated account per attached bank statements as of (Date: 
day/month/year) 
5. Plus balance of the project account(s) (listed separately) 
Plus balance of sub accounts (listed separately) 
Plus balance of Cash in Hand 
US$ 
US$ 
US$ 
US$ 
Total of Bank Balances (designated A/C, PA, SUB accounts& cash in hand balance) (line 
4+line 5) 
US$ 
155 
6. Plus total amount claimed in this WA no. 
7. Plus total amount withdrawn from the designated/ PA and not yet claimed for 
replenishment) or WAs pending submission 
US$ 
US$ 
8. Plus amounts claimed in previous applications but not yet created at the date of bank 
statement and/or claimed after date of bank statement 
US$ 
Application 
No. 
Date 
US$ 
Amount 
$ 
$ 
$ 
9. Minus Interest earned (to be completed. If zero, please enter zero) 
10. Total Advance accounted for (line 5 through line 9) 
US$ 
US$ 
11. Explanation of any difference between the totals appearing in Lines 3 and 10 
US$ 
Non eligible amount to be refunded to the designated 
account 
calculation errors in application of percentage financing 
counterpart financial resources to be 
reimbursed 
cheques not yet cleared/presented to 
Bank 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
12 DATE 
US$ 
US$ 
US$ 
US$ 
SIGNATURE 
Name in full  
Title in Full 
Table 4: STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES - WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT 
Project Name:  
Lead Project Agency: Ministry of             
Agriculture 
156 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURES - WITHDRAWAL 
APPLICATION STATEMENT 
By category of Expenditures in Local Currency 
WA n..  WA n.. 
WA n.. 
WA n.. 
Total 
WA submitted to 
IFAD 
Category  Category 
Description 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
WA n.. 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
1 
2 
3 
AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Total 
xx 
xx 
In US$ equiv/ 
Rejected from IFAD 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Net Reimbursed 
xx 
xx 
WA pending submission to 
IFAD 
WA n..  WA n..  WA n.. 
Category  Category 
Description 
1 
2 
3 
AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Total 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Withdrawal applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical 
exchange rate of the transfers to the Operating Account. 
157 
APPENDIX 4. Fixed Asset Register 
ASSET  
REF. 
NO. 
ASSET 
DESCR
IPTION 
COMPO
NENT 
FINANCING 
SOURCE 
BENE
FICA
RY 
AGEN
CY 
LOCAT
ION 
ASSIG
NED 
TO 
TAG 
NO. 
SUPP
LIER 
NAME 
PMT/IN
V. 
REFER
ENCE 
DATE 
OF 
PURC
HASE 
DATE 
OF 
RECEIP
T 
PURCHASE 
VALUE 
REMARKS 
Total 
158 
APPENDIX 5. COMMUNITY CONTRIBUTION FORM AND ACCEPTANCE 
STATEMENT 
COMMUNITY CONTRIBUTION FORM 
Contribution 
N. 
Type  Units 
Quantity 
Unit 
Price 
Total 
Sum 
Communit
y 
Other 
organizations  
Comments 
1 
2 
3 
Project District Manager  _______________ 
Technical supervisor______________ 
Signature:  _____________________ 
Signature_______ 
Date 
_________________________ 
______________ 
Date 
___ / _________ 20__.             
____________________ Community 
ACCEPTANCE STATEMENT 
Acceptance Statement  
The parties, ____________________________________, on behalf of the community, and  (name, 
surname) ____________________________________ on behalf of the contractor, hereby sign this 
(name, surname), Acceptance Statement acknowledging that the community has delivered and the 
contractor has accepted the following materials/labour/premises for sub-project implementation:  
Materials/Labour/Premises 
Unit 
Quantity 
Unit cost 
Total 
1 
2 
Signed 
_______________________  
_______________________ 
Community representative                 Contractor representative 
159 
___ / _________ 20__ 
          ___ / _________ 20__ 
160 
Appendix  6: Vehicle Log 
Vehicle registration number ______________________________________             Assigned 
driver ______________________________ 
Time 
Mileage 
Trip 
Da
te 
Fuel 
purchase 
Driver 
signat
ure 
Respons
ible staff 
Depart
ing 
Arri
val 
Depart
ing 
Arri
val 
Destinat
ion 
Purpo
se 
Milea
ge 
Quant
ity 
161 
Appendix 7: Vehicle History Record 
Vehicle registration number     ______________________________________                                     Assigned driver ____________________ 
Date 
Repairs 
Service & maintenance 
Insurance 
Fitness tests 
Description of repair  Garage 
Cost 
Description of 
service 
Garage 
Cost 
Type  
Period 
covered 
Cost 
Checked 
by  
Cost 
Report accidents in the space below, providing all relevant details for each occurrence: 
Date: 
Place: 
Name of driver: 
Circumstances: 
Damage to PCU vehicle: 
Damage to other vehicles: 
Injuries (indicate name of victims and describe injuries): 
Insurance settlement: 
162 
Appendix 8: Sample recovery plan  
Recovery Plan 
Designated Account 
IFAD Loan No.: 
IFAD Loan Amount (SDR) 
20 000 000.00 
Project Completion Date: 
31-Dec-12 
Loan Closing Date: 
30-Jun-13 
Particulars  
Reporting  
Period 
Authorized  
Allocation 
Justification: 
WA No. 
Date 
US $ 
EUR 
SDR 
1 
18/01/2006 
$                
250 000.00 
€                             
€                             
Exchange Rate: 
- 
- 
0.00 
172 648.51 
172 648.51 
#VALUE! 
Unjustified balance 
US$                  SDR 
0.00 
(77 351.49) 
Ref.  
No. 
WA No. 
Date 
Estimated WA  
value 
(SP) 
Estimated WA value 
(US$) 
Proposed 
Recovery % 
Recovery Amount 
(US$) 
Cumulative  
Recovery Amount 
(US$) 
Cumulative  
Unjustified  
balance 
(US$) 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
21-Feb-23 
3-Mar-23 
5-May-23 
7-Jul-23 
5-Sep-23 
31-Dec-23 
10-Jun-23 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
111 832.56 
72 685.11 
74 685.11 
70 885.11 
64 885.11 
82 627.66 
26 065.11 
45% 
35% 
35% 
42% 
40% 
80% 
100% 
50 324.65 
25 439.79 
26 139.79 
29 771.75 
25 954.04 
66 102.13 
26 267.85 
50 324.65 
75 764.44 
101 904.23 
131 675.98 
157 630.02 
223 732.15 
250 000.00 
(50 324.65) 
(75 764.44) 
(101 904.23) 
(131 675.98) 
(157 630.02) 
(223 732.15) 
(250 000.00) 
TOTAL 
503 665.77 US$ 
250 000.00 US$ 
In accordance with IFAD procedures, any amount unjustified at the time of loan closing date will be promptly refunded to IFAD. 
Prepared by: 
Confirmed by: 
15-Oct--2022 
Date 
Date 
163 
Annex 8:  Terms of Reference for the SACP PMU FM Staff 
Position: Chief Accountant 
Duty Station: Harare, Zimbabwe 
Overall Scope of Work  
Reporting  directly  to  the  National  Project  Coordinator  with  technical  responsibility  to 
Director of Finance MLAWRR, the Chief Accountant is a key personnel of SACP responsible 
for the overall financial management aspects, implementing   financial policies, strategies 
in line with IFAD and Government of Zimbabwe requirements and international standards. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
q)  Implementation and maintenance of the  off-the shelf accounting system  ensuring 
that  the  chart  of  accounts  and  reporting  system  thereof  provides  information  to 
link between project activities by category, component and funding source. 
r)  Timely input of budget data into the accounting system and production of monthly 
and quarterly reports regarding aspects of Project financial monitoring bringing out 
variances and advising technical specialist as to the limits of expenditure. 
s)  Prepare half-yearly consolidated statements of project accounts as an integral part 
of  the  Management  Information  System  to  be  submitted  to  the  Project  Steering 
Committee, and subsequently to IFAD. 
t)  Prepare  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  International  Public  Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS) - Accrual basis with the prerequisite disclosures for 
non-cash items and liaise with external auditors to audit the SACP accounts to meet 
the required submission dates by IFAD.  
u)  Oversee tax matters of the Project, ensuring that tax exemptions and tax refunds 
for  the  procurement  of  goods  and  services  for  the  Project  are  secured  at  the 
appropriate time. 
v)  Provide training and guidance to project beneficiaries and implementing partners 
for AWPB activity preparation and submissions and participate in the development 
and  implementation  of  plans,  and  procedures  for  budget  request  submission 
activities  to  ensure  that  project  objectives  are  achieved  in  accordance  with 
prevailing government practices which are acceptable to IFAD.  
w)  Calculate the cost of services and associated analyses and propose actions to be 
taken to improve cost-efficiency of services, without affecting quality. 
x)  Process documentation and follow up on disbursements from the government and 
IFAD  to  ensure  that  releases  are  not  delayed.  Ensure  that  funds  for  Project 
implementation are disbursed in a timely manner to enable project interventions 
to be carried out on time. 
y)  Prepare and submit regular withdrawal applications to IFAD and follow up to ensure 
that the project does not run short of liquidity. 
z)  Follow  up  on  all  project  funds  released  to  implementing  entities  and  technical 
partners for timely retirement and proper utilization. 
aa) Ensure that statements of expenditure (SOEs) are carefully checked for eligibility 
with relevant financial agreements. 
bb) Maintain effective internal control environment for the project  by ensuring  that: 
i. 
ii. 
All  SACP  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  financing 
agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  only  for  the 
purposes for which the funds were provided; 
Counterpart  funds  have  been  provided  and  used  in  accordance  with  the 
conditions  of  the  financing  agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and 
efficiency, and only for the purposes for which they were provided; 
164 
iii.  Goods  and  services  financed  have  been  procured  in  accordance  with  the 
financing agreement and in accordance with government and IFAD’s rules and 
procedures; 
All necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect 
of all project activities, with clear linkages between the books of account and 
the financial statements presented to the financiers; 
iv. 
v.  Designated  accounts  are  maintained in accordance  with  the  provisions  of the 
financing  agreement  and  in  accordance  with  the  financier’s  rules  and 
procedures; 
Provide any support to the Procurement Unit to assist in procurement for the 
SACP in accordance with procedures laid down by Financing Agreements of IFAD 
and OFID. 
vi. 
cc) Ensure  that  fixed  assets  are  well  accounted  for  and  annual  verification  is 
undertaken of the condition of assets and their location. 
dd) Ensure the effective and efficient operation of administrative aspects of the SACP. 
ee) Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Coordinator 
Qualifications and Competences 
 
 Bachelor’s degree in business or finance, and a professionally qualified accountant 
with Membership of the Zimbabwe Institute of Chartered Accountants.  
  Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people and interact 
with a wide range of private sector partners and government representatives.  
  Strong organizational skills. Versatility, ability to multi task and meet deadlines. 
  Excellent organisational and analytical skills. 
  Excellent computer skills and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word and accounting 
software. 
  Good communication skills and ability to interact with a wide range of private sector 
partners and government representatives. 
Required Work Experience 
  At least eight years of relevant work experience, including at least four as a financial 
manager or accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Preparing withdrawal applications for external funding agencies.  
  Audit management experience in donor funded program. 
Mode and Duration of Contract 
The total duration of the contract is three years and is subject to annual performance 
review.
165 
Position: Financial Accountant 
Duty Station: Harare, Zimbabwe 
Overall Scope of Work  
Reporting to the chief accountant, the financial accountant supports the Chief Accountant 
to achieve result-oriented objectives of SACP financial management. Under the supervision 
of  the  chief  accountant,  the  financial  accountant  will  take  responsibility for  all  accounts 
and finance transactions of the SACP and for maintaining all accounting documentation in 
good order. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities 
s)  Support in the preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
t)  Analysing  payment  requests  and  reconciliation  with  approved  documentation 
including purchase orders and contracts 
u)  Posting  payment  invoices  into  financial  management  systems  in  line  with 
approved work plans. 
v)  Assist in preparation of half-yearly consolidated statements of project accounts 
as an integral part of the Management Information System to be submitted to 
the Project Oversight Committee, and subsequently to IFAD. 
w)  Ensure  that  fixed  assets  are  well  accounted  for  and  regular  verification  is 
undertaken of the condition of assets and their location. 
x)  Ensure that supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of 
all project activities, with clear linkages between the books of account and the 
financial statements presented to the financiers; 
y)  Preparing bank reconciliations for the project accounts.  
z)  Assisting in review of invoices and supporting documents before any payments 
are processed. 
aa) Following up on outstanding advances both to staff and service providers. 
bb) Assisting  in  ensuring  budgetary  controls  to  ensure  that  no  payment  is  done 
unless there is sufficient budgetary provision. 
cc) Ensuring systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounting records. 
dd) Prepare the SOE’s and the WA Application to IFAD for timely replenishment. 
ee) Participating in the  Audit exercises  providing  auditors  will  all information  and 
documentation they require 
ff)  Follows up accountabilities of funds advanced at the level PMU and with other 
implementing partners. 
gg) Ensure systematic and accurate recording/filing of accounts records. 
hh) Ensure that salary and tax deductions are remitted in timely way and that all 
acknowledgement of receipt is documented. 
ii)  Withholding Tax is recovered from payments, remitted and Tax Certificates are 
issued to suppliers. 
jj)  Any other duties as may be assigned by the Chief Accountant. 
Qualifications and Competences 
  Bachelor’s degree in business or finance, and an affiliate professional accountant. 
  Advanced quantitative and analytical skills. 
  Excellent computer skills and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word and accounting 
software. 
  Good communication skills; Fluency in written and spoken English.  
166 
Required Work Experience 
  At least four years of relevant work experience, including at least four as a financial 
manager or accountant in government/donor projects or large institutions.  
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting. 
  Preparing withdrawal applications for external funding agencies. 
  Working with colleagues in geographically separate locations.  
Mode and Duration of Contract 
Seconded GoZ staff. The total duration of the contract is six years and is subject to 
satisfactory annual performance reviews.
167 
Annex 9: Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of SACP  
The following are the terms of reference (‘ToR’) on which the LPA agrees to engage audit firm ‘the 
Auditor’ to perform an Audit and to report in connection with the Agreement with the International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD) concerning SACP where in these ToRs the ‘Contracting Authority’ 
is mentioned this refers to IFAD which has signed the Agreement with the Borrower and finances the 
services. The Contracting Authority is not a party to this engagement. 
1.1   
Responsibilities of the Parties to the Engagement 
Recipient/Borrower refers to the entity that provides the services and that has signed the Agreement 
with the Contracting Authority. 
  The  MLAWRR  /NPMU  is  responsible  for  providing  a  Financial  Statements  for  the  services 
financed  by  the  Grant  and  for  ensuring  that  these  Financial  Statements  can  be  properly 
reconciled to the MLAWRR /NPCU records and accounts in respect of these services. 
  The MLAWRR /NPCU accepts that the ability of the Auditor to perform the procedures required 
by  this  engagement  effectively  depends  upon  the  MLAWRR  /NPCU  providing  full  and  free 
access to its staff and records and accounts. 
  The  MLAWRR  /NPCU  shall  provide  the  auditors  with  all  the  necessary  documentation  to 
perform the assignment properly; in particular the following information shall be provided to the 
auditors before the beginning of the assignment: 
a)  Project Agreement; 
b)  Annual Progress Report; 
c)  Project Implementation Manual; 
d)  Financial Management Manual; 
e)  Organizational charts along with names and titles of senior managers; 
f)  Names and qualifications of officers responsible for financial management, accounting 
and internal audit. 
g)  Description of information technology facilities and computer systems in use and 
h)  Copies of the minutes of negotiations, the project design document, the annual work 
programme and budget and the letter to the borrower if available. 
‘The Auditor’ refers to the Auditor who is responsible for performing the agreed-upon procedures as 
specified in these ToR, and for submitting a report of factual findings to the MLAWRR /NPCU.  
The Auditor shall provide: 
  A separate opinion on Project Financial Statements (PFS) 
Minimum content of the PFS: 
a)  Yearly  and  cumulative  statements  of  sources  and  application  of  funds,  which  should 
disclose separately IFAD’s funds, other donors funds and beneficiaries funds; 
b)  Statement of sources and application of funds. 
c)  Yearly  and  cumulative  SOEs  by  withdrawal  application  and  category  of  expenditures; 
reconciliation of the designated account. 
d)  Reconciliation between the amounts shown as received by the project and those shown as 
being  disbursed  by  IFAD  should  be  attached  as  an  annex  to  the  PFS.  As  part  of  that 
reconciliation  the  auditor  will  indicate  the  procedure  used  for  disbursement  (designated 
account funds, reimbursement or direct payment) and indicate whether the expenditure is 
fully documented or uses the Summary of Expenditures format. 
e)  Notes accompanying the Financial statements 
f)  Cumulative status of funds by category 
g)  A statement of comparison between the actual expenditures and the budget estimates 
h)  Full disclosure of cash balances and  
i)  Other statements or disclosures relevant to the project .e.g. financial monitoring reports, 
credit lines etc. 
168 
  A  separate  opinion  on  the  use  of  the  Designated  Accounts  (DA);  The  auditor  is  also 
required to audit the activities of the DA associated with the project including the initial advance, 
replenishments,  interest  that  may  accrue  on  the  outstanding  balances,  and  the  year-end 
balances.  The  auditor  must  form  an  opinion  as  to  the  degree  of  compliance  with  IFAD 
procedures and the balance of the DA at year end. The audit should examine: (i) the eligibility 
of  withdrawals  from  the  DA  during  the  period  under  review;  (ii)  the  operation  of  the  DA  in 
accordance with the relevant financing agreement; (iii) the adequacy of internal controls within 
the project appropriate for this disbursement mechanism; and (iv) the use of correct exchange 
rate(s) to convert local currency expenditures to United States dollars. 
  A separate opinion on Withdrawal Application Statement / Statement of expenditures / 
Summary of Expenditures (SOEs); the audit will include a review of SOEs used as the basis 
for submitting withdrawal applications. The auditor will carry out tests and reviews as necessary 
and relevant to the circumstances. SOE expenditures will be carefully compared for eligibility 
with  relevant  financial  agreements,  and  the  disbursement  letter,  and  with  reference  to  the 
project  appraisal  report  for  guidance  when  necessary.  Where  ineligible  expenditures  are 
identified as having been included in withdrawal applications and reimbursed, auditors will note 
these  separately.  A  schedule  listing  individual  SOEs  withdrawal  applications  by  reference 
number  and  amount  should  be  attached  to  the  PFS.  The  total  withdrawals  under  the  SOE 
procedure should be part of the overall reconciliation of IFAD disbursements described above. 
The auditor’s opinion should deal with the adequacy of the procedures used by the project for 
preparing  SOEs  and  should  include  a  statement  that  amounts  withdrawn  from  the  project 
account on the basis of such SOEs were used for the purposes intended under the agreement. 
  A separate management letter addressing the adequacy of the accounting and internal 
control  systems  of  the  Programme,  including  compliance  with  IFAD’s  Procurement 
Guidelines and such other matters as IFAD may notify the PCU to include in the audit. 
The auditor is requested to: 
a)  Comment on economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the use of project resources; 
b)  Comment on achievement of planned project results; 
c)  Comment on legal and financial obligations and commitments of the project and the extent 
of compliance or non-compliance thereof; 
d)  Comment on systems and procedures such as improvements in accounting, information 
technology or computer systems, and operations that may be under development, on which 
the auditor’s comments are necessary to ensure effective controls; 
e)  Comment on other activities on which an auditor may consider it appropriate to report 
  Auditors shall certify : 
a)  Whether  the  PFS  are  drawn  up  in  conformity  with  international  accepted  accounting 
standards (IFRS or IPSAS) 
b)  Whether the PFS are accurate and are drawn up from the books of accounts maintained 
by the Project. 
c)  Whether the provisions of the Project Agreement are adhered to.  
d)  Whether Procurement has been undertaken by the Project in accordance with  Article VI 
of the Project Agreement, IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines  
e)  Carry  out  a  physical  verification  of  any  significant  assets  purchased  and  confirm  their 
existence and use for project purposes. 
f)  Whether the project has an effective system of financial supervision or internal audit at all 
levels.  
g)  Whether  the  expenditure  claimed  through  SOEs  are  properly  approved,  classified  and 
supported by adequate documentation. 
h)  The Auditor is a member of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). 
1.2   
Subject of the Engagement 
The subject of this engagement is the financial statements of the years 20XX, 20XY, and 20XV for the 
IFAD Loan XXX and Grant XXX. The information, both financial and non-financial, which is subject to 
verification  by  the  Auditor,  is  all  information  which  makes  it  possible  to  verify  that  the  expenditures 
claimed by the PCU in Financial statements have occurred, and are accurate and eligible.  
169 
1.3   
Reason for the Engagement 
The PMU Service Provider is required to submit to the Contracting Authority an Audit  report produced 
by an external auditor.  
1.4   
Engagement Type and Objective 
This  constitutes  an  engagement  to  perform  specific  agreed-upon  procedures  following  the  IFAD 
Guidelines  on  Project  Audits  provided  to  the  Auditors  by  the  PMU  in  Annex  1  of  these  TOR.  The 
objective of this audit is for the Auditor to verify that the expenditures claimed by the PMU  in the financial 
statements for the services covered by the Agreement have occurred (‘reality’), are accurate (‘exact’) 
and  eligible  and  to  submit  to  the  PMU  a  report  of  factual  findings  with  regard  to  the  agreed-upon 
procedures performed. Eligibility means that expenditure have been incurred in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of the Agreement. 
1.5  Scope of Work 
1.5.1 
Reference and: 
The  Auditor  shall  undertake  this  engagement  in  accordance  with  these  Terms  of 
- 
- 
in accordance with the International Standard on Audit (ISA) to perform Agreed-upon Procedures 
regarding Financial Information as promulgated by the IFAC;  
In compliance with the Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants issued by the IFAC. Although 
ISRS  4400  provides  that  independence  is  not  a  requirement  for  agreed-upon  procedures 
engagements,  the  Contracting  Authority  requires  that  the  auditor  also  complies  with  the 
independence requirements of the Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants. 
-      In accordance with International Standards on Auditing and in line with IFAD’s Guidelines for Project 
Audits. 
1.5.2 
The Terms and Conditions of the Agreement 
The Auditor verifies that the funds provided by the Agreement were spent in accordance with the terms 
and conditions of the Agreement.  
1.5.3 
Planning, procedures, documentation and evidence 
The Auditor should plan the work so that effective audit can be performed. For this purpose he performs 
the  procedures  specified  the  IFAD Guidelines  on  Project  Audits  and  he  uses the  evidence  obtained 
from  these  procedures  as  the  basis  for  the  report  of  factual  findings.  The  Auditor  should  document 
matters which are important in providing evidence to support the report of factual findings, and evidence 
that the work was carried out in accordance with ISA and these ToR. 
1.6   
Reporting 
The  report  on  this  audit  should  describe  the  purpose  and  the  agreed-upon  procedures  of  the 
engagement in sufficient detail in order to enable the PMU and the Contracting Authority to understand 
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  procedures  performed  by  the  Auditor.  Use  of  the  financial  and  audit 
reporting is compulsory. 
1.6.1     Periods covered  
a) 
IFAD Loan XXX for the years 20XX  
b) 
IFAD Loan XXX for the years 20XY  
c) 
IFAD Loan XXX for the years 20XV  
170 
Reports covering items a must be delivered no later than 120 calendar days as of the date of signing 
the agreement. 
Reports  covering items  b  and  c  must  be  delivered  within  six  months  after  the  end  of  the respective 
fiscal year. 
171 
Annex 10: Assessment for Agricultural Potential for SACP districts  
MASHONALAND EAST PROVINCE 
Location 
Population 
No. of poor 
households 
Poverty Prevalence % 
Mashonaland 
East 
province 
1,344,955 
67.3% 
Goromonzi 
district 
222,324 
(55,652HH) 
38,344 HH 
Murehwa 
district 
189,924 
(45,962HH) 
32,810HH 
Mudzi 
130,261 
(31,835 HH) 
28,595 HH 
Mutoko district  144,370 
28,237 HH 
(34,860HH) 
UMP district 
110,694 
(25,689HH) 
20,333HH 
25 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 53.4% to 77.4% 
District poverty prevalence is 
62.4% 
30 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 48.0% to 77.2% 
District poverty prevalence is 
71.6% 
18 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 78.9% to 93.4% 
District poverty prevalence is 90% 
29 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 57.6% to 91.7% 
District poverty prevalence is 
81.3% 
17 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 70.4% to 85% 
District poverty prevalence is 
79.3% 
172 
Key commodities 
for smallholder 
commercialization 
Nutrition potential 
of commodities 
Estimated 
agribusiness 
engagement 
potential (high, 
medium or low) 
Livestock 
Horticulture  
Livestock 
Horticulture  
Soyabeans 
tobacco 
Livestock 
Horticulture 
(vegetables,  mango 
fruits) 
Macademia nuts 
Livestock 
indigenous chicken) 
 Sorghum, 
groundnuts 
Livestock 
Horticulture  
sorghum 
(goats, 
Livestock 
Horticulture  
Small grains 
sunflower 
High 
high 
high 
high 
high 
high 
1.  Horticulture 
2.  Livestock 
3.  soyabeans 
1.  horticulture 
2. 
livestock 
3.  macademia 
nuts 
1.  groundnuts 
2.  sorghum 
livestock 
3. 
1.  horticulture 
2.  sorghum 
livestock 
3. 
1.  horticulture 
2.  small grains 
3.  sunflower 
livestock 
4. 
Chikomba 
district 
118,630 
(29, 830 HH) 
19,589HH 
Seke district 
99,924 
(24,488HH) 
Hwedza 
district 
69,739 
(17,020HH) 
13,691 HH 
10,959HH 
Marondera  
Rural district 
115,234 
(29,514HH) 
15,777 HH 
30 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 29.5% to 84% 
District poverty prevalence is 
65.8% 
21 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 71% to 46.9% 
District poverty prevalence is 56% 
15 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 45.8% to 74.5% 
District poverty prevalence is 
64.5% 
23 wards with poverty prevalence 
ranging from 39.9% to 66.3% 
District poverty prevalence is 
43.4% 
Livestock (beef) 
Horticulture  
Livestock 
Horticulture  
Livestock 
Horticulture  
1.  horticulture 
livestock 
2. 
(beef) 
1.  horticulture 
livestock 
2. 
1.  horticulture 
livestock 
2. 
Medium to high 
high 
high 
Livestock 
Horticulture 
(blueberry, raspberry, 
tomatoes) 
1.  horticulture 
livestock 
2. 
Medium 
high 
MASHONALAND CENTRAL PROVINCE 
Location 
Population 
No. of poor 
households 
Poverty 
Prevalence % 
Key commodities for 
smallholder commercialization 
Nutrition Potential 
Of Commodities 
Estimated 
agribusiness 
engagement 
potential 
(high, medium 
or low) 
Mashonaland 
Central province 
Mbire district 
1,152,520 
81,879 
(18,018 HH) 
15,322 HH 
75.6% 
17 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 78% to 
89% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 81% 
 Livestock 
Horticulture  
Water Melon 
Rosella  
 Sesame 
Groundnuts  
Chilli  
Masawu 
173 
1.Groundnuts 
2.Traditional Grains 
3. Livestock 
High  
Rushinga district 
73,692 
(17,059 HH) 
13,936 HH 
Mt Darwin district 
206,702 
(46,982HH) 
37,870HH 
Muzarabani district  120,720 
23,548 HH 
(26,692HH) 
Shamva district 
122,335 
(28,261HH) 
20,910HH 
Indigenous 
Livestock-  Beef,  Goats,  Sheep, 
Poultry, 
Fish, 
Apiculture 
Traditional Grains 
Groundnuts 
Livestock- Beef, Goats, Sheep, 
Indigenous Poultry, Apiculture 
Sesame 
Traditional Grains 
Sesame 
Ground Nuts 
Horticulture 
Livestock- Indigenous Poultry, 
Goats, Beef, Apiculture 
Masawu 
 Traditional Grains 
Sugar Beans- Bio-Fortified, Sweet 
Potato, Water Melon, Sesame. 
Livestock- Goats/Sheep, Beef, 
Piggery, Poultry (Broilers, Layers, 
Indigenous) 
Horticulture 
Plantation-Bananas, Mango, 
Citrus, Avocado 
Masawu 
Traditional Grains 
Horticulture 
 Plantation- Mango, Citrus 
Maize. Soya Beans, Sweet Potato 
Livestock- Goats, Beef, Piggery, 
Dairy, Poultry (Broilers, Layers, 
Indigenous), Apiculture 
25 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 56% to 
88% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 81.9% 
40 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 56% to 
89% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 80.6% 
29 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 62.8% 
to 81% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 88.4% 
29 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 50% to 
82% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 74.2% 
High  
1. Groundnuts 
2. 
Grains 
3.Livestock 
Traditional 
High  
1. Groundnuts 
2. 
Grains 
3. Livestock 
Traditional 
High  
Bio-Fortified 
1. Sugar Beans 
2. 
Sweet Potato 
3. Horticulture 
4. Plantation Fruits 
Traditional 
5. 
Grains 
6 Livestock 
High  
Traditional 
1. Horticulture 
2. 
Grains 
3.Livestock 
4. Plantation Fruits 
5. Apiculture 
Guruve district 
119,681 
(27,459HH) 
21,445 HH 
24 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
Livestock-  Goats,  Beef,  Piggery, 
Dairy,  Poultry  (Broilers,  Layers, 
Indigenous) 
1. Horticulture 
2. Sweet Potato 
3. Plantation Fruits 
High  
174 
ranging from 63% to 
88% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 81% 
21 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 66% to 
95% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 63.2% 
35 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 40% to 
78% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 67.6% 
Horticulture 
Plantation- Citrus, Bananas, 
Mango 
Sweet Potato 
Horticulture 
Planation- Citrus, Mango, Banana 
Sweet Potato. 
Livestock- Dairy, Broilers, Layers, 
Indigenous, Piggery 
1.Horticulture 
Plantation- Citrus, Peaches, 
Avocado 
Soya Beans, Maize, Sweet Potato 
Livestock- Dairy, Broilers, Layers , 
Indigenous , Piggery 
4. Livestock 
High  
1. Horticulture 
2. Sweet Potato 
3. Plantation Fruits 
4. Livestock 
High  
1. Horticulture 
2. Sweet Potato 
3. Plantation Fruits 
4. Livestock 
Bindura Rural 
district 
124,505 
(28,668HH) 
20,591HH 
Mazowe district 
233,960 
(56,391HH) 
38,664HH 
MASHONALAND WEST PROVICE  
Location 
Population 
No. of poor 
households 
Poverty 
Prevalence % 
Key Commodities For 
Smallholder 
Commercialization 
Nutrition potential 
of commodities 
Estimated 
agribusiness 
engagement 
potential (high, 
medium or low) 
Overall 
Mashonaland 
West province 
1,501,656 
73.3% 
Chegutu Rural 
district 
149,375 
(35,546HH) 
25,522HH 
29 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 55% 
to 73.3%o 77% 
Livestock 
Citrus 
Cereals and Oilseeds 
Horticulture (Tomatoes, 
Onion) 
Maize 
Horticulture-Tomato 
Poultry 
Citrus and Mango 
Potato 
1.  Horticulture 
2.  Cereals 
3.  Livestock 
4.  Citrus 
1.  Horticulture 
2.  Maize/Potato 
3.  Poultry 
4.  Citrus and 
Mango 
High  
High 
High 
High 
High 
175 
Mhondoro-Ngezi 
district 
99,665 
(23,253HH) 
16,858HH 
Zvimba district 
260,615 
(62,564HH) 
49,765HH 
Sanyati district 
112,361 
(25,046HH) 
18,223HH 
Hurungwe district 
323,632 
(69,919HH) 
63,148 HH 
Kariba rural 
40,844 (9,505 
HH) 
8,455 HH 
District poverty 
prevalence is 
57.6% 
16 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 63% 
to 79% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 
64.3% 
35 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 61% 
to 88% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 
79.8% 
23 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 51% 
to 80% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 
64.3% 
26 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 81% 
to 94% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 
87.9% 
12 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 73.3% 
to 95% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 
73.3% 
Maize  
Horticulture (Tomato) 
Apiculture 
Piggery  
Groundnuts 
1.  Horticulture 
2.  Groundnuts 
3.  Maize 
4.  Piggery 
5.  Apiculture 
High   
High  
Medium 
Medium  
high 
Maize  
Poultry  
Potato 
Tobacco  
Soybean 
Cotton 
Sorghum  
Citrus and Mango 
Small Livestock 
Maize  
Tobacco  
Livestock Beef 
Sheep and Goats 
Apiculture  
Small Livestock 
Traditional Grains 
Fisheries 
Apiculture 
Cotton 
1.  Potato 
2.  Poultry 
3.  Maize 
4.  Soybean 
High  
High 
High 
High 
High 
1.  Sorghum 
2.  Citrus and 
Mango 
3.  Small 
Livestock 
High 
high 
high 
medium  
1.  Maize 
2.  Livestock 
3.  Apiculture 
1.  Traditional 
Grains 
2.  Fisheries 
3.  Small 
Livestock 
4.  Apiculture 
High  
High 
High 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low  
176 
Makonde district 
150,889 
(32,597 HH) 
27,277 HH 
19 wards with 
poverty prevalence 
ranging from 63% 
to 93% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 
73.5% 
Maize  
Soybean 
Citrus 
Potato  
Cotton  
1.  Soybean 
2.  Maize 
3.  Citrus 
4.  Potato 
High  
High 
High 
High 
High 
Total  
MATEBELELAND  NORTH PROVINCE 
Location 
Population  No. of poor 
households 
Matebeleland 
North province 
Hwange district 
Ranked 1 
60,747 
(14,534HH) 
12,052 HH 
Binga district 
Ranked 2. 
134,022 
(31,075HH) 
27,332 HH 
Tsholotsho 
district 
Ranked 3 
111,891 
23,338 HH) 
20,781HH 
Poverty  Prevalence %  Key commodities 
Nutrition potential of commodities 
for smallholder 
commercialization 
20wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
60.5%% to 89.7% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 68.5% 
25wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
68.8% to 93%(ward 21) 
District poverty 
prevalence is 88.3% 
22 wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
77.1% to 93.4% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 89.3% 
Sorghum and Pearl 
Millet 
Goats 
Poultry 
Beef 
Cotton 
Goats 
Sorghum  
Beef 
Fish  
Sorghum and Pearl 
Millet 
Goats 
Beef 
Cow Peas 
Groundnuts 
1.  Sorghum and Millet 
2.  Poultry 
3.  Goats 
4.  Beef 
1.  Sorghum 
2.  Fish 
3.  Goats 
4.  Beef 
1. Cow Peas 
2. Sorghum and Millet 
3. Groundnuts 
4.  Goats 
5. Beef 
177 
Estimated 
agribusiness 
engagement 
potential (high, 
medium or low) 
5.  High 
6.  Medium 
7.  Medium 
Medium 
1. High 
2. Medium 
3. High 
4. Medium 
5. High 
1.  High 
2.  High 
3.  High 
8.  High 
Lupane district 
Ranked 4 
97,232 
(18,845HH) 
17,435HH 
Nkayi district 
Ranked 5 
107,613 
(21,112HH) 
20,143HH 
Umguza district 
Ranked 6 
Bubi district 
Ranked 7 
78,392 
(18,871 
HH) 
60,512 
(13,352 
HH) 
14,973HH 
11,755HH 
28 wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
74.6% to 96.6% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 92.9% 
30 wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
83.4% to 97.7% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 95.6% 
19 wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
66.6% to 93.8% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 79.9% 
23 wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
72% to 96%(ward 9) 
District poverty 
prevalence is 88.7% 
Cotton 
Sorghum and Pearl 
Millet 
Apiculture  
Beef 
Goats 
Cotton 
Beef 
Sorghum and Pearl 
Millet 
Goats 
Groundnuts 
Apiculture 
Horticulture 
Beef 
Poultry 
Pecan Nut 
Beef 
Poultry 
Horticulture In 
Irrigation Schemes 
Goats 
1.  Sorghum and Pearl Millet 
2.  Groundnuts 
3.  Goats 
4.  Beef 
Apiculture 
1.  Sorghum and Pearl Millet 
2.  Groundnuts 
3.  Goats 
4.  Beef 
5.  Apiculture 
1.  Horticulture 
2.  Pecan Nut 
3.  Poultry 
4.  Beef 
1.  Horticulture 
2.  Poultry 
3.  Goats 
4.  Beef 
 Source: 2015 Zimbabwe Poverty Atlas 
Value Chains from the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement 
MIDLANDS PROVINCE  (Overlap with SIRP Districts) 
Location 
Population  No. of poor 
households 
Poverty Prevalence %  Key commodities 
Nutrition potential of commodities 
for smallholder 
commercialization 
178 
1.  High 
2.  High 
3  High 
4  Medium 
5  Medium 
1.  High 
2.  High 
3.  Medium 
4.  Medium 
5.  Medium 
6.  High 
1.  High 
2.  High 
3.  High 
4.  High 
5.  High 
6.  Medium 
7.  Medium 
5.  Medium 
Estimated 
agribusiness 
engagement 
potential (high, 
medium or low) 
Matebeleland 
North province 
Kwekwe district 
173,402 
(37,686HH) 
29,789 HH 
Chirimanzu 
District 
80,351 
(19,341HH) 
13,517 HH 
33wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
63.5%% to 88.9% 
District poverty 
prevalence is 61.8% 
25wards with poverty 
prevalence ranging from 
38.1% to 78.8% (ward 
23) 
District poverty 
prevalence is 70.3% 
Sorghum and 
Pearl Millet 
Goats 
Poultry 
Beef 
Piggery 
Poultry 
Maize  
Beef 
Citrus 
1.  Sorghum and Millet 
2.  Poultry 
3.  Goats 
4.  Beef 
1.  Poultry 
2.  Goats 
3.  Piggery 
4.  Citrus 
5.  Beef 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
179 
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Overall Summary
1/15
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
High
High
High
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Environment and Climate Context
High
Substantial
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project financial Management
Project organization and Staffing
Project budgeting
Substantial
High
Moderate
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Project funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
High
Substantial
Project internal Controls
Project accounting and financial reporting
Project external Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
2/15
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Substantial
Moderate
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Overall
Substantial
Moderate
High
High
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
As COVID–19 pandemic has exacerbated the deepening economic
crisis, the recent threat of protests arising from the worsening
economic situation, shortages of goods in particular food, and
declining real wages amidst hyperinflation, highlight the risk of political
uncertainties and instability.
Mitigations:
While the potential of SACP to mitigate political risks is limited,
detailed agreements with the Government on all investment activities
and implementation modalities aim to mitigate these risks. The SACP
focus on smallholder agriculture transformation is on private sector-
led and operated activities, as opposed to the earlier exclusively GoZ-
led approach, which is expected to remove some of the uncertainties
associated to the political context.
Governance
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Zimbabwe’s limited economic and financial governance as well as
erratic formulation of policies has been earmarked by key international
financiers as one of the causes of poor overall performance in the
country in the past 20 years. This has created a weak environment for
growth and development in key sectors and reduced the willingness of
local and international investors to commit their resources in the
country. Zimbabwe is ranked 158 out of 180 countries according to
Transparency International’s 2019 Corruption Perception Index (CPI)
by. High corruption rating and overall lack of transparency have
significantly increased risks for investments in Zimbabwe, including
investments in agriculture and agro-processing.
Mitigations:
3/15
SACP incorporates safeguard mechanisms to mitigate against these
risks. This includes ensuring strict adherence to IFAD procurement
rules are as well as provision of support in the competitive recruitment
of a SACP procurement officer. Indeed, the competitive recruitment of
key staff, particularly the National Project Coordinator and Chief
Accountant, is also expected to ensure good project governance. 
One of the main safeguards against governance risks is the private
sector orientation of all the investments in the key value chain
development component of the project.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Macroeconomic instability including risks related to high international
and domestic debt overhang, hyperinflation and currency convertibility
will continue to adversely impact the country’s development agenda,
including efforts to commercialise smallholder agriculture. Investment
inflows remain weak and the due to debt arrears, several sources of
external credit are not accessible yet. 
The commercial banks’ portfolios, denominated mostly in
Zimbabwean dollars, have lost much of their value, with currency
devaluation and the consequent significant hyperinflation. At the same
time, the concentration of bank assets on non-liquid central bank
deposits and treasury bills has further reduced the amount available
for lending to private urban and rural sectors. 
Additional economic stress has been caused by the COVID-19
outbreak. With COVID-19, negative macroeconomic trends are
projected to persist, resulting in a projected contraction in GDP by
8%-10% in 2020.
Mitigations:
The macroeconomic outlook for Zimbabwe, as from 2021, remains
cautiously optimistic. It is expected that between 2021-24, real GDP
will rebound gradually, as better weather conditions facilitate growth in
agriculture and a resurgence in domestic hydropower production,
allowing mining activity to pick up. 
It should also be noted that the core investment instruments of SACP,
including the large-scale matching grant and capacity building
operations on the supported value chains, are developed to function
even in an economy, in which many sub-sectors and services do not
function properly. The assumption at the same time is that with SACP
support, farmers and enterprises are better positioned to tap into the
economic opportunities when the country’s macroeconomic
performance improves, and investor confidence increases.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Against the backdrop of political instability, a weak economy as well
as arrears with key development partners (including World Bank and
the African Development Bank), Zimbabwe has also in recent
decades, experienced various types of shocks, ranging from weather
extremes to the recent COVID-19 outbreak.
Mitigations:
4/15
Through strong contractual agreements, private sector orientation of
key activities and effective and systematic implementation systems,
SACP aims to increase its capacity to tolerate moderate shocks in its
operational environment. Further, the well-resourced components and
activities provide independence and increase tolerance to unexpected
changes in the implementation environment.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Although Zimbabwe has several policies in place to support rural
development [e.g. National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (2012),
National Youth Policy (2015), National Gender Policy (2017) and
Zimbabwe Climate Policy (2016)], agricultural policy has been
inconsistent and has not adequately supported sustained rural growth.
Mitigations:
Since 2018, the Government of Zimbabwe’s (GoZ) strategy has
focused more on efforts to commercialise smallholder agriculture.
This includes: (i) organising smallholders into groups and associations
and eventually converting them into small and medium enterprises
(SMEs); (ii) connecting farmers and their groups into profitable value
chains (VCs) and markets; (iii) facilitating contract farming along
profitable VCs; (iv) developing smallholders’ capacity in marketing and
business skills; (v) revitalising infrastructure, including marketing and
agro-processing hubs; (vi) promotion of climate smart agriculture; and
(vii) strengthening of income pathways for improved food security and
nutrition.
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
As indicated above, there is improvement regarding the formulation
and implementation of key rural development polices. However,
limited national budget resources and capacity to effectively support
the implementation of new agricultural policies remains a risk.
Mitigations:
SACP will support Government efforts to create a conducive policy
environment for private sector-led smallholder agriculture
transformation in Zimbabwe. In 2020, GOZ launched several
strategies and plans: Agriculture and Food Systems Transformation
Strategy, Livestock Growth Plan, Horticulture Recovery and Growth
Plan and the Accelerated Irrigation Rehabilitation and Development
Plan. Specifically, SACP will contribute to operationalise relevant
strategies/plans, through enhancing a community feedback loop to
GoZ. 
SACP will also draw lessons from SIRP’s success in stakeholder
consultations regarding smallholder irrigation development models,
now at Attorney General approval stage. Specifically, SACP will
engage specialists to develop relevant knowledge products. Through
stakeholder dialogue, SACP will enhance the development of action-
oriented plans in support of diversification and commercialisation of
smallholder agriculture, including contact farming, horticultural action
plans and studies to identify new profitable smallholder value chains.
Environment and Climate Context
5/15
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The main environmental risks for the SACP include land degradation,
which is already adversely impacting agricultural productivity and site-
specific loss of soils and vegetation during the infrastructure
development activities. SACP activities may also result in increased
abstraction of ground and surface water resources for agriculture
productivity and domestic use.
Mitigations:
The capacity building targeted at the smallholders will include climate
smart agriculture techniques that also ensure environmental
sustainability such as integrated soil fertility management and
diversified cropping systems. Environmental Management Plans
(EMPs) will be developed for the infrastructure sites articulating
mitigation measures. In addition, water use efficiency will be promoted
in the irrigation schemes.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
The climate change risks for the SACP include increasing rainfall
variability, incidence of droughts, prolonged dry spells, and intermittent
floods. Droughts have occurred in the recent past due to the El-Nino
phenomenon leading to crop losses and negatively impacting
agricultural dependent livelihoods. Water stress will also increase as a
result of climate change as well as incidence of pests and diseases.
Mitigations:
Climate change adaptation measures will be promoted through the
climate smart agriculture investments. Capacity building of the
smallholders will also include measures such as integrated pest
management and conservation agriculture techniques. The
infrastructure developed under SACP will be climate resilient to
improve water use efficiency and harvest rainwater for productive use.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
This risk is very limited in the case of SACP, due to appropriate policy
alignment and active participation of the national Government
counterparts in the project design.
Mitigations:
As indicated above and discussed in detail in the PDR, SACP is fully
aligned with Government’s key rural development policies, IFAD’s
new COSOP and IFAD’s core corporate priorities.
Technical Soundness
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
6/15
Relatively poor overall performance of agriculture sector interventions
creates a risk that this could happen also with SACP. There is also
very little recent experience and information on the overall
management of rural development projects, with external funding.
SACP is the first IFAD funded loan operation for Zimbabwe since
1990s.
Mitigations:
SACP integrates capacity building of government staff to manage
development projects. At the same time, the project creates linkages
with the private sector, which is also in line with GoZ policy objective,
to enhance market access for smallholder agricultural produce.
Matching grants, based on a competitive process, are expected to
encourage companies and farmers to commit themselves in the
operations of the supported value chains and improve chances of
implementation success.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
After 20 years with very few international projects, many Zimbabwean
institutions lack experience on how to implement development
partner-supported projects and have limited adequate, staff and
resources to implement them.
The management mechanism for matching grants in particular require
a comprehensive and clear framework to ensure effective
implementation, viability of promoted value chains, and to avoid elite
capture.
Mitigations:
The Lead Agency, MLAWRR, is the implementing agency for the
IFAD-supported SIRP. With a Joint Management Unit, SIRP and
SACP will work closely together This Joint Management Unit will
make it easier for IFAD to focus its support, introduce new tools and
facilitate training and capacity building.
Measures to reduce elite capture in the matching grant operations
include: (i) Increased volume of independent BDS support (NGO or
private sector service provider) to include follow up visits and
investment monitoring for each grant implementer; (ii) utilization of
formal financial institutions for all matching grant financial transactions,
through established bank accounts, and supervision of these as part
of project audits, (iii) systematic training provided to the evaluation
panels and key project-related GOZ staff on integrity, eligibility and
conflict of interest, and corruption and bribery related topics; (iv)
ensure beneficiary access to project information through public
dissemination events for project start-up and periodic batches of
successful matching grant proposals; (v) piloting a digital business
plan database for matching grant projects; (vi) selection of the
evaluation panels to be subject to IFAD’s NO and rotation of some of
the evaluation panel members, and (vii) prior elite capture risk
assessment for key value chains supported by the APG matching
grants.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
The key risk that the project executing agency’s M&E processes and
systems are weak or inefficient, resulting in a limited ability to monitor,
validate, analyse, and communicate results, capture lessons, and
adjust implementation to seize opportunities and take corrective
actions in a timely manner.
7/15
Mitigations:
SACP has a full time M&E, KM, and data assistant specialists. A
robust M&E system that is linked to the MIS will be designed. Baseline
studies to benchmark progress will be carried out in Year 1. Field
extension staff will be furnished with electronic tablets that are linked
to MIS. Participatory monitoring will be used to capture qualitative and
quantitative data, capture lessons and adjust implementation. Reports
will be evidence-based, gender and sex disaggregated date and will
be submitted timely. Field verification monitoring visits will be carried
out regularly.
Project financial Management
Project organization and Staffing
Risk:
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Inadequate staff capabilities, skills and experience in project
accounting, donor funds management and on IFAD procedures.
Mitigations:
Mitigations: At project onset the creation of Joint Project
implementation unit will avail staff from SIRP to help new recruited
staff quickly on board
SACP shall recruit a suitably qualified, competitively selected persons
to initially lead the finance unit, set up SACP financial systems.
Training in IFAD funding guidelines to be done during start up work
but will be a continuous process throughout the project life.
Project budgeting
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Risk(s): Low budgeting capacity in the Lead Agency and low
motivation of district field staff to prioritise implementation of SACP
activities leading to low AWPB execution rates resulting in overall
slow implementation progress.
AWPB not approved at the commencement of the fiscal year
Over expenditure/ under expenditure on project activities not tracked
Mitigations:
Ensure the accounting package will include a budgeting module that
must be put into use at the onset of the project
8/15
SACP implementation shall incorporate results-based award scheme
for seconded GoZ field extension staff to motivate excellent project
delivery.
Clear budget guidelines and procedures to be detailed in the PIM to
assist the preparation of budgets.
Further, the SACP officers and field staff will provided with
transportation and communication means and appropriate skill to be
able to carry out the required AWPB-related tasks.
Technical guidance from IFAD during the budgeting process
Project funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Delayed payments to Suppliers are also affected affecting the timely
supplies for the project and beneficiaries for in terms of goods and
services.
Non-availability of forex for SACP operations due to the regulatory
framework in the country that affects the availability of funds to the
project for foreign exchange invoiced expenditure.
Delays in collating expenditures by implementing partners leading to
delays in processing replenishments
Mitigations:
SACP shall maintain a USD designed account at a commercial bank
to facilitate timely settlement of forex invoices.
SACP will to a great extent use the IFAD direct payment method for
payments above USD 100,000.
The project will adhere to the liquidity mitigation measures
incorporated within IFAD disbursement guidelines relating to
submission timelines and thresholds for withdrawal applications
Project internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Lack of adequate delegation of authority within the Finance unit due to
limited staff numbers.
Failure to justify programme expenditures in implementing districts
and provinces, leading to delayed replenishment of the designated
account and potential ineligible expenditures
Mitigations:
The FM manual will detail controls and procedures to be followed in
using programme funds.
9/15
SACP accounting and disbursements operations will be centralised at
the NPMU
Engagement of the internal audit unit within the ministry to carry out
annual review of the systems
The NPMU will perform quarterly reimbursements to implementing
agencies to ensure timely replenishment before replenishment to their
accounts
Project accounting and financial reporting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Inadequate record keeping of accounting records 
Failure to properly track use of grant proceeds to disbursed to
grantees 
Failure to produce IFAD –specific reports. 
Community level beneficiaries not having sufficient financial
management capabilities per GOM and IFAD requirements
Mitigations:
Centralised accounting of SACP at the NPMU 
PIM to detail reporting and monitoring requirements and rules
including on grant disbursements 
Off-the shelf accounting software to be configured generate
automated, consolidated financial reports and smart SOEs 
Capacity building by PMU of all implementing partners including 
beneficiaries on SACP financial management
Project external Audit
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The key risk is the potential delay in performance of independent and
competent oversight of the SACP financial statements leading to
possible misrepresentation of the financial results and/or suspension
due to compliance breaches
Mitigations:
External audits for the project will be performed by independent
private firms during the initial years of implementation in line with
guidelines spelt out in the IFAD Handbook on Financial Report and
Auditing for IFAD funded projects. IFAD will continuously perform
reviews together with the Office of the Auditor General of Zimbabwe to
assess its readiness in staffing capacities to conduct SACP audits for
IFAD funded projects. SACP NPMU will proactively engage this
external auditors during the financial year to plan for timely execution
of year–end audits
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
10/15
The Legal and regulatory framework score is 1.80 points and
categorized, henceforth, as substantial. The new Statutory Instrument
5 of 2018 “Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets”
provides a relatively acceptable coverage of the various rules and
procedures to be followed by the public purchaser across the
procurement cycle. Nonetheless, a number of deficiencies are
highlighted particularly in terms of transparency and public access to
information indicator which poses a particular issue. Further, the
country regulations do not detail matters related to consulting and non-
consulting processes (including the recruitment of individual
consultants).
Mitigations:
Standard Bidding Documents for low purchases falling under
shopping to be developed for the project, subject to IFAD review and
approval. Project will establish and maintain a database of records
through the IFAD client portal contract monitoring tool. The GPN is
required to be published through the newspapers and online means
prior to launching the procurement processes. 
The SACP annual procurement plan is required to be published on
PRAZ, MLLR webpage, the Gazette, and newspapers with large
audience. All contract awards must be published, and respective
bidders acknowledged accordingly of the process output. 
IFAD procedures will prevail for the consulting and non-consulting
processes with appropriate procurement training and ad hoc support
to be provided.
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
By reference to PEFA framework, procurement complaint
management remains largely unsatisfactory. Zimbabwe Corruption
Perception Index score is 24 (2019) and ranks the country at the 158
position out of 198. The corruption risk indicator is therefore high. The
complaint management system is based on 1-tier level only. The SI 5-
2010 does not, among others, provide clear information on the
constitution of the complaint committee and the handling of the
challenge procedure. The Statutory Instrument covers the code of
conduct for procurement officers as well as ethical responsibilities of
bidders and contractors. However, these two subjects lack institutional
guidance and comprehensiveness. In addition, there are no provisions
for SH/SEA in accordance with requirements emanating from IFAD’s
policies.
Mitigations:
IFAD will be notified in the event of complaints and follow up the
process and decisions issued by PRAZ. Project to strictly adhere to
IFAD's "Revised Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its
Activities and Operations". Training and awareness sessions will be
conducted.
Capability in Public Procurement
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
11/15
The capability in public procurement score is 2,40 points and
categorized, henceforth, as medium. SACP includes within its
organizational structure a procurement unit both at the headquarter
(Harare) and at the Provinces with different threshold levels. The
country benefited from limited international support during the past
five years, therefore public procurement officers have limited
knowledge and experience in donor-funded procurement
environment, in particular at the Provinces. The rules and regulations
guiding procurement are publicly available online through the
Procurement Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe website.
Within the beneficiary’s organizational structure, the financial and
procurement functions are, on the other side, fully separated.
Mitigations:
Appointed project procurement staff (at the NPMU and Provincial
levels) will be trained on IFAD's procurement rules and procedures
and the quality of the tendering process to be monitored subsequently.
IFAD Standard Bidding documents will be used.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Government procurement planning is not undertaken thoroughly and
suffers from the prevailing economic crisis rendering the market highly
volatile. The lack of resources adversely impacts the day-to-day
management of the government budget. The procurement methods as
well as the bidding procedures are, globally, in line with the common
international and IFAD’s practices. On the other side, contract
awarding lacks transparency while contract management requires
support through providing relevant trainings to the government staff
and preparing adequate guidance.
Mitigations:
All project procurement plans must be prepared in advance and be
consisted with the annual work plan. Any revision is subject to IFAD's
explicit No Objection. Respective procurement officers at the NPMU
and Provincial level to be involved in the annual work planning
process and assess the feasibility of the activities within each year as
well as the consistency and timeliness of the activities. IFAD
procurement plan to be adopted. Minimum publication days under
competitive bidding processes must be not less than 30 calendar
days (inclusive of the advertisement and closure day). Project to follow
similar procedures as SIRP for all matters related to contract
management and administration.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Risk:
Clearing of land for agricultural expansion may occur in some of the
targeted areas of the SACP. Land clearing has already resulted in
loss of habitat and biodiversity. Smallholders may also reduce the
diversity of their farms as they become integrated in specific value
chains thus adversely impacting agro-biodiversity.
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Mitigations:
12/15
The business plans and grant proposals will be screened for adverse
environmental impacts including potential to result in loss of
biodiversity. In addition, capacity building for the smallholders will
include biodiversity conservation within the agricultural production
landscape. SACP will promote nutrition sensitive value chains and
crop diversification as part of the CSA.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Land and water resources may be polluted through increased use of
agro-chemicals as smallholders invest in improved agricultural
productivity and become integrated into value chains. Discharge from
the drainage in the irrigation schemes may also result in pollution.
Mitigations:
The pollution will be point source that can be managed by the farmers
once equipped with the knowledge and skills to do so. The screening
criteria for business plans includes environmental criteria that will
minimize impacts of pollution. CSA capacity building will include safe
handling and use of agro-chemicals. Design of irrigation systems will
also ensure adequate drainage systems design and periodic water
testing at the discharge points.
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The potential risk is that SACP may cause significant cultural or
physical resource degradation, including threats to or the loss of
resources of historical, religious or cultural significance. There is also
the risk that women may be prevented from participating due to
patriarchal norms and that the men could take over lucrative
enterprises from the women beneficiaries.
Mitigations:
There is a very low risk that SACP will be implemented in areas of
cultural heritage sites. SACP will put in place a grievance redress
mechanism and indigenous people will be engaged through FPIC
process to ensure consent to all interventions. GALS methodology, to
empower women and men, will be adopted. Training on GALS will
increase the visibility of women’s roles and raise awareness of gender
justice for men, women and youth for increased wellbeing. Using
WEAI survey, SACP will measure empowerment in terms of income
generation and sharing of labour roles, improved knowledge and
leadership skills, equitable household decision making and access to
productive resources. GALS mentors will monitor the use of assets
and economic activities. The WEAI survey will benchmark the
percentage of individuals demonstrating improvement in
empowerment. SACP targets mostly group activities in order as
mitigation to male elite capture.
Indigenous People
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
The potential risk that SACP may cause physical, social, or economic
impacts on indigenous peoples, or in threats to or the loss of
resources of historical or cultural significance to them.
13/15
Mitigations:
SACP community mobilisers will be well versed with the communities
to ensure that the project targets group are reached and that there are
no threats to or loss of resources for indigenous people. A grievance
mechanism and strong feedback mechanisms will be put in place for
reporting on targeting. Indigenous people will be engaged in a
consultative and participatory process through FPIC.
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The potential risk is that SACP may cause an increase in gender-
based violence, discriminatory and unsafe/unhealthy working
conditions for people employed to work specifically in relation to the
project, including third parties and primary suppliers.
Mitigations:
SACP will promote viable enterprises that generate enough income
for decent labour practices. The project will raise awareness against
gender-based violence, and unsafe working conditions. Required
clauses will be included in contacts with APGs, microenterprises and
lead value chain enterprises. SACP will also engage targeted
households on the benefits of equitable sharing of labour through
GALs. The contracts for infrastructure development will also include
clauses to ensure decent working conditions.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The potential community health and safety risks could arise from
exposure to agro-chemicals, zoonotic diseases, COVID-19, pollution
from project interventions and from gender-based violence.
Mitigations:
The Environmental and Social management Plans for each sites will
include measures to minimise the risks. Capacity building for
smallholders will also include safe use and handling of agro-
chemicals. SACP will develop road infrastructure to improve transport
safety. Communities will access training on gender-based violence,
reproductive health rights, child feeding and nutrition education as part
of other mainstream topics such BDS, financial literacy etc. Labour
saving technologies will improve the health and will being of women.
For COVID-19, SACP’s efforts will be towards increased awareness
on social distancing, wearing masks, washing hands and increasing
the use of digital platforms.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
The potential risk is that the SACP may cause physical, social, cultural
or economic impacts, especially for marginalized groups, from
involuntary loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or
means of livelihoods. Some of these risks may result from
infrastructure development activities.
14/15
Mitigations:
SACP will raise awareness of the Lead Value Chain Companies to be
ethical and engage producers in a transparent manner, as a condition
in the SACP grant agreement. Infrastructure development proposals
will be screened to ensure no physical or economic resettlement will
result from these activities.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The green-house gas emissions from the SACP activities are minimal.
Land clearing may result in increased emissions as a result of land
use change.
Mitigations:
Screening of investments will ensure no forests are cleared for
agricultural production and agricultural intensification as opposed to
expansion is promoted. CSA includes benefits of mitigation through
measures such as improved soil carbon storage resulting from
integrated soil fertility management and agroforestry.
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Most of the SACP target beneficiaries depend on rain-fed agriculture
for their livelihoods. This dependency increases their vulnerability to
variable climate. Some of the SACP locations are also water stressed,
which increases the vulnerability of the ecosystems.
Mitigations:
CSA investments will reduce the vulnerability to climate variability and
change. The capacity building will also increase the knowledge base
of the smallholders to manage the climate change related risks.
Irrigation and water supply schemes will contribute to addressing
water stress and incidents of drought and prolonged dry spells.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
There is a potential risk that relevant stakeholders are not adequately
consulted and that may undermine project implementation and
achievement of project development objectives.
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Mitigations:
15/15
SACP utilizes participatory, consultative engagement with the
stakeholders and demand driven approach to develop activities in
partnership with stakeholders. Full-time Targeting and Social Inclusion
Experts are stationed at both the provincial and national level to
ensure the project engages appropriately with men, women and youth
in project interventions.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The potential risk is that SACP has ineffective grievance/complaint
redress processes, leading to unaddressed stakeholder complaints
that may undermine project implementation and the achievement of
project development objectives.
Mitigations:
SACP will put in place a strong stakeholder grievance mechanism and
a beneficiary feedback mechanism through which beneficiaries can
lodge grievances and have concrete measures taken by SACP. This
will be backed by community validation mechanisms at each stage in
project implementation. SACP will raise awareness on an anti-
corruption policy and establish contact telephone numbers for
grievances.
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: SACP Sustainability and Exit Strategy 
Sustainability of the SACP benefits and results can be approached at three different levels: the 
smallholder, the farmer group/cooperative and the value chain. The SACP exit strategy and its 
success  is  closely  linked  to  results  achieved  at  all  these  three  sustainability  levels.  With  this 
sustainability focus, the exit strategy is in-built in the SACP activities and in the manner, they 
are to be implemented. The Table below presents the approach to SACP sustainability and exit 
strategy from the point of view of the key activities in the two operational components of the 
project (Component 1 and 2) and in Sub-Component 3.1 (Policy and Institutional Support). 
Component/Activity  Sustainability and Exit Strategy 
Component 1: 
Inclusive Value 
Chain Development 
The SACP Component 1 comprises of subcomponent 1.1, Cluster Identification 
and  VC  Mobilization,  1.2  Technical  Services  for  APGs  and  Microenterprises, 
Matching Grants (MG) for Inclusive VC Investment. 
C1.1: The overall sustainability of Component 1 is based on demand-driven and 
analytical  identification  and  mobilization  of  stakeholders  for  value  chain 
upgrading  activities  and  investments.  To  this  end,  as  the  first  step,  the 
Agriculture  Producer  Groups,  Microenterprises  and  VC  Lead  Enterprises 
communicate  their  Expressions  of  Interest  to  SACP.  Thereafter,  the  project 
team  shortlists  viable  ideas  for  development  of  full  Investment  Proposals.  In 
the full proposals, smallholders and agribusinesses will explain the viability and 
sustainability of their proposed activities, for technical, financial, social as well 
as environmental aspects. Through a competitive selection method, a Technical 
Assessment  Committee  under  SACP  will  select  the  most  viable  proposals  to 
receive SACP technical and financial assistance.  
C1.2: The technical services are primarily focused at the local level of the value 
chains,  for  Smallholder  Groups  and  Microenterprises.  As  result,  each 
stakeholder  will  have  the  required  capacities  to  plan,  invest  and  sustainably 
operate their farms or small businesses as part of commercial value chains. The 
services will also ensure that all investments are socially and environmentally 
sustainable,  in  view  of  local  economic  and  social  structures,  natural  resource 
management, as well as changing climatic conditions. Also, a targeted technical 
service package is deployed for Financial Literacy, which will support long term 
financial sustainability of the smallholder operations and livelihoods. 
C1.3:  As  follow  up  action  to  the  value  chain  technical  services,  to  ensure 
sufficient  investment  flow  into  the  upgraded  production  systems,  a  financial 
support instrument is launched. A competitive Matching Grant (MG) mechanism 
will initiate productive investments into smallholder agriculture modernization. 
Furthermore, MG are extended to enterprise development in the value chains, 
to  strengthen  market  sustainability  of  the  smallholder  investments.  As  noted 
above, only such MG investments are made that demonstrate full viability and 
sustainability beyond the duration of SACP support. A growth path is initiated 
by  the  SACP,  and  as  exit  strategy,  the  stakeholders  with  new  skills  and 
capacities  will  independently  maintain  and  further  develop  their  upgraded 
agriculture operations. 
As  an  additional  sustainability  element,  the  MG  will  be  implemented  in 
association with a capable and interested partner from financial sector such as 
the Agribank. All MG transactions are done through formal banking route, from 
the project to the bank accounts of grant recipients. The supported Value Chain 
stakeholders will thus gain knowledge and familiarity of banking services. With 
this capacity, and supported by their achieved savings and transaction history, 
the  stakeholders  will  later  gain  access  to  market-based  financing.  The  small 
Lead  Enterprise  credit  line  activity  will  be  implemented  with  a  competent 
commercial/development bank, and the revolved USD-denominated funds can 
be re-used in the next IFAD-supported value chain project. In the long-term, 
IFAD’s  follow-up  investments  in  Zimbabwe  will  continue  spear-heading  the 
commercialization  of  smallholder  sector.  With  the  expectation  of  settled 
Component/Activity  Sustainability and Exit Strategy 
Component 2: 
Climate Proofed 
Value Chain 
Infrastructure 
Sub-Component 
3.1: Policy and 
Institutional 
Support 
macroeconomic  conditions,  IFAD  will  support  the  initiated  commercial  value 
chain finance opportunities through tailored debt- and guarantee-instruments. 
The  infrastructure  built  under  the  project  will  have  three  pathways  to 
sustainability, leading towards a successful project exit. First, the infrastructure 
is  demand  driven,  prioritising  the  infrastructure  that  serves  the  needs  of  the 
community best; second, the owners and beneficiaries of the infrastructure will 
contribute  at  least  15%  of  the  required  financing  in  cash;  and  third,  the 
management  arrangements  for  the  infrastructure  will  be  competence-driven, 
with  users  paying  for  services.  For  multi-purpose  water  supply,  a  private  or 
quasi-private  entity  may  run  the  facilities  and  users  pay  for  services  using  a 
pre-card system.  
Maintenance agreements will be signed with the Rural District Councils and the 
District Development Fund for all roads developed under the project.  
A farmer-led approach to irrigation development and community-led approach 
to water supply development embeds an exit strategy right from the beginning 
of the process. The users will be responsible from the start. 
Sustainability  of  SACP  results  and  the  improvement  of  opportunities  to 
successfully continue private sector-led smallholder agriculture transformation 
after  the  project  ends  are  at  the  core  of  the  targets  of  SACP’s  policy  and 
institutional support work. The purpose of Sub-component 3.1 activities is to 
support the efforts to create a conducive policy and institutional environment 
for private sector-led smallholder agriculture transformation in Zimbabwe. The 
work  will  tackle  obstacles  for  achieving  sustainable  result  in  smallholder 
commercialization  at  the  national  policy  level  but  focus  also  on  practical 
challenges that are projected to adversely affect smallholder commercialisation 
both during and after the SACP implementation period. These include work on 
practical  issues  such  as  (i) contract  farming  best  practices  in  enterprise-led, 
climate-smart  value  chain  development;  (ii)  farmer  group  registration 
mechanism to enable full participation in commercial and financial transactions; 
(iii) smallholder land titles and their use as loan collateral, and access to land 
by  women;  (iv) modernization  of  extension  services  combining  private  and 
public sector resources; (v) effectiveness of local market linkage platforms to 
facilitate rural value chain development, (vi) food safety standards for domestic 
and  export  production;  (vii)  nutrition  sensitive  agriculture  and  value  chains; 
and (viii) actions/policies to reduce food loss and waste. Project success in many 
of these themes and challenges is expected to significantly increase the chances 
of sustaining the SACP results and impact, and the project work in these areas 
under Sub-component 3.1 is therefore seen as a core contributing factor to a 
successful exit strategy for SACP. 
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/2
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
 Women are > 40% of outreach
and youth
youth, and IPs (if appropriate)
beneficiaries
IFAD empowerment index
(IE.2.1)
Output level CIs
CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
Outcome level CIs (at least one
of below)
CI 1.2.8
CI 1.2.9
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for IFAD empowerment index
in M&E budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$14,061,000
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$14,061,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
2/2
Gender considerations have been integrated in the conceptualisation and design of the SACP. The targeting approach includes a focus women with specific quotas to
be met and specific activities to ensure their effective participation in the project and ensure their empowerment.
Nutrition
Pathways to improve the nutrition status of target beneficiaries have been identified as well as specific activities to ensure nutrition sensitive cluster development.
Nutrition sensitivity is a criteria for the matching grants that will be provided to the smallholders and SMEs that will participate in the project.
Youth
Rural youth will be incentivised to participate in the SACP. A quota has been included to promote their active engagement in the project and activities identified. A
Social Inclusion Specialist will be part of the Project management team.
 No social inclusion themes
Zimbabwe
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project
Project Design Report
Annex: An assessment of commercial banks
Mission Dates:
25 May - 19 June 2020
Document Date:
28/01/2021
Project No.
2000002341
Report No.
5490-ZW
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Contents 
List of Tables .......................................................................................................................................................................... I 
List of Figures ........................................................................................................................................................................ II 
Acronyms and Abbreviations ......................................................................................................................................... III 
Introduction: Assessment of Banks to Partner with SACP ........................................................................................ 1 
AGRIBANK (AGRICULTURAL BANK OF ZIMBABWE) LTD ....................................................................................... 3 
SECTION 1: Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 3 
SECTION 2: Operational ........................................................................................................................................... 5 
SECTION 3: Assessment............................................................................................................................................ 6 
CBZ (COMMERCIAL BANK OF ZIMBABWE) LTD ................................................................................................... 12 
SECTION 1: Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 12 
SECTION 2: Operational ........................................................................................................................................ 14 
SECTION 3: Assessment......................................................................................................................................... 16 
NMB (NATIONAL MERCHANT BANK) BANK LTD .................................................................................................. 21 
SECTION 1: Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 21 
SECTION 2: Operational ........................................................................................................................................ 23 
SECTION 3: Assessment......................................................................................................................................... 27 
STEWARD BANK LTD ................................................................................................................................................... 34 
SECTION 1: Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 34 
SECTION 2: Operational ........................................................................................................................................ 36 
SECTION 3: Assessment......................................................................................................................................... 37 
ZB (ZIMBABWE BANKING CORPORATION) BANK LTD ........................................................................................ 41 
SECTION 1: Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 41 
SECTION 2: Operational ........................................................................................................................................ 43 
SECTION 3: ASSESSMENT ...................................................................................................................................... 44 
CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................................................................... 48 
RECOMMENDATIONS ...................................................................................................................................................... 50 
Bibliography/ List of References ................................................................................................................................... 51 
List of Tables 
Table 1: The Board of Directors of Agribank ................................................................................ 4 
Table 2: Management Structure at Agribank ............................................................................... 4 
Table 3: Agribank Ratings ...................................................................................................................... 4 
Table 4: Shareholders of CBZ Bank Ltd Top Seven .................................................................. 12 
Table 5: Management Structure of CBZ Bank Ltd ..................................................................... 13 
Table 6: Details of Global Credit Rating ......................................................................................... 13 
Table 7: NMB Bank Ltd Management Structure ........................................................................ 23 
Table 8: Global Rating Details ............................................................................................................ 23 
Table 9: Board of Directors of Steward Bank ............................................................................. 34 
Table 10: Steward Bank Credit ratings .......................................................................................... 35 
Table 11: Management Structure of Steward Bank ................................................................ 35 
Table 12: Shareholding Structure Top Five................................................................................. 41 
Table 13: Global (External) Credit Rating .................................................................................... 42 
I 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Agribank Capital Adequacy Ratios 2016-2019 ..................................................... 10 
Figure 2: Agribank Liquidity Ratios 2016-2019 ....................................................................... 10 
Figure 3: Agribank Non-Performing Loans Ratios ................................................................... 11 
Figure 4: Agribank Net Profit (Loss) After Tax .......................................................................... 11 
Figure 5: CBZ Bank Capital Adequacy Ratio ................................................................................ 19 
Figure 6 CBZ Bank Liquidity Ratio ................................................................................................... 19 
Figure 7: CBZ Bank Ltd Non-Performing Loans ......................................................................... 20 
Figure 8: CBZ Bank Ltd Net Profit after Tax ................................................................................ 20 
Figure 9: NMB Bank Ltd Top 5 Shareholders .............................................................................. 22 
Figure 10: Main Shareholders: Shares of Ownership ............................................................. 22 
Figure 11: NMB Bank Capital Adequacy Ratios 2015 -2019 ............................................... 31 
Figure 12: NMB Bank Liquidity Ratios 2016 -2019 ................................................................. 31 
Figure 13: NMB Bank Non-Performing Loan Ratios 2015 -2019 ..................................... 32 
Figure 14:NMB Bank Capital Levels 2016 -2019 ...................................................................... 32 
Figure 15: NMB Net Profit After-Tax Inclusive Of Other Income 2015 -2019 ........... 33 
Figure 16: Steward Bank Capital Adequacy Ratios ................................................................. 39 
Figure 17: Steward Bank Liquidity Ratios ................................................................................... 39 
Figure 18: Steward Bank Non-Performing Loans Ratios ...................................................... 40 
Figure 19: Steward Bank Net Profit after Tax ............................................................................ 40 
Figure 20: ZB Capital Adequacy Ratios .......................................................................................... 46 
Figure 21: ZB Bank Ltd Liquidity Ratios ....................................................................................... 46 
Figure 22: ZB Bank Ltd Non-Performing Loans Ratios .......................................................... 47 
Figure 23: ZB Bank Ltd Net Profit (Loss) After Tax ................................................................. 47 
II 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
AFC 
Agriculture Finance Corporation 
AGRIBANK  Agricultural Bank of Zimbabwe Limited  
ATM 
CBZ 
GCR 
GoZ 
Automated teller machines 
COMMERCIAL BANK OF ZIMBABWE 
Global Credit Rating Group 
Government of Zimbabwe 
ICAAP 
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Policy 
IFAD 
IMF 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
The International Monetary Fund  
MLAWRR  Ministry 
of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water,  Climate 
and  Rural 
Resettlement Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water, Climate and Rural Resettlement  
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organization 
NMB    
National Merchant Bank 
OFID    
OPEC Fund for International Development 
POS 
RAS 
RBZ 
SACP 
USD 
VC 
WB 
ZB 
Point of Sale 
Risk Assessment System  
Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe 
Smallholder Agriculture Cluster Project 
United States Dollars 
Value Chain 
World Bank 
Zimbabwe Banking Corporation 
ZIMRA 
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority 
III 
Introduction: Assessment of Banks to Partner with SACP 
Smallholder Agriculture  Cluster Project  (SACP) is  a six-year development  project  financed 
jointly  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD),  OPEC  Fund  for 
International Development (OFID) and the Government of Zimbabwe (GoZ). SACP supports 
the  transformation  of  smallholder  agriculture  in  Zimbabwe  through  private  sector-led  value 
chain  development.  The  Project  operates  in  the  five  provinces  of  Mashonaland  Central, 
Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Matebeleland North and Midlands. It consists of three 
interlinked components: Inclusive Value Chain Development, Component 2: Climate Proofed 
Value  Chain  Infrastructure  and  Component  3:  Policy  and  Institutional  Support  and  Project 
Coordination. 
The  SACP  value  chain  (VC)  support  operations  will  include  as  a  core  element  financing 
support  to  smallholders,  community-based  micro-enterprises,  and  Lead  Enterprises  in  the 
selected VCs. Reflecting the current financial sector challenges in the provision of working 
capital  and  investment  credit,  the  SACP  will  use  matching  grant  as  the  main  instrument  to 
channel financing support to benefiting smallholders, micro-enterprises and also to VC Lead 
Enterprises.  These matching grants will be financed by SACP through the IFAD loan. 
In addition to matching grants, a USD-denominated Credit Line of USD 2.5 million will be 
established at a selected financial institution, to initiate access to commercial bank finance by 
those SACP’s partner VC Lead Enterprises that operate in the export sector and earn a major 
part of their revenues in foreign currency. After the start-up of the project operations, the SACP 
credit line will be established in a financially sound commercial/development bank through a 
subsidiary loan agreement to be signed between the selected bank and the GoZ represented by 
Ministry  of  Lands,  Agriculture,  Water,  Climate  and  Rural  Resettlement Ministry  of  Lands, 
Agriculture,  Water,  Climate  and  Rural  Resettlement  (MLAWRR).  The  selected  bank  is 
expected  to  use  this  refinancing  injection  as  a  part  of  its  overall  strategy  to  develop  new 
products and serve new markets in rural areas. 
Following  initial  inquiries  by  IFAD/MLAWRR  about  the  interest  of  banks  to  partner  with 
SACP, a national banking consultant conducted the institutional assessments of five leading 
1 | P a g e  
Harare-based commercial/development banks that are active in or have interest to expand to 
the agri-business finance. These banks included CBZ Bank Ltd, ZB Bank Ltd, NMB Bank Ltd, 
Steward Bank Ltd and Agribank. The purpose of the institutional assessment was to evaluate 
the financial and institutional position and product portfolio of the financial institutions as well 
as their readiness to implement the SACP Credit Line for Export Sector VC Lead Enterprises. 
The results of the institutional assessment of each bank are presented below, followed by the 
overall conclusions of the assessments and recommendations to IFAD/GoZ on the suitability 
of the assessed banks to partner with SACP in the implementation of the proposed Credit Line 
operations. 
2 | P a g e  
AGRIBANK (AGRICULTURAL BANK OF ZIMBABWE) LTD 
SECTION 1: Introduction  
The Agricultural Bank of Zimbabwe Limited (AGRIBANK) is a registered commercial bank 
in terms of the Banking Act (Chapter 24:20). The Agricultural Bank of Zimbabwe, in its present 
state, has evolved in various forms over the past 82 years. Its roots can be traced to 1924 when 
the Land and Agriculture and Bank were founded to cater for the needs of commercial farmers 
of the day. In 1971 the Agriculture Finance Corporation (AFC) was conceived through an act 
of  Parliament,  which  amalgamated  the  Land  and  Agricultural  Bank  and  the  Agricultural 
Assistance Board. In 1996, the Bank was incorporated as the Agricultural Bank of Zimbabwe 
and was subsequently granted a commercial licence in June 1999.  
The Bank began its operations on 10 January 2000 and remains focused on agricultural lending 
to farmers, augmented by Corporate, Treasury and Retail Banking operations, in all parts of 
Zimbabwe throughout its wide branch network. Agribank currently has more than 40 branches 
throughout all the provinces of Zimbabwe. The Bank is wholly owned by the Government of 
Zimbabwe.  The  shareholding  structure  is:  50%  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  50%  Ministry  of 
Finance. Agribank’s Legal Mandate: and key role is that of a development finance institution 
with both loan granting and deposit taking functions. Agribank is subject to the supervision of 
the RBZ and operates in terms of the Banking Act. 
According to the 2019 Annual Report of Agribank “The Government in April 2018 resolved 
for Agribank to look for a Strategic Partner. This is necessary for further recapitalization of 
Agribank  to  enable  the  Bank  to  access  long-term  capital  and  lines  of  credit  for  expanded 
support to agriculture and other productive sectors. The Transaction Advisors, Ernst and Young 
Chartered Accountants carried out a due diligence exercise of the Bank during the year and the 
reports are pending presentation to the Government’s Privatisation technical committee. The 
due diligence exercise was critical to pave way for the recruitment of a strategic partner. The 
benefits of a strategic partner are that the Bank will be adequately capitalized to raise long term 
financing for agricultural infrastructure and development as well as to access international lines 
of credit.”   
3 | P a g e  
The members of Board of Directors of Agribank is shown in the following Table. 
Table 1: The Board of Directors of Agribank 
Name 
Mr. G.T. Matemachani 
Mr. B. Ngara 
Mr. E. Chimbera 
Mr. C. C. Sibanda 
Mrs S. Mrewa 
Mr. A. F. Hodges 
Ms M.A. Washaya 
Dr. J. Mutambara 
Ms. C.M. Maveneka 
Ms. P. Mandaza 
Mr. F Macheka 
Mr. T. Ruvingo 
Title/Position 
Chairman 
Vice Chairman 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Executive Director 
Acting Finance Director 
The management structure at Agribank is given below according to the 2019 Annual Report. 
Table 2: Management Structure at Agribank 
Name 
Mr. F. Macheka 
Mr. T. Ruvingo 
Mr. L. Rwazemba 
Mrs. P. Munyeza 
Mr. J Mverecha 
Mr. C. Mpofu 
Mrs G. Chigunde 
Mr. D. Ngwenya 
Ms T. Nhewede 
Mr D. Mbiba 
Mr. G. Kudumba 
Mrs. P. Mahundi 
Source: Agribank Website –cited on 10/09/2020 
Title/Position 
Executive Director 
Acting Finance Director 
Head of Corporate Services and Company Secretary 
Head of Corporate Banking 
Head of Strategy and Business Development 
Head of Credit and Debt Recoveries 
Head of Human Resources 
Head of Retail Banking 
Head of Business Risk 
Head of Treasury and International Banking 
Head of Internal Audit 
Head of Legal and Compliance 
Its main business is the provision of agricultural finance, retail banking, treasury and corporate 
banking services. The Bank subscribes to an internationally recognised rating agency, Global 
Credit Rating Group (GCR).  
The ratings for the last three (3) years were as follows: 
Table 3: Agribank Ratings 
Name 
Agribank Zimbabwe 
2019 
BB- 
2018 
BB- 
2017 
B+ 
The bank has been graded as above and is still to reach the quality of AA.  
4 | P a g e  
SECTION 2: Operational 
The  bank  maintains  its  headquarters  at  Hurudza  House,  14-16  Nelson  Mandela  Avenue,  in 
Harare, Zimbabwe's capital. It also has 47 networked branches in all provinces of the country. 
According  to  the  2019  Annual  Report  “The  Bank  successfully  implemented  an  ICT  Core 
banking system upgrade and went live on 4 November 2019. This transformed our core banking 
system from R10 version to R18, which is the latest version. The improved version will offer 
new  products  and  new  channel  offerings.  The  second  phase  of  the  upgrade  will  commence 
during the second quarter of 2020 and is scheduled for completion by December 2020. The 
second  phase  of  the  project  involves  implementation  of  additional  modules.  Digital 
transformation  and  investment  in  ICT  capabilities  will  remain  key  enablers  of  our  business 
going forward.” 
Agribank confirms that they have gone paperless and internet banking, mobile banking, USSD 
function,  online  banking  as  evidenced  with  the  efforts  mentioned  above.  Agribank  ‘s  main 
focus  is  agriculture  and  has  a  strategy  for  this  sector  confirmed  one  of  the  Agribusiness 
Manager interviewed by the research team.  
5 | P a g e  
SECTION 3: Assessment 
Experiences 
In 
Level  Of  Interest 
Foreign  Currency 
In Taking Up This 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Strategy In Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
Agribank has been doing the 
The 
bank 
has 
The  bank  is  keen 
Agribank 
has 
The bank has a consistent 
The bank is coming out of the 
similar  work  with  other 
IDCSA credit line 
to  work  with 
consistently 
high 
liquidity  ratio  as 
woods  as  regards  the  level  of 
NGOs  such  as  Save 
the 
lending in forex 
IFAD 
implored 
maintained  a  higher 
evidenced  by  figure  4 
Non-Performing  Loans. 
It 
Children,  SOS,  ActionAid 
one 
of 
the 
than  required  12  % 
below. However the bank 
picked  at  21% 
in  2016 
they  have  customers  and  the 
A  Robust  system- 
Agribusiness 
capital 
adequacy 
made  a  huge 
loss  of 
reducing to 14 % in 2017. RBZ 
clients 
cut 
across 
the 
manages R18 T20 
Managers  during 
ratio over the recent 
US$37  million  and  US$ 
maximum  recommended  ratio 
agricultural sector. They have 
system  the  latest 
the 
interviews 
with  a  pick  of  59% 
31  million  in  2016  and 
is 12 %. However over the past 
economists  who  monitor  the 
being R19. 
carried out by the 
in  2018.  However 
2017  respectively.  It  has 
two years the bank has traded 
agribusiness system.   
Research Team.  
there  has  been  a 
made  a  huge  turn  for the 
below the RBZ threshold with 
Agribank  has  a  separate 
agribusiness  robust  systems 
in its portfolios. 
6 | P a g e  
sharp decline of this 
better with a recorded Net 
9 % and 4 % in 2018 and 2019 
ratio in 2019 to 19%. 
Profit after Tax of US$ 13 
respectively.  This 
is 
a 
This  could  send  a 
million 
and  US$  2   
reflection of vigorous efforts to 
wrong 
signal 
to 
million in 2018 and 2019 
recover  outstanding  debts  by 
potential 
investors 
respectively.  The  bank 
the bank.  
being  looked  for  as 
despite 
the 
losses  has 
alluded to earlier on 
been 
paying 
some 
The 
Bank 
has  made    
although 19 % is still 
dividends 
to 
the 
significant 
progress 
in 
a  modest  coverage 
shareholder who happens 
strengthening credit 
ratio   
Experiences 
In 
Level  Of  Interest 
Foreign  Currency 
In Taking Up This 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Strategy In Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
to  be  the  Government  of 
assessment  processes  as  well 
Zimbabwe. 
as  debt  recovery.  This  has 
resulted in the 
improvement of the NPL ratio 
According  to  the  2019 
from 9% in December 2018 to 
Annual  Report 
“The 
3.70% as alluded to in the 2019 
Bank 
recognised 
a   
Annual Report  
financial 
asset 
of 
The  Bank  will 
continue 
ZWL$408  million  which 
implementing  measures 
for 
relates 
to 
the  Reserve 
enhanced 
credit 
granting 
Bank 
of 
Zimbabwe 
systems  as  well  as  sustained 
(“RBZ”) 
funding 
the 
debt  recovery  initiatives  the 
Bank’s  foreign  liability 
report  goes  on  to  say.    See 
funding  gap  which  arose 
figure  3  below  for  a  pictorial 
after separation of RTGS 
view  of  the  status  of  non-
and 
foreign 
currency 
performing loans.  
balances  by  the  Reserve 
Bank  of  Zimbabwe.  The 
arrangement  with 
the 
7 | P a g e  
Experiences 
In 
Level  Of  Interest 
Foreign  Currency 
In Taking Up This 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Strategy In Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
RBZ  was  determined  in 
accordance with IFRS 9 
to  contain  an  embedded 
derivative  which 
is 
recognised  at  fair  value 
through profit or loss, any 
gains or losses will 
be recognised in profit or 
loss The fair value of the 
financial  asset  on  initial 
recognition 
was 
determined as the 
anticipated  US$  amount 
receivable  translated  at 
the 
closing 
exchange 
rate.” This has a negative 
effect  on 
the  macro-
economic  condition  for 
the  country  as  it  implies 
8 | P a g e  
Experiences 
In 
Level  Of  Interest 
Foreign  Currency 
In Taking Up This 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Strategy In Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
the  ordinary  Taxpayer 
will bear the debt. 
9 | P a g e  
Figure 1: Agribank Capital Adequacy Ratios 2016-2019 
Figure 2: Agribank Liquidity Ratios 2016-2019 
10 | P a g e  
Figure 3: Agribank Non-Performing Loans Ratios 
Figure 4: Agribank Net Profit (Loss) After Tax 
11 | P a g e  
CBZ (COMMERCIAL BANK OF ZIMBABWE) LTD 
SECTION 1: Introduction  
CBZ Bank “is wholly owned by CBZ Holdings Limited, a locally incorporated company listed 
on  the  Zimbabwe  Stock  Exchange”. CBZ Bank  was  founded  when  the  Government  of 
Zimbabwe took over the defunct Bank of Credit and Commerce in 1991”. Bank of Credit and 
Commerce International headquartered in the United Kingdom also suffered the same fate in 
1991 and the Government of Zimbabwe assumed a 100% ownership of its local presence. An 
intensive turnaround strategy involving the adoption of strategic visioning and planning was 
instituted in 1995 and this resulted in the bank repositioning and naming itself as The Jewel 
Bank. In 1997 the bank was privatised to fund the ambitious turnaround programme. At that 
time the privatisation reduced the shareholding of the Government of Zimbabwe to 20% with 
private players taking up the rest.  
The board is composed of 7 members, 5 of whom are independent non-executive. This meets 
the requirements of good corporate governance which states that the board should be composed 
of more independent than executive directors according to the Cadbury Report of 1992. The 
board  is  chaired  by  Marc  L  Holtzman  while  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  is  Dr  Blessing 
Mudavanhu.  The  Chief  Finance  Officer  is  Tawanda  Gumbo  according  to  the  2019  Annual 
Report. 
The shareholders of CBZ Holdings are depicted below as at 31 December 2018.  
Table 4: Shareholders of CBZ Bank Ltd Top Seven 
Name 
CBZ Holdings Ltd  
Government of Zimbabwe 
Central Bank of Libya 
National Social Security Authority 
LHG Malta Holdings Ltd. 
Pharmaceuticals & Chem D Pl 
Old Mutual Investment Group Zimbabwe (Pvt) Ltd. 
Source: CBZ Website – cited on 06.09.2020 
12 | P a g e  
Equities 
% 
168,981,847 
24.6% 
110,000,000 
16.0% 
96,609,470 
14.1% 
80,499,805 
11.7% 
26,449,396 
3.85% 
9,200,000 
1.34% 
8,675,663 
1.26% 
The management structure of CBZ Bank Ltd is listed hereunder. 
   Table 5: Management Structure of CBZ Bank Ltd 
Name 
Since Title 
Dr.Blessing Mudavanhu 
2020  Chief Executive Officer & Executive Director 
Marc L. Holtzman 
Tawanda Gumbo  
2019  Chairman 
2020  Chief Financial Officer & Executive Director 
Rebecca Gaskin Gain  
2019  Independent Non-Executive Director 
Edward Mashingaidze  
2019  Independent Non-Executive Director 
Louis Charles Gerken  
2019  Independent Non-Executive Director 
Edward E. Galante  
2019  Independent Non-Executive Director 
Rumbidzayi Angeline Jakanani   2012  Group Legal Corporate Secretary 
  Source: CBZ Website – cited on 06.09.2020 
CBZ Bank is operating in a number of sectors, including 
1.  Retail and commercial banking  
2.  Mortgage Finance 
3.  Asset Management 
4. 
Insurance Business 
5.  Property Investment 
6.  Agro Business and  
7.  Other services which include Microfinancing package by Redsphere Unit and Equity 
Investments in the Holding Company. This is according to the 2019 Annual Report as 
it prepared the segment operational reporting. 
The following is the global credit rating of NMB Bank Ltd over the recent past 
Table 6: Details of Global Credit Rating 
Details 
Global Credit Rating Score 
2019 
A+ 
2018 
A 
2017 
A 
The above table shows that the bank is strong because it has reached the A grades in the years 
under review although it can still improve to AA. However, with the advent of the Covid-19 
13 | P a g e  
there is need to keep watch on this Global Credit Rating scores. The bank improved its score 
from a mere A in 2017 and 2018 to A+ in 2019 which is a sign of improved efficiency.  
SECTION 2: Operational 
CBZ Bank Ltd is widely spread in Zimbabwe with branch networks in most towns and cities. 
It has presence in what is term Growth Points. However with the advent of the Corona Virus 
most of the branches have been temporarily closed but the bank stakeholders have been taken 
care of by the Information, Communication and Technology the bank has put in place. The use 
of the card system has been enhanced recently. The customers of including farmers in remote 
areas use the following to access banking business: 
1.  Internet Banking 
2.  Mobile money banking through their cell-phones 
3.  Point of Sale machines and the Card system and  
4.  General use of Plastic money. 
CBZ Bank Ltd has introduced what is termed CBZ Touch to facilitate banking services where 
customers using their cell-phones can transfer money from one account to another, make bill 
payments, and even download funds from a foreign currency account to a local account with 
conversion facilities embedded in the system. With the cash crunch in Zimbabwe CBZ Bank 
Ltd has established what we can term virtual bank for its clients. In August 2020 CBZ Bank 
made a systems upgrade to enhance virtual banking and condition its clients to the new normal 
during and beyond Covid-19 pandemic. In a summary and according to the 2019 Annual Report 
“The Group has put in place various measures to support its clients and counter the effects of 
the COVID-19 pandemic and to make sure that the Group sustains itself during this pandemic. 
The measures are detailed as below: 
• Aggressive use of digital channels: The Group has encouraged its customers to make use of 
the various digital platforms it has available in effort to make sure that services are available 
to customers during the lockdown period. 
• Remote Working: Most of the Group employees are available to ensure continuity of the 
business during lockdown by working remotely. 
•  Limited  services:  The  Group,  is  offering  money  transfer  agency  business,  deposit  and 
withdrawal services to customers that are within the essential services category and those that 
have access to the teller on premises facility. 
14 | P a g e  
• Forbearance and moratoria to clients hardest hit by the pandemic: The Group’s level of 
exposure within the Hospitality and Tourism Sector which has been hardest hit by the effects 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, constitutes about 0.68% and hence, the Group is unlikely to suffer 
significant losses due to non-performance of borrowers in this Sector.” 
The management at the Agribusiness Department were confident of the new environment vis-
a-vis  the  enhanced  Information  Communication  and  Technology  CBZ  Bank  Ltd  has  put  in 
place. The heavy branch network could experience a downturn through the improved ICT in 
CBZ Bank Ltd.   
As of 30 June 2014, CBZ Bank Limited maintained a network of branches at 66 locations in 
all major urban centres of Zimbabwe. There has been a deliberate effort to downsize the branch 
network recently especially with the advent of the Covid-19 pandemic which has necessitated 
the lockdown of many a branch.  
According to the 2019 Annual Report “The Group is co-operating in ongoing investigations 
by the Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC) regarding historical transactions involving a 
party that was subject to OFAC economic sanctions”. Based on the facts currently known, it is 
not practicable at the reporting date for the Group to determine the terms on which the ongoing 
investigations will be resolved, or the timing of such resolution, or for the Group to estimate 
reliably the amounts or range of possible amounts of any fines and/or penalties which could be 
significant.” This statement is coming from 2018 and could impact on the rating of the Bank. 
Also  according  to  the  2019  Annual  Report  “Included  in  the  deposits  balance  above,  are 
amounts that are denominated in USD amounting to US$451 551 474 (being legacy liabilities 
of  US$ 318,062,662  and  nostro  gap  of  US$ 133,488,811)  which  are  shown  at  ZWL$ 
7,574,053,486.  These  foreign  denominated  liabilities,  which  are  payable  on  demand,  are 
subject  to  a  special  settlement  arrangement  with  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Zimbabwe  (RBZ)  as 
detailed in Note 16 to the financial statements wherein the RBZ will provide foreign currency 
gradually to the Bank for all registered legacy liabilities and nostro gap accounts at an exchange 
rate  of  1:1.  Subsequent  to  year  end,  the  Bank  transferred  the  ZWL  equivalent  of  the  said 
balances  to  the  RBZ  at  a  rate  of  1:1.  We  note  that  to  date  USD10  965 225  has  been  made 
available under this arrangement, demonstrating the willingness and capability of the RBZ to 
honour the settlement arrangement. However the absorption by the RBZ of such huge debts 
has severe economic impact on the fiscus and the nation at large.  
15 | P a g e  
SECTION 3: Assessment 
Strategy In Agribusiness 
CBZ  Bank  Ltd  has  a 
Experiences 
In 
Foreign  Currency 
Credit Lines 
CBZ  Bank  Ltd  has 
Level  Of  Interest 
In Taking Up This 
Partner-Ship 
CBZ Bank is very 
Capital Adequacy 
According 
to 
the 
Profitability/ Solvency 
CBZ 
Bank 
has 
Of 
Status 
Loans/Advances 
(Performing And Non -Performing 
The level of non-performing loans 
strong 
strategy 
in 
an 
extensive 
much interested in 
2019  Annual  Report 
maintained  above 
the 
has drastically reduced from a high 
Agribusiness  with 
a 
experience 
in 
partnering 
IFAD 
“The  Group  adopted 
RBZ 
minimum 
of US$ 202,772,288.00 in 2017 to 
separate 
department 
foreign 
currency 
in  this  upcoming 
the  Internal  Capital 
Liquidity ratios over the 
a  low  of  US  $  6,254,215.07  and 
having been established. 
credit 
lines. 
Project and awaits 
Adequacy 
reporting period 2015 to 
this could be attributed to the court 
The 
strategy 
is 
to 
Examples  of 
the 
an 
invitation 
to 
Assessment  Policy 
2019  with  the  highest 
ruling  by  the  Supreme  court  of 
finance 
various 
credit 
lines 
participate  in  the 
(ICAAP) 
which 
ratio recorded in 2016 at 
Zimbabwe  against  all  odds  to  the 
businesses  along 
the 
managed  by  CBZ 
same.  
enunciates 
CBZ 
76.65%.  This  ratio  has 
effect 
that  funds  which  were 
agricultural  value  chain 
Bank  Ltd  include 
Holding’s  approach, 
decreased to 52.56% by 
borrowed  in  US  $s  during  the 
from 
Input 
suppliers 
Create  Fund 
for 
assessment 
and 
2019  against  the  RBZ 
multiple  currency  era  were  to  be 
such  as  Seed  Houses  , 
US$5,000,000.00 
management  of  risk 
minimum 
of 
30% 
repaid  in  ZW  dollars  at  a  rate  of 
Chemical  Companies 
and  Badia.  CBZ 
and  capital  from  an 
maintained over the five 
ZW$1  =  US$1.    A  number  of 
such 
as 
Fertilizer 
Bank  Ltd 
also 
internal  perspective 
year  period.  Figure  2 
creditors lost huge sums of money 
Manufacturers,  Actual 
manages 
The 
that is over and above 
below 
clarifies 
the 
by this court ruling. 
farmers  both  small  and 
European  Union 
the 
minimum 
movements.  CBZ  Bank 
Figure 3 below supports the above 
large and commercial, to 
grants  said  one  of 
regulatory  rules  and 
Ltd  has 
consistently 
argument.  
uptakers 
such 
as 
the  Agribusiness 
capital  requirements 
posted  impressive  Net 
Paperhall 
Investments 
Managers  at  CBZ 
as  per  Basel  II  CBZ 
Profit  after  tax  in  the 
part 
of 
(INSCOR), 
Bank  Ltd.  CBZ 
Bank 
has 
reporting 
periods. 
National Foods. 
Bank  Ltd 
also 
consistently recorded 
However 
the 
16 | P a g e  
Status 
Loans/Advances 
(Performing And Non -Performing 
Of 
Level  Of  Interest 
In Taking Up This 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
a  capital  adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
profitability  took  a  dip 
ratio  above  the  RBZ 
in 2019 of only US$ 18 
recommended 
million  compared  to  a 
minimum of 12 %. 
high  of  US$  72  million 
It  has  moved  from  a 
in  2018  reflecting  a 
low of 16.3% in 2015 
reduction  by  over  two 
to  a  high  of  36.77% 
thirds.  
in  2019  see  Figure  1 
below  for  a  pictorial 
appreciation.  
Strategy In Agribusiness 
In 
Experiences 
Foreign  Currency 
Credit Lines 
supports  working 
capital 
requirements 
for 
exporters so that the 
exporters 
can 
“produce 
exportable products 
and assist exporters 
in  the  management 
of  CDI  forms  said 
an 
Agribusiness 
Manager. 
The 
Group currently has 
two 
facilities 
in 
place,  which  are  in 
operation  and  the 
financiers 
have  not  indicated 
an 
intention 
to 
review  terms  and 
conditions, 
17 | P a g e  
Level  Of  Interest 
In Taking Up This 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Status 
Loans/Advances 
(Performing And Non -Performing 
Of 
Strategy In Agribusiness 
In 
Experiences 
Foreign  Currency 
Credit Lines 
particularly 
availability 
according 
to 
the 
2019 
Annual 
Report. 
18 | P a g e  
Figure 5: CBZ Bank Capital Adequacy Ratio 
76.65%
51.84%
43.42%
64.24%
52.56%
30%
30%
30%
30%
30%
%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
2015
2016
2017
PERIOD
2018
2019
RBZ  LIQUIDITY RATIO  MINIMUM CBZ  BANK LIQUIDITY RATION ACHIEVED
Figure 6 CBZ Bank Liquidity Ratio 
19 | P a g e  
Figure 7: CBZ Bank Ltd Non-Performing Loans 
Figure 8: CBZ Bank Ltd Net Profit after Tax 
20 | P a g e  
NMB (NATIONAL MERCHANT BANK) BANK LTD 
SECTION 1: Introduction  
NMB Bank Ltd formerly called National Merchant Bank Ltd was established in 1993 as a bank 
incorporated under the Companies Act (Chapter 24:03) and is registered as a Commercial Bank 
in terms of the Banking Act (Chapter 24:20) according to the Annual Report of 2007. It was 
established  after  the  deregulation  of  the  Financial  Services  Sector  by  the  Government  of 
Zimbabwe  following  the  introduction  of  the  Economic  Structural  Adjustment  Programme 
recommended by the Bretton Woods Institutions (The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and 
The World Bank (WB)).   
It  started  as  a  Merchant  Banking  Financial  Institution  dealing  mainly  in  the  Imports  and 
Exports sector of the Zimbabwean Economy before turning itself into a Commercial Bank (in 
YEAR). On turning into a Commercial Bank it changed its name from National Merchant Bank 
to NMB Bank Ltd as it is called today.  Two incidents to note are that in 2004 it lost its banking 
licence to The Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) (The Central Bank of Zimbabwe) following 
allegations of massive foreign currency parallel market dealings and other non-banking illegal 
activities. The entire board was forced to resign and some of the board members skipped the 
country boarders to seek refuge in Britain.  
However, the second incident involved a fraudulent activity in 2006 which made the bank loose 
about  US$ 6.4 million  and destabilized its  capital  base. According to  the Audited Financial 
Statements of 2007 page 77 “A fraud involving about US$ 6.4 million was uncovered wherein 
foreign currency was deposed of by a bank official for Zimbabwe Dollars at the then  ruling 
exchange rate of ZW$250 to the US$ without authority” and in pursuant of that the bank lost 
its foreign currency dealership licence on 16 May 2007.    
According to the 2019 Annual Report the Board of Directors (BoD) is chaired by Mr. Benedict 
A. Chikwanha and deputised by Mr. Charles Chikaura. Mr. Benefit P. Washaya is the Chief 
Executive Officer while Mr. Benson Ndachena is the Chief Finance Officer.  
The board is composed of 10 members seven of whom are Independent Non-Executive. This 
meets the requirements of good corporate governance which states that the board should be 
composed of more independent non-executive directors according to the Cadbury Report of 
21 | P a g e  
1992. There has been stability in the board composition since only one director resigned in 
January 2019.  
The five top shareholders of NMB Bank Ltd’ are depicted below as at 31 December 2018. They 
are all private sector shareholders.  
Figure 9: NMB Bank Ltd Top 5 Shareholders 
Figure 10: Main Shareholders: Shares of Ownership 
Source: NMB Holdings Website – cited on 06.09.2020 
The balance of 39.89% is spread widely as NMB Bank is a quoted company on the Zimbabwe 
Stock Exchange.  
The management structure of NMB Bank Ltd is listed in Table 7. 
22 | P a g e  
Table 7: NMB Bank Ltd Management Structure 
Name 
Benefit P. Washaya 
Benson Ndachena 
Lionel Chinyamutangira 
Loyd Gore 
Fanwell Mutogo 
Simon Tembo 
Addison Shoniwa 
Jeskinus Z Mukunoweshuro 
Fradreck Chimhenga 
Ashley Fushai 
Shumirai Pashapa 
Alwin Chinyoka 
Source: NMB Holdings Website – cited on 06.09.2020 
Title 
Chief Executive Officer 
Chief Finance Officer 
Business Development Executive 
Deputy Chief Executive Officer 
Head Corporate Banking 
Head Retail Banking 
Head Treasury 
Head Human Capital 
Head Credit Management 
Head Risk Management 
Head Legal and Corporate Affairs / Company Secretary 
Head Operations 
The Bank Chairman acknowledges in  his  statement in  the Annual  Report  of 2019 that “the 
operating environment is challenging”. He went on to say “The financial results continue to be 
largely  driven  by  the  Bank’s  continued  diversification  into  the  broader  market  segments, 
enhanced use of the bank’s digital offerings, stricter credit underwriting standards, containment 
of  non-performing  loans  and  fair  value  gains  on  investment  properties  and  property  and 
equipment.”    NMB  Bank  as  a  registered  Commercial  Bank  is  operating  in  the  Retail  and 
Commercial Banking. It also has a Treasury and International Banking. It provides Corporate 
Finance Services as well. 
The following is the global credit rating of NMB Bank Ltd over the recent past. 
Table 8: Global Rating Details 
Details 
Global Credit Rating Score 
2019 
BB- 
2018 
BBB- 
2017 
BB+ 
The above table shows that the bank is weak in risk management as it is yet to reach the AA 
grades in the years under review.  
SECTION 2: Operational 
NMB Bank has been receiving adverse opinions in 2018 and 2019 as a result of “In light of the 
failure to  fully comply  with  the requirements  of  IAS  21, the Group’s independent  auditors, 
Ernst & Young, have issued an adverse opinion on the financial statements for the year ended 
31  December  2018.”    According  to  the  Annual  Report  of  2019  “These  abridged  financial 
statements have been audited by Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants (Zimbabwe) and an 
adverse  audit  opinion  issued  thereon  due  to  non-compliance  with  International  Accounting 
23 | P a g e  
Standard 21, “The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates” and non-compliance with 
International Accounting Standard 8, “Accounting Polices, Changes in Accounting Estimates 
and  Errors”.  There  are  no  key  audit  matters  communicated  in  the  auditor’s  report.”  The 
adverse  opinion  came  out  mainly  because  Zimbabwe  adopted  a  functional  Local  Currency 
midstream the financial year and most institutions received the adverse opinion. In the same 
Annual Report of 2019  “ For management purposes, the Bank is organised into five operating 
segments based on products and services as follows:  
1.  Retail banking covers individual customer’s deposits and consumer overdrafts, credit 
card facilities and funds transfer facilities.  
2.  Corporate  Banking  looks  at  loans  and  other  credit  facilities,  deposit  and  current 
accounts for corporate and institutional customers.  
3.  Treasury  oversees  money  market  investment,  securities  trading,  accepting  and 
discounting of instruments and foreign currency trading.  
4.  International  Banking  is  there  to  handle  the  Bank’s  foreign  currency  denominated 
banking business and manages relationships with correspondent.  
5.  Digital Banking looks at the Bank’s digital banking products including Card and Point 
of Sale (POS) service”. 
In terms of the bank’s branch network, NMB Bank is headquartered in Harare at Unity Court, 
Kwame Nkrumah and First Street. According to the NMB Website cited on 06 /09/2020, NMB 
Bank Ltd have 18 Branches 9 of which are in Harare and the other 9 are spread throughout out 
the country with one Branch in each of the following towns and cities: 
  Bindura,  
  Bulawayo,  
  Chinhoyi,  
  Chitungwiza,  
  Gweru,  
  Kwekwe,  
  Masvingo,  
  Mutare, and  
  Victoria Falls.  
The Bank’s Automated Teller Machine (ATM) network covers the following locations: 
24 | P a g e  
  Avondale - Harare 
  Borrowdale - Harare 
  Bulawayo 
  Card Centre - Harare 
  Chinhoyi 
  Chitungwiza Town Centre 
  Eastgate - Harare 
  Fruit & Veg - Greendale, Harare 
  Gweru 
  Joina City - Harare 
  Kwekwe 
  Masvingo 
  Msasa - Harare 
  Mutare 
  Southerton – Harare. 
However,  these  ATMs  have  been  rendered  almost  useless  given  the  macro–economic 
conditions in Zimbabwe especially over the last three years where access to physical cash has 
been a major challenge for the banking public. After the reintroduction of a local currency in 
2019 these ATMs started to dispense cash in local currency as prescribed by the Reserve Bank 
of Zimbabwe, but the daily cash withdrawal limits were very low.  
The  use  of  point-of-sale  machines  has  grown  significantly  over  the  recent  past  and  the 
Government  of  Zimbabwe  through  its  Central  Bank  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  has 
encouraged  the  use  of  plastic  money  and  has  limited  the  printing  of  physical  cash  thereby 
constraining the transacting public who may prefer the use of cash to plastic (card) money. 
With the advent of Covid-19 and consequent closure of branches the use of cards and internet 
banking has grown significantly. The bank has embarked on a digitization trajectory marked 
by the introduction of paperless low-cost account opening the Chairman alluded to in his 2019 
Chairman’s statement in the Annual Report of the same year.  
Experience with Lines of Credit 
According to the NMB 2019 Annual Report “The banking subsidiary owed USD 13 840 412 
to various providers of lines of credit at 31 December 2019. The Bank registered these foreign 
debts  with  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Zimbabwe  (RBZ)  as  required  by  the  regulatory  directives. 
25 | P a g e  
During the period under review, the Bank transferred to the RBZ the ZWL equivalent of the 
foreign debts at a rate of USD/ZWL1:1. The RBZ indicated that they will be issuing a USD 
denominated instrument for these debts and consequently these debts and the RBZ deposits 
were accounted for at the closing exchange rate of USD/ZWL 1:16.77 at 31 December 2019. 
This effectively valued the original credit lines at a rate of 1:1 on a netted off basis. Subsequent 
to year end, the RBZ approved the line of credit balances amounting to USD13 840 412”. The 
adoption of the legacy debt by the RBZ has had serious negative impact on macro-economic 
performance of the country as a whole.  
ICT infrastructure and capacity 
NMB Bank Ltd is well configured in terms of ICT. This has made its business resilient in the 
face of the Covid 19 pandemic. During interviews with the IFAD consultant, the Agribusiness 
Manager stated that “staff members have been given systems remote access to enable working 
from  home.    He  went  on  to  say  “physical  customer  visits  are  being  minimised  and  most 
meetings are being held virtually”. Finally, the Agribusiness Manager indicated in his response 
to  our  question  about  health  and  safety  that  “The  Bank  has  fully  adopted  WHO  Covid-19 
guidelines  on  maintaining  safe  working  environments”.    The  manager  also  directed  the 
researcher  to  their  website:  www.nmbz.co.zw    to  obtain  data  regarding  their  financial 
statements including status of level of non-performing loans.  
26 | P a g e  
SECTION 3: Assessment 
Strategy 
In 
Foreign  Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Status 
Of 
Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non  -
Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
NMB  Bank  has 
the 
The 
bank 
has 
The  Agribusiness 
NMB  Bank  has  consistently 
According  to  Figure  4 
According  to  the  NMB 
strategy  of  “To  grow 
experience 
in 
Manager 
indicated 
surpassed 
the 
Capital 
below  NMB  Bank  Ltd 
Annual  Reports  2015  to 
and 
double 
current 
foreign 
currency 
strongly that “NMB 
Adequacy  Ratio  as  prescribed 
has consistently shown 
2019 
the  Bank  has 
Agribusiness  portfolio 
credit  lines.  NMB 
Bank  would  be 
by  The  Reserve  Bank  of 
a  satisfactory  level  of 
achieved 
a  massive 
by 
2021 
through 
Bank  Ltd 
has 
interested to partner 
Zimbabwe  between  2015  and 
liquidity 
above 
the 
improvement 
in 
offering  tailor  –  made 
“accessed  lines  of 
IFAD in supporting 
2019  which  period  is  under 
required  RBZ 
ratio 
containing  
working 
capital 
and 
credit… 
from 
and  exploiting  the 
review for this report  
with  a  high  of  60.72% 
Non-  performing  loans 
capex 
(capital 
Afreximbank US $ 
potential 
in 
the 
Figure 
3 
below 
shows 
achieved 
by  NMB 
from  13.19%  in  2015  to 
expenditure) 
funding 
20  million,  Trade 
agriculture sector.” 
comparison  of  NMB  Capital 
Bank  Ltd  against  the 
as little as 1.37% in 2019. 
solutions  to  farmers  in 
and  Development 
Adequacy Ratios against those 
required 30 % in 2019. 
This  is  due  to  a  stricter 
all  sectors  that  include 
Bank 
(formerly 
prescribed by Reserve Bank of 
It  should  be  noted 
credit 
underwriting 
seasonal 
cropping, 
PTA  Bank)  US$ 
Zimbabwe from 2015 to 2019. 
however  that  this  ratio 
standards 
being 
horticulture, 
livestock, 
10  million  as  well 
In  2020  a  post  period  to  this 
may  not  be  very 
implemented 
and 
an 
floriculture  etc.”  said 
as  DFIs  such  as 
report  prescribes  the  Capital 
informative  given  that 
aggressive  containment 
the  Manager  at  NMB 
FMO  US  $  15 
Requirement  of  US  $  20 
RBZ required ratio has 
of  Non 
-  performing 
Bank  Ltd  –  head  of 
million,  Norsad 
million  equivalent  in  ZW$. 
remained  30  %  since 
loans 
through 
an 
Agribusiness 
US  $  10  million 
NMB Bank in response to this 
2016 
against 
a 
aggressive 
collection 
etc. “All personnel 
requirement has decided not to 
hyperinflationary 
efforts  put  in  place  by 
27 | P a g e  
Strategy 
In 
Foreign  Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Status 
Of 
Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non  -
Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
that managed these 
facilities  are  still 
with the bank” the 
Agribusiness 
Manager implored.  
declare  a  dividend.  Non- 
environment 
the 
management according to 
payment  of  a  dividend  could 
country  faces.    NMB 
the  2019  Annual  report. 
send  a  wrong  message 
to 
Bank  has  consistently 
However  added  to  the 
current  and potential  investors 
posted  huge  profits  in 
above 
argument 
the 
because  Dividends  are  a  form 
the 
periods 
under 
reduction 
could 
be 
of thank you to the subscribing 
review  although  with 
attributed  to  the  court 
shareholders.  In  2018  NMB 
the 
advent  of 
the 
ruling  by  the  Supreme 
declared  a  scrip  dividend  of 
Corona  Virus  2020 
Court 
of  Zimbabwe 
0.96  RTGS  dollars  per  share 
could reflect a different 
recently which stated that 
according  to  the  2018  Annual 
story.  Figure  5  below 
funds  borrowed  during 
report  and  this  change  to  not 
depicts the profitability 
the multiple currency era 
declare any in order to meet the 
which rose to a high of 
in US $ were to be repaid 
RBZ  Capital requirement may 
US  $  21,267.632  in 
in  local  ZW$  currency. 
send 
the  wrong  message. 
2018  but  took  a  dip  in 
Creditors  were  dealt  a 
According  to  Brealey,  Myers 
2019 
to 
US$ 
blow 
in 
that 
they 
and  Allen 
(2011)  p  425 
11,269,032 
after 
experienced  huge  losses 
“investors  do  not  get  excited 
revaluing  by  applying 
because  of  that  ruling. 
about the level of a company’s 
the  exchange  rate  of 
Figure  5  below  shows 
dividend, they worry about the 
ZW$  16.77  =  US$  1 
pictorially  the  decline  in 
28 | P a g e  
Strategy 
In 
Foreign  Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Status 
Of 
Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non  -
Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
change” from declaring one to 
which  was  the  closing 
non-performing 
loan 
not declaring any. Brealey et al 
rate as at 31 December 
requirement  ratios  from 
2015  to  2019.    Figure  5 
below highlights the non-
performing 
loans 
pictorially. 
go  on  to  say  they  view  the 
2019 
change  as  an  “an  important 
indicator  of  the  sustainability 
of earnings.”   Although NMB 
Bank 
Ltd 
has 
shown 
consistently  that  it  meets  the 
required 
capital 
levels 
according  to  Figure  4  below 
between  2016  and  2018,  in 
2019  after  adjusting  for  the 
exchange rate of ZW$ 16.77 to 
US$ 1 – the bank is short of the 
RBZ  required  capital  of  US$ 
25 million. This could explain 
non-  payment  of  dividend  in 
order 
to  meet 
the  RBZ 
29 | P a g e  
Strategy 
In 
Foreign  Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Status 
Of 
Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non  -
Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
requirements  of  US$  20 
million by year 2020. 
30 | P a g e  
Figure 11: NMB Bank Capital Adequacy Ratios 2015 -2019 
Source: NMB Bank Ltd Annual Reports 2016 – 2019. 
Figure 12: NMB Bank Liquidity Ratios 2016 -2019 
Source: NMB Bank Ltd Annual Reports 2016 – 2019. 
31 | P a g e  
Figure 13: NMB Bank Non-Performing Loan Ratios 2015 -2019 
Source: NMB Bank Ltd Annual Reports 2016 – 2019. 
Figure 14: NMB Bank Capital Levels 2016 -2019 
Source: NMB Bank Ltd Annual Reports 2016 – 2019. 
32 | P a g e  
Figure 15: NMB Net Profit After-Tax Inclusive of Other Income 2015 -2019 
Source: NMB Bank Annual Reports 2015-2019. 
33 | P a g e  
STEWARD BANK LTD 
SECTION 1: Introduction  
Steward Bank was launched in July 2013 following Econet Wireless Zimbabwe's acquisition 
of  TN Bank,  a  subsidiary  of  TN  Holdings  Limited  (now  known  as  Lifestyle  Holdings). 
Following  its  launch,  the Bank has  since  positioned  itself  as  a  mass-bank,  focused  on 
providing banking solutions through the use of technology. 
Steward Bank is the first bank in the country to have convergence with telecommunications 
and together with its technology focus the bank is set to change the way Zimbabweans view 
banking. The future prospects of Steward Bank are very promising, with a total capital base 
which stood at $75 million on 28 Feb 2013, which is well in excess of the Reserve Bank of 
Zimbabwe’s requirement of $50  million  by June 2013.  Econet Wireless  Zimbabwe  Limited 
acquired 100% shareholding in TN Bank now Steward Bank in January 2013 and the Bank is 
now  poised to become  one of the  leading banks.  Steward  Bank  is  a  subsidiary  of  Econet 
Wireless which is listed on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange.  
The Board of Directors of Steward Bank is given in the table below which is in accordance 
with the 2019 Annual Report: 
Table 9: Board of Directors of Steward Bank 
Name 
Since  Title 
Bernard Chidzore 
2017 
Board Chairman 
Courage Mashavave 
2020  Acting Chief Executive Office 
John Gould 
Peter M. Mbizvo 
2016  Non-Executive Director 
2016  Non-Executive Director 
Christopher Maswi 
2016  Non-Executive Director 
Nancy N. Chadehumbe 
2016  Non-Executive Director 
Krison V. Chirairo 
2016  Non-Executive Director 
Darlington Mandivenga 
2019  Non-Executive Director 
Lance Mambondiani 
2016 
Executive Director 
Alfred Chaavure 
2017 
Executive Director 
 Source: Steward Bank Ltd Website – cited on 11.9.2020 
34 | P a g e  
The board has a diverse membership and is heavily in favour of non-executive directors which 
meet the requirements of good corporate governance according to the Cadbury Report of 1992. 
The board has only one executive director against seven non-executive directors including the 
chairman. Steward Bank has also undergone some credit rating despite its novice in the banking 
industry as shown below 
Table 10: Steward Bank Credit ratings 
2018 
Name 
BBB 
Steward Bank 
Source: 2019 Steward Bank Annual Report 
2017 
BBB 
2016 
BBB- 
The bank has recorded a BBB credit rating with a minus in 2016 and a straight BBB in 2017 
and 2018. The bank is yet to achieve an AA grade.  
The management structure of Steward Bank is provided for in the following table: 
Table 11: Management Structure of Steward Bank 
Name 
Title 
Courage Mashavave  Acting Chief Executive Office 
Arthur Matsaudza 
Chief Technology Officer 
Mudiwa Hood 
Manager: Millennial Banking 
Ruka Nyoka 
Head of Human Resources 
Chaavure Alfred 
Chief Finance Officer 
Tapera Mushoriwa 
Division Head / Digital Payments and Financial Services 
Takudzwa Muzvidzwa Head of Digital Transformation 
Theodora Mangwiza  Marketing and Creativity Manager 
Florence Rusike 
Risk and Compliance Manager 
David Mapangela 
Head of Risk 
Twaibu Seremani 
Programmes Director  
Rudo Manjengwa 
Merchant Service Manager 
Blessing Chiwandire  Renewable Energy Manager 
Malvern Kuona 
Planning and Data Analyst 
Enwell O. Boweni 
Retail Credit Analyst 
Daniel Njovana  
Mortgage Loan Officer 
John Gould  
Chairman Auditor 
Vimbai Chinyadza 
Internal Audit 
35 | P a g e  
Name 
Title 
Jasper Sasa 
Core Systems Manager 
 Source: Steward Bank Website – cited on 11/9/2020    
SECTION 2: Operational 
Steward  Bank  has  8  branches  throughout  the  country  but  also  a  number  of  agents  to 
complement the branches located in Econet Shops throughout the country as well.  
Prior  to  Covid-19,  the  bank  has  always  been  structured  in  more  of  Digital  banking  system 
platforms.  The  bank  introduced  various  platforms  to  upscale  digitization.  Some  of  the 
platforms include the following  
1.  Crowd funding – Kanzatu – Kanzatu 
2.  USSD Digital account opening 
3.  Nano Loans and  
4.  Kashagi 
Steward  Bank  has  also  facilitated  the  use  of  VISA  Cards,  Point  of  Sale  Machines  across 
different banks, internet banking and general card services even before the advent of Covid 19.  
According to the 2019 Annual Report “The line of credit consists of funds advanced to the 
Bank for disbursement to entities in the agriculture value chains. The line is priced at 5% per 
annum, is unsecured, and payable over tenure of 12-36 months.” 
According  to  Banks  and  Banking  Survey  (2019  p  54  “Steward  Bank  has  fully  embraced 
innovation on the digital front. It has launched Kashagi *263# Banking and Sosholoza on the 
WhatsApp Banking Platform in partnership with Facebook Inc.” Opening bank accounts and 
payment  of  bills  has  been  made  easy  through  adoption  of  technologies  especially  with  the 
Covid 19 pandemic.  
36 | P a g e  
SECTION 3: Assessment 
Strategy 
In 
Foreign 
Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
Steward  Bank 
programs 
that 
has 
are 
already  working  under 
Rural  Finance  Pilar 
where  they  are  giving 
credit 
facility 
to 
smallholder  famers  and 
Steward bank is funding 
on its own. But it’s still 
to be launched there has 
been  delays  due  to  the 
COVID-19 
pandemic  
They  have  also  had 
other partners who come 
with  their  own  funding 
and 
Steward 
bank 
manages 
the 
funding 
supporting 
agriculture 
value  chain  and  also 
37 | P a g e  
Steward  Bank  has 
The bank has maintained 
The bank has fought very hard 
maintained 
above 
a healthy liquidity ratio in 
to contain the non-performing 
the minimum capital 
the  reporting  period  with 
loans moving from a high of 35 
adequacy 
ratio 
a  high  of  81%  in  2017 
% in 2015 to a low of 11 % in 
which 
has 
been 
tapering  off  to  75  %  in 
2017  which 
is  below 
the 
pitched  at  68%  in 
2019  which  figures  are 
maximum  recommended  by 
2018 
and 
2019 
way  above  the  minimum 
the  RBZ.  Figure  3  below 
according 
to 
the 
of  30%  as  prescribed  by 
depicts the picture of the non-
2019 Annual report.  
the  Reserve  Bank  of 
performing loans clearly.  
The 
threshold  for 
Zimbabwe  (RBZ).  The 
Capital 
adequacy 
bank started with a loss of 
ratio by the RBZ has 
US$ 8 million in 2015 but 
remained  at  12  % 
turned 
the  corner  and 
over 
the 
period 
realised  consistently  Net 
under review.  
Profit after Tax reaching a 
high of US$ 32 million in 
2018  which  dipped  in 
2019  to  only  US$  1.3 
million.  
Strategy 
In 
Foreign 
Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Agribusiness 
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
getting  guarantees  from 
those partners especially 
in 
the 
rural 
finance 
groups and SMEs  
38 | P a g e  
Figure 16: Steward Bank Capital Adequacy Ratios 
Figure 17: Steward Bank Liquidity Ratios 
39 | P a g e  
Figure 18: Steward Bank Non-Performing Loans Ratios 
Figure 19: Steward Bank Net Profit after Tax 
40 | P a g e  
ZB (ZIMBABWE BANKING CORPORATION) BANK LTD 
SECTION 1: Introduction  
ZB  Bank  Ltd  is  the  flagship  of  ZB  Financial  Holdings  (ZBFH).  Banking  operations 
commenced  in  1951  when  the  Netherlands  Bank  of  South  Africa  opened  a  branch  in  then 
Salisbury, now Harare. These operations, which were sold to the Netherlands Bank of Rhodesia 
in  August  of  1967,  maintained  a  steady  growth  through  acquisitions  and  expansion  of 
operations. The Company changed its name to Rhodesia Banking Corporation Limited in 1972 
and then Rhobank in 1979.  
After  the  acquisition  of  a  majority  shareholding  in  the  Company  by  the  Government  of 
Zimbabwe in 1981 the Company changed its name to Zimbabwe Banking Corporation Limited. 
The Bank became a subsidiary of Zimbabwe Financial Holdings Limited (FINHOLD) in 1992 
following a restructuring of operations in which non-banking operations were removed from 
the Bank.  
The Bank was renamed ZB Bank Limited in 2006 following the adoption of a monolithic brand 
by  the  Group.  The  Bank  provides  retail  banking  and  corporate  banking  services.  The  share 
ownership structure for the top five shareholders is shown in the table below. 
Table 12: Shareholding Structure Top Five 
Name 
National Social Security Authority (NSSA) 
Transnational Holdings Ltd 
ZB Financial Holdings Ltd 
Old Mutual Life Assurance Company of Zimbabwe 
Mashonaland Holdings 
Source: 2019 ZB Bank Annual Report 
Number of Shares 
66,196,080 
37,557,626 
17,667,740 
10,178,562 
5,281,975 
% holding 
37.79% 
21.44% 
10.04% 
5.81% 
3.01% 
The  balance  of  21.91%  is  spread  widely.  Of  interest  to  note  is  that  the  Government  of 
Zimbabwe  (GoZ)  divested  from  this  group  directly  but  in  its  stead  it  is  represented  by  the 
majority-  shareholder  NSSA  combined  with  ZB  Financial  Holdings  who  have  a  total  of 
47.83%. The Government of Zimbabwe can still influence the goings on at ZB Bank to include 
even  appointment  of  Directors  through  NSSA.  NSSA  is  a  parastatal  or  a  State  Owned 
Enterprise a vehicle for the GoZ to influence investment activities in the economy. 
41 | P a g e  
The Board of Directors as pronounced by the Annual Report of 2019 is as follows: 
  Mrs P Chiromo (Acting Chairman) 
  Mr. R. Mutandagayi (Group Chief Executive) 
  Mr. F. Kapanje (Group Finance Director) 
  Mr. O. Akerele 
  Mr. T. S. Bvurere 
  Mrs. A. Makamure 
  Mr. A. Z. Mangwiro 
  Mr. K. Maukazuva 
  Mr. J. Mutevedzi 
  Mr. P. B. Nyoni 
  Ms. T. Sibanda. 
The  board  complies  with  corporate  governance  which  state  that  Non-Executive  Directors 
should be more in number than the Executive. In the case of ZB Bank Ltd there are only two 
Executive Directors out of the eleven members. 
The following tables shows the global rating for ZB Bank Ltd. 
Table 13: Global (External) Credit Rating 
Institution 
ZB Bank Ltd 
Source: ZB Bank 2019 Annual Report 
2019 
BB 
2018 
BB 
2017 
BB- 
The above rating shows that there has been an improvement in  the rating although it is still 
below the AA rating other banks achieved in the period under review. 
ZB Bank and its affiliates provide a variety of products and services. including the ones listed 
below. 
Retail Banking 
• Savings accounts, • Current accounts, • Call banking, • Banc-assurance, • Personal loans,  
• Mortgage loans, and • Home improvement loans, • Diaspora banking, and • Agents banking. 
Micro-banking 
• Micro business loans, • Savings accounts, and • Advisory 
42 | P a g e  
Electronic Banking 
• Internet banking, • Mobile banking, • Automated teller machines (ATMs), and • Point of Sale 
(POS) machines. 
Corporate Banking 
•  Term  loans,  •  Overdrafts,  •  Advisory  services,  •  Corporate  savings  accounts,  • Corporate, 
current accounts, and • Corporate mortgages. 
Treasury and Investments 
• Fixed deposits, • Treasury bills, • Bankers acceptances, • Savings deposit account 
• Foreign currency accounts, • Structured facilities, and • Investments advisory services. 
International Banking 
•  Correspondent  banking,  •  Exchange  control  and  advisory  services,  •  Clean  documentary 
collections, • Documentary letters of credit, and • Foreign lines of credit. 
The  Bank  through  its  affiliates  also  offer  investments  products,  life  insurance,  mortgages 
among other products and services alluded to in the 2019 Annual Report.  
SECTION 2: Operational 
ZB Bank Ltd is widely spread in the country with a branch network is all towns and cities.  As 
of April 2016, ZBBL maintained a network of 49 branches and 10 agencies across Zimbabwe, 
as listed in the 2016 Annual Report. 
According to the 2019 Banks and Banking Survey p. 70 ZB Bank is ranked number 16 out of 
18  banks  in  Zimbabwe  in  terms  of  performance  judged  through  Ratio  Analysis.  The  bank 
wanted  more  information  on  arrangement  fees,  establishment  fee,  interest  rates  and  tenure 
before considering whether to participate or not. This information could not be provided by the 
Research Team as the research was at its initial assessment stage.  
43 | P a g e  
SECTION 3: ASSESSMENT 
Strategy In 
Agribusiness 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Foreign 
Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
According to the 2019 Annual 
According to the Annual 
The 2019 Annual report stated 
Report “ZB Bank Limited and 
Report  of  ZB  Bank 
that “Loan impairment charges 
ZB  Building  Society  were 
liquidity of the bank has 
to 
the 
income 
statement 
assessed  using 
the  Risk 
remained strong to reach 
increased  from  ZW$34.6m  in 
Assessment  System  (RAS) 
a high of 88 % in 2019. 
2018 to ZW$75.6m in 2019 in 
and were found to be at level 
Figure  2  below  shows 
line  with  the  growth  in  assets 
4  which 
is  Fair 
in 
the 
the scenario pictorially. 
exposed  to  credit  risk.  Overall 
circumstances.  In  the  same 
credit 
quality 
however 
report  there  is  mention  that 
ZB BANK experienced a 
improved, 
with 
non-
the  Bank  met  the  minimum 
massive  loss  of  US  $  7 
performing 
loans 
as 
a 
requirement  of  the  Reserve 
million in 2018 although 
percentage  of 
total 
loans 
Bank  of  Zimbabwe  (RBZ) 
it  bounced  back 
to 
reducing from 4.6% in 2018 to 
although the figure could not 
realise  a  net  profit  after 
2.2% in 2019.”  
be easily traced. 
tax  of  over  US$  25 
million  in  2019  restated 
A  pictorial  view  of  the  non-
in  US  dollars  at  the 
performing  loans  is  given  in 
exchange  rate  of  ZW$ 
figure 2 below. The RBZ set the 
16.7734  =  US  $  1.  This 
minimum liquidity ratio for ZB 
rate  has  depreciated  in 
Bank  at  5  %  according  to  the 
44 | P a g e  
Strategy In 
Agribusiness 
Experiences 
In 
Level Of Interest In 
Foreign 
Currency 
Taking  Up  This 
Status  Of  Loans/Advances 
(Performing  And  Non 
-
Credit Lines 
Partner-Ship 
Capital Adequacy 
Profitability/ Solvency 
Performing 
less  than  one  year  to 
Annual  report  of  2018  and  it 
ZW$  82  =  US  $  1. 
can be seen that the bank is in a 
According 
to 
the 
weak position at 4.6% and 2.2 
Auction  System  of  8 
% 
in 
2018 
and 
2019 
September  2020  put  in 
respectively 
place  by  the  RBZ.  See 
figure  4  below  to  view 
the details.  
45 | P a g e  
Figure 20: ZB Capital Adequacy Ratios 
Figure 21: ZB Bank Ltd Liquidity Ratios 
46 | P a g e  
Figure 22: ZB Bank Ltd Non-Performing Loans Ratios 
Figure 23: ZB Bank Ltd Net Profit (Loss) After Tax 
47 | P a g e  
CONCLUSIONS 
Agribank  is  coming  out  of  a  perennial  loss-making  situation  to  profitability.  Although  the 
profits are modest it could be seen that the bank has turned the corner.  The bank has instituted 
an aggressive debt  recovery  and as of 2019 the bank met the requirements of 4% against a 
maximum  ratio  of  12  %  set  by  the  regulatory  authority  (The  Reserve  Bank  of  Zimbabwe). 
However, the bank still maintains only two shareholders in the name of Ministry of Finance 
and  Ministry  of  Agriculture  which  are  effectively  The  Government  of  Zimbabwe.  It  has  a 
robust IT system and has experience in managing foreign lines of credit. 
CBZ Bank Ltd has shown a strong performance in the report period maintaining a very good 
external  credit rating of  AA throughout.  It  is  well  capitalised and has a strong  agribusiness 
strategy.  CBZ  Bank  Ltd  also  made  huge  strides  in  improving  the  recovery  rate  of  non- 
performing loans from a high of over US$ 202 million in 2017 to a low of only US$ 6 million 
in 2019.  The bank is highly liquid as most State Owned Enterprises which include the Revenue 
Authority (ZIMRA) and State owned Universities to mention a few bank with it. However the 
Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe took over a legacy debt of US$ 450 million in the recent past which 
becomes a burden to the Zimbabwe economy in general and the Taxpayer in particular. 
NMB Bank Ltd has had extensive experience in managing foreign lines of credit much larger 
than  what  IFAD  is  offering  at  the  moment.  It  has  also  retained  key  personnel  who  have 
managed similar larger lines of credit according to responses the research team obtained from 
the agribusiness unit within the bank. The bank’s financial position is strong with net Profit 
after Tax of over US$ 11 million in 2019.   However the bank has recently transferred a legacy 
debt of US$ 14 million to the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe as alluded to earlier on, which has a 
negative impact on the economy of Zimbabwe. It has also received adverse audit reports in the 
recent past mainly because of macro-economic fundamental functional local currency changes. 
The  bank  has  instituted  an  aggressive  debt  recovery  and  its  non-performing  loans  are  now 
insignificant in 2019 compared to prior years. The bank maintains a good capital adequacy and 
liquidity ratios in excess of those recommended by the RBZ. 
Steward Bank is a relatively new player in the banking industry in Zimbabwe but has made 
strides  in  the  adoption  of  digital  banking.  It  has  also  moved  from  loss  making  of  US$  8.3 
48 | P a g e  
million  in  2015  to  profit  making  of  a  high  US$  32  million  in  2018.  However  profitability 
plummeted to over just US$ 1 million in 2019 which could be a source of worry for potential 
partners.  Liquidity and Non-performing loans ratios have improved in the recent past in line 
with  Reserve  Bank  of  Zimbabwe  guidelines.  However,  the  bank  has  remained  in  the  BB 
categories of credit rating by external global credit rating agencies which is an indication of 
some fundamental weakness within the bank.  
ZB Bank Ltd experienced a loss of US$ 7 million in 2018 before attaining a modest profit of 
US$ 26 million in 2019. It has not managed to meet the maximum non-performing loan cut off 
of 12 % set  by The Reserve  Bank of  Zimbabwe in  2019 which could  indicate a weak debt 
collection system in the bank.  
49 | P a g e  
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Given the above institutional assessments and concluding remarks across the selected banks, 
the research team makes the following recommendations concerning the potential partnering 
of the above banks with the SACP Line of Credit operations. 
a.  The limitations of Agribank reside in  low profitability but  could  be considered with 
other banks on the offer at hand as it has a robust agribusiness portfolio and substantial 
experience in rural credit line operations as well as interest to develop its agro-business 
finance operations. 
b.  Given the strengths of its agribusiness and experience in foreign lines of credit, CBZ 
Bank can manage the US$ 2.5 million facility with relative ease. It is recommended 
that  it  be  considered  for  this  facility  but  taking  into  account  its  share  ownership 
structure. The bank has a strong past experience in management of foreign credit lines 
and also has the appropriate personnel to manage the US$2.5 million on offer as alluded 
to  by  the  agribusiness  manager  at  the  bank.  The  bank  has  also  consistently  been 
awarded AA  credit rating  grades by  external  credit rating agencies  which indicate a 
strong going concern status of the bank.  
c.  NMB bank Ltd is being recommended to be a partner to  IFAD given its strong past 
experience in management of foreign credit lines and having the appropriate personnel 
to manage the US$2.5 million on offer.  The bank has remained profitable even in the 
current macroeconomic environment and has a board structure which is commensurate 
with good corporate governance. According to external credit rating agencies the bank 
has not performed so well coming from a BB+ in 2017 to a low of BB – in 2018 and 
2019 respectively.  The bank has however retained its key personnel to manage foreign 
lines  of  credit  hence  the  recommendation  by  the  research  team  that  it  be  given  an 
opportunity to partner IFAD. 
d.  Steward Bank Ltd is a relatively new player in the banking industry with less than ten 
years overall experience and has not demonstrated that it has managed foreign lines of 
credit. Its external credit rating is still low in the BB category therefore the research 
team is not recommending this bank to partner IFAD in the US$ 2.5 million window of 
funding.  
50 | P a g e  
e.  ZB Bank Ltd is weak in debt recovery and has not met the threshold set by RBZ in the 
recent past which could be an indication of underlying operational problems within the 
bank’s  structures.  It  has  not  demonstrated  experience  in  managing  foreign  lines  of 
credits therefore we do not recommend a partnership with IFAD for it to manage the 
US$ 2.5 million facility on offer.  
Bibliography/ List of References 
1.  Agribank (2016-2019) Annual Reports 
2.  Banks  and  Banking  Survey  (2019),  The  Independent,  Alpha  Media  Harare  (The 
Zimbabwe Independent) 
3.  Brealey R A, Myers S.C and Allen F (2011) Principles of Corporate Governance Global 
Edition, McGraw- Hill Irwin New York. USA. 
4.  CBZ Bank Ltd (2016-2019 Annual Reports  
5.  NMBZ Holdings Ltd (2007) Annual Report 
6.  NMBZ Holdings Ltd (2016 - 2019) Annual Reports 
7.  Steward Bank Ltd (2016-2019) Annual Reports 
8.  ZB Bank (2016-2019) Annual Reports  
51 | P a g e  
