Executive Board  
136th Session 
Rome, 13–15 September 2022 
President's report 
Proposed loan  
Federative Republic of Brazil  
Piauí Inclusive and Sustainable Project 
Document: EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Agenda: 16(a)(i)(a) 
Date: 5 October 2022 
Distribution: Public  
Original: English  
FOR: APPROVAL  
Action: The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation 
contained in paragraph 52. 
Technical questions:  
Rossana Polastri 
Regional Director 
Latin America and the Caribbean Division  
e-mail: r.polastri@ifad.org 
Claus Reiner 
Country Director 
e-mail: c.reiner@ifad.org 
International Fund for Agricultural Development – www.ifad.org 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Contents 
Map of the project area 
Financing summary 
I. 
Context 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
B.  Lessons learned 
II.  Project description 
A.  Objectives, geographical area of intervention and target groups 
B.  Components, outcomes and activities 
C.  Theory of change 
D. Alignment, ownership and partnerships 
E.  Costs, benefits and financing 
III.  Risks 
A.  Risks and mitigation measures 
B.  Environment and social category 
C.  Climate risk classification 
D. Debt sustainability 
IV.  Implementation 
A.  Organizational framework 
B.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning, knowledge 
management and communications 
C.  Implementation plans 
Legal instruments and authority 
V. 
VI.  Recommendation 
Appendices 
I.  Negotiated financing agreement  
II.  Logical framework 
III.  Integrated project risk matrix 
ii 
iii 
1 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
8 
9 
9 
9 
i 
Map of the project area 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Piauí Inclusive and 
Sustainable Project (PSI) 
ii 
Financing summary 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Initiating institution: 
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)  
Borrower: 
State of Piauí (with a sovereign guarantee from the 
Federative Republic of Brazil) 
Executing agency: 
Secretariat of Planning (SEPLAN) 
Total project cost: 
US$147.5 million 
Amount of IFAD loan: 
US$18.0 million 
Terms of IFAD loan:  
Ordinary, with a maturity period of 18 years and a 
grace period of 3 years at an interest rate equivalent to 
IFAD’s reference rate plus a variable spread 
Cofinanciers:  
IDB  
Amount of cofinancing: 
US$100 million  
Terms of cofinancing:  
Loan 
Contribution of borrower: 
US$29.5 million 
Contribution of beneficiaries: 
US$13 million (the beneficiary contribution will not be 
accounted for in the total project cost, following IDB 
procedures) 
Amount of IFAD climate finance: 
US$13.3 million 
Cooperating institution: 
IDB 
iii 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Piauí Inclusive and Sustainable Project 
I.  Context 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
National context 
Brazil is an upper-middle-income economy of approximately 211 million people. 
Despite this, multidimensional inequalities in the country are deep and persistent. 
Between 2003 and 2012, extreme poverty fell by more than 63 per cent, but this 
trend has reversed in recent years. Some 52 million Brazilians (24 per cent of the 
national population) currently live below the poverty line, and 14 million 
(6.5 per cent), in extreme poverty. Almost half of the poverty in Brazil is 
concentrated the country’s north-east region, which has less than a third of the 
national population. 
At the moment, Brazil is in the throes of a hunger and food and nutritional 
insecurity crisis, having regressed to the levels of 2004. In 2020, about 117 million 
Brazilians experienced some degree of food insecurity, with 43.4 million not having 
enough food and 19 million facing hunger. Less than half the population in the 
north-east region (49.7 per cent) has full and regular access to quality food, and 
more than 7.6 million experienced severe food insecurity in 2020. 
Family farming is strategic in national and state policies to reduce poverty 
(Sustainable Development Goal [SDG] 1) and promote food and nutrition security 
(SDG 2), ensuring the livelihoods of the majority of the rural population. The sector 
employs three-quarters of the agricultural labour force, makes up 77 per cent of 
farms and is responsible for one third of national agricultural revenue. However, 
family farmers have little access to human and financial resources, limiting their 
adaptive capacity and contributing to the increase in rural exodus, poverty and food 
insecurity.  
State of Piauí. With an area of 251,755 km², Piauí is the third-largest  
north-eastern state, with a population of 3.2 million, 34.2 per cent of it residing in 
rural areas. Piauí’s annual GDP per capita, US$2,968, is the second-lowest of all 
states. Some 43 per cent of the Piauí population lives in poverty and 15 per cent in 
extreme poverty, ranking it the fifth-worst among Brazilian states in this regard. 
Poverty in the state is concentrated in rural semi-arid areas. Piauí’s food insecurity 
index is the highest in Brazil, affecting 44 per cent of households.  
5. 
Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities 
In line with Twelfth Replenishment of IFAD’s Resources (IFAD12) mainstreaming 
commitments, the project has been validated as: 
☒ Including climate finance; 
☒ Gender transformational; 
☒ Nutrition-sensitive; 
☒ Youth-sensitive. 
6.  Gender transformational: The number of households reporting a reduction in the 
time spent collecting water will be closely monitored as part of the logical 
framework. Awareness-raising on preventing and addressing gender-based 
violence is foreseen. Gender parity among project field staff will be sought. IFAD's 
empowerment indicator will be measured at baseline, midterm and completion, 
which will enable corrective measures to be adopted, if needed. 
7. 
Youth-sensitive: Building on the experience of other IFAD-supported projects in 
Brazil, the Piauí Inclusive and Sustainable Project (PSI) will apply a holistic 
perspective to youth inclusion. The number of youth with new employment 
1 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
opportunities will be monitored through the project's monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) system. 
8.  Nutrition-sensitive: The project’s entry points for the improvement of nutrition 
are mostly related to improved access to water for household consumption and 
agricultural production, social technologies aimed at renewable energy, the 
harvesting and storage of water for household consumption and the recycling of 
household greywater for fruit and vegetable production. These technologies play a 
critical role for women and for improving household resilience and nutrition.  
9. 
Climate finance: Brazil’s semi-arid region is among the South American regions 
most vulnerable to climate change. The project is partially counted as climate 
finance (around 74.5 per cent). Based on the multilateral development banks’ 
methodology for tracking climate change adaptation and mitigation finance, the 
total IFAD climate finance for this project is calculated at US$13.3 million.  
Rationale for IFAD involvement 
10.  The PSI is the first loan operation cofinanced by IDB in Brazil. It will apply the 
IDB’s social and environmental standards, which meet IFAD’s standards, as 
confirmed by an IFAD gap analysis.  
11. 
IFAD participation in the project has contributed to a sound design that builds on 
experiences from the ongoing IFAD-financed Semi-arid Sustainable Development 
Project in the State of Piauí (PVSA), including its differentiated approaches for 
priority groups such as youth, women and traditional communities such as 
Afro-descendants and indigenous peoples, and responds to IFAD’s four 
mainstreaming themes, as it is gender-transformative, youth-inclusive, 
nutrition-sensitive and climate-responsive.  
12.  The PSI cofinancing arrangement also extends project outreach and maximizes 
complementarities between IFAD and IDB by drawing on the comparative 
advantages of both financiers. It allows IFAD to leverage its resources and 
contribute to the following IFAD goals: (i) leveraging additional resources to invest 
in rural people; (ii) increasing outreach; (iii) increasing public investments toward 
social inclusiveness and sustainability; (iv) reducing administrative design and 
supervision costs; and (v) leveraging the complementary knowledge and expertise 
of IFAD and IDB. 
B.  Lessons learned 
13.  The project benefits from the following lessons learned from the IDB and IFAD 
portfolio. 
14.  Climate resilience of production systems. Successful investment plans in the 
semi-arid region emphasize the resilience of productive systems, including the use 
of technologies for the storage and efficient use of water; the rehabilitation of 
vegetation cover and water catchments; soil conservation; and the diversification 
of agricultural activities and market outlets, complementing them with off-farm 
activities. 
15.  Technical assistance (TA). The PSI incorporates the following lessons: (i) apart 
from technical issues, TA should cover management, finance, procurement and 
contracts, ensuring good management of investment plans by rural organizations; 
(ii) diversity in the provision of TA through civil society entities (non-governmental 
organizations – NGOs), private companies and public rural extension agencies; 
(iii) TA arrangements need contractually agreed goals; and (iv) TA tools must 
include remote means, such as the use of cell phones, internet and radio. 
16.  Social technologies. IFAD has accumulated a great deal experience with social 
technologies adapted to family farming, which will be upscaled by the PSI. These 
include cisterns to harvest rainwater for human consumption and production,  
eco-stoves to reduce firewood consumption, biodigesters to diversify energy 
2 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
sources, greywater reuse systems for backyard vegetable irrigation and renewable 
energy technologies. 
17.  Knowledge management (KM), policy dialogue and South-South and 
Triangular Cooperation. This is an important comparative advantage of IFAD. 
The IDB has used many of IFAD’s knowledge materials for the design of the PSI. 
IFAD’s significant collaboration with the State of Piauí has led to the production of 
KM materials relevant for PSI, which are used for policy dialogue. Moreover, IFAD’s 
work in policy dialogue based on knowledge will continue in the project. 
II.  Project description 
A.  Objectives, geographical area of intervention and target 
groups 
18.  The project objective is to improve the income, food security, nutrition, access to 
basic services and adaptation to climate change of the rural population living in the 
semi-arid region of Piauí. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve access to water 
for domestic use and production; (ii) improve the environmental conditions of rural 
families and their surroundings; and (iii) increase the adoption of agricultural 
technologies, with emphasis on climate change adaptation and mitigation and the 
integration of small-scale producers in the value chain, especially women, youth 
and Afro-descendants. 
19.  The project area covers 138 municipalities in the watersheds of the Piauí and 
Canindé rivers in Piauí’s semi-arid region. PSI will directly benefit 60,000 
households (about 210,000 people), 50 per cent of which will be headed by women 
and 20 per cent by youth, and at least 4,800 households from traditional 
communities, mainly quilombola (Afro-descendants). Some 31,000 households will 
benefit from group-based investments and TA to improve production and 
marketing, 28,000 households from access to water and 6,500 households from 
sanitation improvements. 
20.  The target population comprises poor family farmers and other poor rural 
populations, with priority given to women, youth and traditional communities. The 
selection of participating rural communities will be based on their low Human 
Development Index, lack of water and sanitation services, agricultural productivity 
constraints, limited access to TA services and environmental degradation situation.  
B.  Components, outcomes and activities 
21.  Component 1 (water security and rural sanitation) will finance small 
infrastructure works at the household and community level to improve the drinking 
water supply and basic sanitation and reduce disruptions in transportation during 
the rainy season. It includes: (i) small works for drinking water, including 
household cisterns to harvest rainwater for human consumption, and simplified 
water supply systems with household connections and community sources (surface 
or underground water); (ii) simplified basic sanitation systems for households, 
including sewage treatment systems, greywater reuse systems for backyard 
gardens and green pits; and (iii) fords across intermittent watercourses. 
22.  Component 2 (adaptation to climate change and inclusive social and 
environmental recovery) will fund four types of intervention: (i) productive 
adaptation plans (PAPs); (ii) business plans (PNs); (iii) environmental recovery 
plans (PRAs); and (iv) land and environmental regularization. The plans will benefit 
producers’ organizations, with a focus on women, youth and traditional 
communities, especially Afro-descendants, who will participate in their formulation 
and implementation. Land and environmental regularization will be carried out 
mainly in Afro-descendant communities. PAPs will benefit producers’ groups and 
finance mainly inputs, tools, equipment, technical assistance and small-scale 
works, and will focus on strengthening food security and nutrition. PNs will finance 
3 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
cooperatives and economic organizations and will include mainly specialized 
technical assistance and finance to enhance the production, storage, processing 
and marketing of products. The PRAs will fund technical assistance and 
investments by community producers’ groups to restore vegetation cover in 
deteriorated areas of the Piauí-Canindé watershed. The component will also provide 
funding for land and environmental regularization for the collection of information, 
georeferencing, Rural Environmental Registry (CAR) registration and issuance of 
property titles. 
23.  Component 3 (institutional strengthening) will develop the capacities of state 
secretariats, government agencies and private actors to support sustainable rural 
development and family farming within the scope of the project. It will be 
implemented through capacity-building plans for key public institutions and 
participating community organizations, such as those for the operation and 
maintenance of water and sanitation infrastructure. It will include studies on 
technical, environmental and social aspects of the Piauí-Canindé basins and 
feasibility studies for small dams to be built by potential future projects. Finally, 
the component will pilot innovative digital solutions for family farming with Agritech 
and Fintech services. It will also reinforce the work on KM and policy dialogue. 
C.  Theory of change 
24.  Rural populations in the project area are disproportionately poor, with 30,000 farm 
households living in extreme poverty and food and nutritional insecurity 
(44 per cent of households do not have guaranteed food). Traditional communities 
are disproportionately affected, with 78 per cent of quilombola and 66 per cent of 
indigenous households living in extreme poverty. The main causes are low levels of 
diversification and low agricultural productivity and income, with limited connection 
to markets and high dependence on external income, including social transfer 
programmes. The scarcity of water for human consumption and productive 
purposes is one of the main reasons for Piauí’s limited economic and social 
development, which makes these populations vulnerable to drought and other 
impacts of climate change. Furthermore, poor basic sanitation and energy services 
and lack of economic and training opportunities have intensified the exodus of 
young people and created a wide gender gap in access to natural, social and 
economic resources (for example, 76 per cent of landowners in the project area are 
men). 
25.  To overcome these constraints, the PSI will adopt an integrated strategy 
encompassing the three interconnected components discussed above to achieve its 
objectives.  
26. 
In the long term, the results should yield a number of impacts that are aligned with 
the general objective of increasing the rural population’s income, access to basic 
services and adaptation to climate change. The various interventions are expected 
to contribute to (i) an increase in agricultural income; (ii) a reduction in the 
incidence of poverty among the beneficiary population; (iii) an increase in the 
minimum dietary diversity among beneficiary women; and (iv) the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions, mainly through environmental restoration activities. 
D.  Alignment, ownership and partnerships 
27.  The project is aligned with the 2030 Agenda of leaving no one behind and the 
following SDGs in particular: 1 (no poverty), 2 (zero hunger and sustainable 
agriculture), 5 (gender equality), 6 (clean water and sanitation), 7 (affordable and 
clean energy) and 13 (climate action). It will contribute to all the mainstreaming 
themes of IFAD12; to the strategic objectives of the IFAD Strategic Framework 
2016-2025: SO1 (increased production), SO2 (increased market participation) and 
SO3 (increased climate resilience); and to the strategic objectives of the Brazil 
COSOP 2016–2022, namely to: (i) improve agricultural production, food security 
and nutrition, and access to markets; (ii) enhance rural development and rural 
4 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
poverty reduction programmes; and (iii) strengthen the capacities of government 
institutions and farmers' organizations. 
28.  The project is fully aligned with the state’s rural development policies, particularly 
its Pluriannual Plan 2020–2023 and Water Resources Plan, and ensures state 
government ownership under Brazil’s decentralized federative system. It is also 
aligned with several national policies and programs for sustainable rural 
development and builds on federal projects financed by IFAD (Policy Coordination 
and Dialogue for Reducing Poverty and Inequalities in Semi-Arid North-east Brazil – 
PDHC-II) and IDB (Program to Support Agricultural Development in the Northeast 
– AgroNordeste), both implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Food Supply (MAPA). 
E.  Costs, benefits and financing 
Project costs 
29.  Total project costs amount to US$147.5 million, consisting mainly of costs for 
components 1 and 2 (40 per cent and 48 per cent, respectively). Project 
management will take up about 7 per cent of the total costs. The project costs will 
be financed by a US$100 million loan from the IDB, a US$18 million loan from 
IFAD (Borrowed Resource Access Mechanism [BRAM]) and US$29.5 million as 
State of Piauí counterpart financing. In addition, project beneficiaries will provide 
an in-kind contribution of US$13 million, which has not been included in the total 
project costs of the design report, pursuant to IDB procedures. Their contribution 
will amount to approximately 10 per cent of the cost of each PAP and 20 per cent 
of the cost of each PN. 
30.  The PSI will be financed proportionally by IFAD, IDB and the State of Piauí across 
all project components. This will ensure IFAD participation and engagement in the 
entire project and visibility during implementation. 
Table 1 
Project costs by component and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Component 
1. Water security and rural sanitation 
2. Adaptation to climate change and 
inclusive social and environmental 
recovery 
3. Institutional strengthening 
Management, monitoring, evaluation, 
knowledge management and auditing  
IFAD loan 
IDB loan 
State of Piauí 
Total 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount  % 
7 238 
40 
40 222 
40 
11 865 
40 
59 325 
40 
8 690 
48 
48 265 
48 
14 239 
48 
71 194 
48 
864 
1 208 
5 
7 
4 801 
6 712 
5 
7 
1 416 
1 980 
5 
7 
7 081 
9 901 
5 
7 
Total 
18 000 
100 
100 000 
100 
29 500 
100  147 500 
100 
31.  Pursuant to IDB policies, the allocation table is broken down by component. To 
simplify implementation arrangements, budget monitoring and financial reporting 
requirements, the allocation table in IFAD’s financing agreement will be by 
component instead of category. Therefore, the table on project costs by 
expenditure category and financier is not included. 
5 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Table 2 
Project costs by component and project year (PY) 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
Total 
Component  
Amount 
Amount 
Amount 
Amount 
Amount 
Amount 
Amount 
1. Water security and rural sanitation 
2. Adaptation to climate change and 
inclusive social and environmental recovery 
2 950 
9 687 
16 115 
17 490 
13 083 
- 
59 325 
4 144 
10 372 
17 401 
19 503 
12 546 
7 228 
71 194 
3. Institutional strengthening 
625 
1 610 
2 066 
1 440 
720 
620 
7 080 
Management, monitoring, evaluation, 
knowledge management and auditing  
1 301 
1 720 
1 929 
1 929 
1 720 
1 301 
9 901 
Total 
9 021 
23 389 
37 511 
40 362 
28 067 
9 150 
147 500 
Disbursement 
32.  The State of Piauí will open a designated account in United States dollars, to be 
used exclusively for resources provided by IFAD. Funds will be transferred in local 
currency from the designated account to the operational accounts of the State of 
Piauí. The pari passu will be monitored during project implementation and achieved 
at the end of the project. The project will submit withdrawal applications to the 
IDB. IDB will review withdrawal applications to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of the IFAD financing agreement and provide written confirmation to 
IFAD that the conditions for disbursement have been met and authorizing payment 
to proceed. 
Summary of benefits and economic analysis 
33.  The financial analysis showed an economic internal rate of return for the project of 
13.66 per cent and a net present value of US$7.7 million. A comparative cost 
analysis showed that project investment costs are reasonable and comparable to 
those of other IDB investments: (i) the project’s rural sanitation solutions cost 
between US$493 and US$684 per household; and (ii) land regularization 
investments cost US$12.4 per ha. 
Exit strategy and sustainability 
34.  The PSI will upscale the PVSA approach of building the capacity of rural producers’ 
organizations to produce sustainably with a high level of climate resilience, and to 
offer lasting services to their members. Moreover, component 3 will strengthen 
state capacities to ensure the delivery of high-quality services to rural populations 
during and after the project period. Project management will implement a project 
exit strategy aimed at the sustainability of interventions; this will be underpinned 
by the work on KM and policy dialogue. The fact that the PSI is cofinanced by IFAD 
and IDB also means that its methodology, mainstreaming and operations could be 
scaled up in other projects financed by IDB, which has a significant presence in the 
country and region. 
III.  Risks 
A.  Risks and mitigation measures 
35.  The integrated project risk matrix was prepared according to IFAD’s guidelines. The 
overall PSI risk is substantial and the residual risk moderate. 
6 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Table 3 
Risks and mitigation measures  
Risk areas 
Country context 
Sector strategies and policies 
Environment and climate context 
Project scope 
Institutional capacity for implementation and 
sustainability 
Financial management 
Project procurement 
Environment, social and climate impact 
Stakeholders 
Overall 
Inherent risk rating 
Residual risk rating 
Substantial 
High  
High 
Moderate 
Substantial  
Substantial 
Moderate 
Substantial  
Moderate 
Substantial 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
B.  Environment and social category 
36. 
IFAD conducted a gap analysis comparing the IDB Environmental and Social Policy 
Framework (ESPF) with IFAD´s 2021 Updated Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP). The analysis confirmed that IFAD’s social, 
environmental and climate change commitments will be adequately met with the 
use of the ESPF and corresponding performance standards. The project is classified 
as category B. Anticipated environmental and social impacts that could arise from 
project implementation are minimal. Adequate monitoring and verification of 
safeguard compliance is considered throughout the life of the project. 
C.  Climate risk classification 
37.  The climate risk is classified as moderate. No information considered significant is 
lacking, the measures to mitigate risks are identified and the project will include a 
climate and disaster risk analysis. 
D.  Debt sustainability  
38.  The State of Piauí’s debt was rated “A” in 2021, based a debt ratio of 56 per cent. 
In addition, the National Treasury Secretariat of the Ministry of Economy’s rating, 
which covers indebtedness, current savings and liquidity, qualifies the State for a 
sovereign guarantee by the Federal Government of Brazil. The loan will be 
guaranteed by the Federal Government of Brazil. 
IV.  Implementation 
A.  Organizational framework 
Project management and coordination 
39.  The PSI will have a six-year implementation period. The implementing agency will 
be the State of Piauí’s Secretariat of Planning (SEPLAN), jointly with the Secretariat 
of Family Agriculture (SAF), the Secretariat of Environment and Water Resources 
(SEMAR) and the Land Institute of Piauí (INTERPI). One project management unit 
(PMU) and seven field-based territorial project units will be established to ensure a 
solid presence in the project area.  
Financial management, procurement and governance  
40.  Financial management. The financial team from the SEPLAN PMU is responsible 
for the project’s financial management. The IDB will be appointed as cooperating 
institution and be responsible for managing and supervising the implementation of 
IFAD’s financing. It will do so based on a letter of appointment that includes details 
of supervision arrangements such as missions, financial reporting and audits. To 
simplify implementation arrangements, IFAD will accept the application of IDB 
financial policies and procedures, which IFAD has reviewed to confirm their 
alignment with IFAD’s fiduciary requirements.  
7 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
41.  External audit. The project’s annual accounts and financial statements will be 
audited by a private audit firm in compliance with international auditing standards 
and IDB policies and procedures. The audited financial statements shall be 
submitted to IDB and IFAD no later than six months after the end of every fiscal 
year. The arrangements for financial management, procurement and governance 
will be described in the project implementation manual and be based on the IDB 
guidelines for project financial management and procurement (GN-2349-15 for 
procurement of goods and works, and GN-2350-15 for procurement of 
consultants). They will also draw on the implementation experience of the PVSA. 
The procurement plan will identify the items subject to ex ante or ex post 
procurement review. As per the gap analysis of the IDB guidelines and procedures, 
the following IFAD procedures will be applied by IDB: (i) contractor and consultant 
self-certification in all bidding documents and contracts, in compliance with IFAD’s 
Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations and its 
Policy on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation 
and Abuse; and (ii) the use of IFAD’s contract monitoring tool system to register 
signed contracts and update their status. 
Project target group engagement and feedback and grievance redress 
42.  The PSI’s design included a stakeholder consultation involving 250 people from the 
entire project area. A project coordination committee with operational 
responsibilities will also be formed, composed of project representatives, the 
operational teams of SAF, SEMAR and INTERPI and representatives from civil 
society and beneficiaries. In addition, the project will hold mobilization and 
consultative workshops and meetings in the field to increase the participation of 
local actors and beneficiaries.  
Grievance redress 
43.  The grievance mechanism adopted will be that of the IDB, in line with its 
Environmental and Social Policy Framework (ESPF), which includes the specific 
grievance mechanism (Mecanismo de Resolução de Queixas [MRQ] in IDB 
terminology in Portuguese). The mechanism will be established during the 
consultations and maintained during project implementation. 
B.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning, knowledge 
management and communications 
44.  The project planning and M&E system is aligned with the IFAD logical framework. 
The PVSA baseline and impact studies were critical to informing the preparation of 
the project logical framework. In order to align with IFAD’s mainstreaming criteria, 
the logical framework includes several IFAD core indicators on outreach, number of 
persons with new jobs/employment opportunities, percentage of women reporting 
minimum dietary diversity, households provided with targeted support to improve 
their nutrition, number of households reporting a significant reduction in the time 
spent collecting water, tons of CO2e avoided/sequestered, households reporting 
the adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and 
IFAD’s empowerment indicator. The project will conduct baseline, midterm and 
impact surveys.  
Innovation and scaling up 
45.  The project has innovation and scaling-up potential in areas such as access to 
digital technologies in rural extension. The PSI itself represents a scaling-up 
experience, as it is based on the PVSA implemented by IFAD in the State of Piauí, 
which will close on 31 December 2022. It is expected to give rise to further 
cofinanced operations with IDB and other multilaterals operating in Brazil.  
8 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
C.  Implementation plans 
Implementation readiness and start-up plans 
46.  The PVSA substantially increased the implementation readiness of the State of 
Piauí for the PSI, thus allowing for a smooth and rapid project start-up. 
Furthermore, IDB and IFAD will prepare a start-up mission and consider retroactive 
financing to support the start-up process. 
Supervision, midterm review and completion plans 
47.  Regular supervision and implementation support missions will be undertaken, and 
a midterm review and a completion mission will be carried out. The IDB will be the 
appointed cooperating institution for the project, responsible for administrating the 
IFAD loan based on the IDB-IFAD cooperation agreement.  
48.  As per the cooperation agreement, IDB will coordinate the plans and terms of 
reference for supervision and other missions with IFAD in advance, so that IFAD 
can contribute to mission preparations and execution. During supervision missions, 
IFAD will cover topics that respond to project needs, in coordination with IDB and 
the State of Piauí. In recognition of IFAD’s high-quality supervision and 
implementation support, IDB and IFAD will collaborate closely to make good use of 
IFAD’s knowledge and experience. 
V.  Legal instruments and authority 
49.  A financing agreement between the State of Piauí and IFAD and a guarantee 
agreement between the Federative Republic of Brazil and IFAD will constitute the 
legal instruments for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of 
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.  
50.  The State of Piauí is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD. 
51. 
I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing. 
VI.  Recommendation 
52. 
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 
the following resolution:  
RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the State 
of Piauí with a sovereign guarantee from the Federative Republic of Brazil in 
an amount of eighteen million United States dollars (US$18,000,000) and 
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with 
the terms and conditions presented herein. 
Gilbert F. Houngbo 
President 
9 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Negotiated financing agreement: “Piauí Inclusive and 
Sustainable Project”  
(Negotiations concluded on 31 August 2022) 
Loan No: __________ 
Project  Name:  Integrated  Project  for  Water  Security,  Environmental  Sustainability  and 
Socio-productive Development of the Piauí and Canindé Rivers Basin, State of Piauí - Piauí 
Inclusive and Sustainable Project (PSI) (the “Project”) 
State of Piauí - Federative Republic of Brazil (the “Borrower/Recipient”) 
and 
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”) 
(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”) 
WHEREAS, the Borrower has requested a loan from the Fund for the purpose of financing 
the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Agreement;  
WHEREAS, the Project shall be co-financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (the 
“IDB”).  The  Borrower  and  the  IDB  will  enter  into  a  financing  agreement  (the  “IDB  Loan 
Agreement”) to provide one hundred million United Sates Dollars (USD 100 000 000) for 
the Project; 
WHEREAS, the Fund and IDB will enter into a Coordination Agreement (the “Coordination 
Agreement”) to stablish the responsibilities of IDB as the administrator (the “Cooperating 
Institution”) of the execution of the activities financed through the IFAD Loan; 
WHEREAS, the Fund has agreed to provide financing for the Project; 
NOW THEREFORE, the Parties hereby agree as follows: 
Section A 
1. 
The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the Project 
Description  and  Implementation  Arrangements  (Schedule  1),  the  Allocation  Table 
(Schedule 2) and the Special Covenants (Schedule 3). 
2. 
The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated 29 April 
2009,  amended  as  of  December  2020  (the  “General  Conditions”)  are  annexed  to  this 
Agreement, and all provisions thereof shall apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of 
this Agreement the terms defined in the General Conditions shall have the meanings set 
forth therein, unless the Parties shall otherwise agree in this Agreement. 
3. 
The Fund shall provide a loan to the Borrower (the “Loan” or “Financing”), which the 
Borrower shall use to implement the Project in accordance with the terms and conditions 
of this Agreement. 
4. 
The Loan is to be guaranteed by the Federative Republic of Brazil (the “Guarantor”) 
on the terms and conditions set forth in an agreement, of even date, to be entered into by 
the Fund and the Federative Republic of Brazil (the “Guarantee Agreement”). 
1 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Section B 
The  amount  of  the  Loan  is  up  to  eighteen  million  United  States  dollars 
1. 
(USD 18 000 000)  
2. 
The Loan is granted on ordinary terms and shall have a maturity period of eighteen 
(18) years, including a grace period of three (3) years starting from the date on which the 
Fund has determined that all general conditions precedent to withdrawal have been fulfilled 
in accordance with Section 4.02(b) of the General Conditions.  
3. 
The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be in United States dollars (USD). 
4. 
The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January. 
5. 
Payments of principal and interest shall be payable on each 15 May and 15 November. 
6. 
There shall be a Designated Account opened by and held in the name of the Borrower 
in  USD,  for  the  exclusive  use  of  the  Project.  The  Borrower  shall  inform  the  Fund  of  the 
officials authorized to operate the Designated Account. 
There  shall  be  a  Project  Account  in  Brazilian  Real  (BRL)  for  the  benefit  of  the 
7. 
Government of the State of Piauí in a bank selected by the Borrower. 
8. 
The Borrower shall provide counterpart financing for the Project in the amount of four 
million  five  hundred  thousand  United  States  dollars  (USD4,500,000),  which  shall  also 
include the payment of taxes. 
Section C 
1. 
The Lead Programme Agency shall be the Secretariat of Planning of the State of Piauí 
(SEPLAN) or its successor with the same attributions and legal competencies, subject to 
prior approval by the Fund for the purposes of the Project. 
The  following  are  designated  as  additional  Project  Parties:  Secretariat  of  Family 
2. 
Farming  (SAF),  the  Secretariat  of  Environment  and  Water  Resources  (SEMAR)  and  the 
Land Institute of Piauí (INTERPI) or their successors with the same attributions and legal 
competencies, subject to prior approval by the Fund for the purposes of the Project. 
3. 
A Mid-Term Review mission will be conducted as specified in Section 8.03 (b) and (c) 
of the General Conditions; however, the Parties may agree on a different date for the Mid-
Term Review mission of the implementation of the Project. 
4. 
The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into 
force of this Agreement and the Financing Closing Date shall be 6 months later, or such 
other date as the Fund may designate by notice to the Borrower. 
Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the Financing shall be carried 
5. 
out: 
in accordance with the provisions of the IDB Policy for the Procurement of Goods and 
(a) 
Works Financed by the IDB (GN-2349-15) and the Policy for the Selection and Contracting 
of  Consultants  Financed  by  the  IDB  (GN-2350-15)  as  referred  in  the  Coordination 
Agreement between IDB and IFAD. 
2 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Section D 
1. 
The Loan shall be administered by the Fund. 
2. 
The Project shall be supervised by the IDB as the Cooperating Institution. 
Section E 
1. 
The following are designated as additional grounds for suspension of this Agreement: 
(a)  The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) (Regulamento Operacional do Projeto 
(ROP)  in  IDB  language)  and/or  any  provision  thereof,  has  been  waived, 
suspended, terminated, amended or modified without the prior agreement of 
IDB, and the Fund, after consultation with the Borrower, has determined that 
it has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the Project. 
The following are designated as additional (general/specific) conditions precedent to 
2. 
withdrawal: 
(a)  The Guarantee Agreement shall have been duly signed, and the signature 
thereof by the Guarantor shall have been duly authorised by all necessary 
administrative and governmental authorities; 
(b)  The PIM (ROP in IDB language) shall have been agreed; 
(c)  The Project Designated Account and the operational accounts shall have been 
opened.  
(d)  The Project Management Unit (PMU) shall have has been established within 
SEPLAN and its members appointed.  
(e)  The IDB Loan Agreement shall have entered into full force and effect.  
(f) 
The right of the Borrower to withdraw the proceeds of the IDB Loan 
Agreement has not been suspended, cancelled or terminated, in whole or in 
part, or the IDB Loan has become due and payable prior to the agreed 
maturity thereof provided that the Parties could not have reached an 
agreement on a mutual solution. 
4. The following provisions of the General Conditions shall not apply to this Agreement: 
Section 5.02; (Repayments and Prepayments of Principal): 
(c)  The Fund may modify the repayment terms applicable to the principal amount 
of the Loan disbursed and outstanding in accordance with the applicable accelerated 
repayment and voluntary prepayment framework of the Fund. 
(d)  Pursuant to paragraph (c) above, upon notification by the Fund to the Borrower, 
the Borrower shall repay twice the original amount of the remaining loan instalments 
of the withdrawn loan outstanding, along with any interest due. 
If,  at  any  time  after  the  repayment  terms  have  been  modified  pursuant  to 
(e) 
paragraph (c) above, the Fund determines that the  Borrower’s economic condition 
has deteriorated significantly, the Fund may, if so requested by the Borrower, further 
reverse the terms of repayment of the principal amount to the ones originally agreed 
upon in this Agreement. 
3 
The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any 
5. 
communication related to this Agreement: 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
For the Borrower: 
Palácio de Karnak  
Avenida Antonino Freire, n. 1450  
Centro Sul  
CEP: 64001-040 
Teresina, Estado do Piauí 
Procuradoria-Geral da Fazenda Nacional 
Coordenação-Geral de Operações Financeiras da União 
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco “P”, 8º Andar, Sala 803 
CEP 70040-900, Brasília, Distrito Federal, Brasil 
Tel nº + 55 (61) 3412.2842 
E-mail: apoiocof.df.pgfn@pgfn.gov.br 
For the Fund: 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
This Agreement, _____________ has been prepared in the English language in three (3) 
original  copies,  one  (1)  for  the  Fund,  one  (1)  for  the  Borrower  and  one  (1)  for  the 
Guarantor. 
THE STATE OF PIAUÍ 
____________________  
"[Authorised Representative Name]"  
"[Authorised Representative title]"  
Date: ____________ 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT  
___________________ 
President 
Date: ______________ 
4 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Schedule 1 
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements 
I. 
Project Description 
Target  Population.  The  target  population  comprises  family  farmers  and  rural 
1. 
populations living in poverty and extreme poverty in the Project area.  
2. 
Project area. The Project area will cover 138 municipalities. The geographic targeting 
strategy is based on the state priority for water investments in the watershed of the Piauí 
and Canindé rivers in Piauí’s semiarid region and selects areas with high levels of poverty 
and  vulnerability  to  climate  change,  food  and  nutrition  insecurity,  and  a  low  human 
development index (the “Project Area”).  
 General  Objective.  The  general  objective  of  the  Project  is  to  improve  the  rural 
3. 
population's  income,  food  security,  nutrition,  access  to  basic  services  and  adaptation  to 
climate change.  
4. 
Specific  objectives.  The  specific  objectives  are  to:  (i)  improve  access  to  water  for 
human consumption and agricultural production; (ii) improve the environmental conditions 
of  rural  families  and  their  surroundings;  and  (iii)  increase  the  adoption  of  agricultural 
technologies, with an emphasis on climate change adaptation and mitigation, and improve 
the  integration  of  producers  into  value  chains,  especially  women,  youth  and  Afro-
descendants (quilombolas). 
5. 
Components. The Project shall consist of the following Components:  
5.1  Component 1. Water security and rural sanitation 
5.1.1 . The component will fund: (i) small works in rural communities to improve the supply 
of  potable  water,  including  individual  cisterns  to  collect  and  store  rainwater  for  human 
consumption, domestic water supply networks and fountains; (ii) basic sanitation (simplified 
individual  systems);  and  (iii)  wet  passages  to  reduce  transport  disruptions  in  the  rainy 
season.  
5.1.2 The  works  that  will  be  funded  by  component  1  must  meet  the  following  eligibility 
criteria:  (i)  correspond  to  rural  water  supply  works  (cisterns,  water  supply  networks  with 
home connection and hydrometer, fountains), sanitation (simplified individual systems) and 
wet passages; (ii) demonstrate socioeconomic feasibility, in accordance with the cost-benefit 
and cost-effectiveness simplified analysis methodologies accepted by the IDB applied to the 
selected  sample;  and  (iii)  comply  with  applied  socio-environmental  requirements  of  the 
Project's Environmental and Social Management Framework (MGAS).  
5.1.3 For water supply networks with a home connection and a water meter, the following 
eligibility  criterion  will  also  apply:  a  cooperation  agreement  must  be  signed  between  the 
respective  municipality  and  the  Integrated  Rural  Sanitation  System  (SISAR),  with  the 
objective  of  formalizing  the  obligations  related  to  the  operation  and  management  of  the 
collective water system. For wet passages, the following eligibility criterion will apply: a legal 
instrument must be signed between the Borrower and the respective municipality, in which 
the municipality assumes responsibility for maintaining the infrastructure of the works. 
5.2  Component 2. Adaptation to Climate Change and Inclusive Social and Environmental 
Recovery. 
5.2.1 This component will fund four types of interventions: (i) Productive Adaptation Plans 
(PAPs); (ii) Business Plans (PNs); (iii) Environmental Recovery Plans (PRAs); and (iv) land 
and environmental regularization. The plans will benefit producer organizations, with a focus 
on  women,  youth  and  traditional  communities,  especially  Afro-descendants,  who  will 
participate in their formulation and implementation. Land and environmental regularization 
5 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
will be carried out mainly in Afro-descendant communities. PAPs will benefit producers’ group 
and will finance mainly inputs, tools, equipment, technical assistance, and small-scale works 
and  will  focus  on  the  strengthening  of  food  security  and  nutrition.  PNs  will  finance 
cooperatives  and  economic  organizations  and  will  include  mainly  specialized  technical 
assistance  and  finance  to  enhance  the  production,  storage,  processing  and  marketing  of 
products. 
5.2.2 The  PRAs  will  fund  technical  assistance  and  investments  by  community  producer 
groups to restore vegetation cover in deteriorated areas of the Piauí-Canindé watershed. The 
Component  will  also  provide  funding  for  land  and  environmental  regularization  for  the 
collection of information, georeferencing, Rural Environmental Registry (CAR for its acronym 
in Portuguese) registration and issuance of property titles. 
5.2.3 To enhance the income for women, Afro-descendants and youth, at least 25% of total 
resources for PAPs will go to associations and cooperatives that have a majority and are led 
by women, at least 15% to Afro-descendants communities and at least 5% to youth-only 
groups. Prioritization criteria will also be defined for PAPs and PNs that favour mixed groups 
with  a  higher  proportion  of  women,  youth  and  Afro-descendant  producers.  Each  plan  will 
fund  a  maximum  of  US$4,000  per  beneficiary  and  US$400,000  per  plan  for  PAPs  and 
US$600,000  for  PNs.  The  PRAs  will  fund  a  maximum  of  US$1,500  per  beneficiary  and 
US$33,000 per plan. The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) (ROP in IDB language) will 
contain additional requirements applicable for PAPs, PNs and PRAs. 
5.3  Component 3. Institutional strengthening 
5.3.1  The  component's  objective  is  to  improve  the  capacities  of  key  institutions  in  rural 
development.  This  component  will  fund  three  types  of  actions:  (i)  capacity  building  plans 
that  will  include  training,  consultancy,  equipment,  vehicles  and  information  systems  to 
improve the management of the main public rural development institutions, as well as to 
strengthen community organizations for the operation and maintenance of water supply and 
sewage  sanitation  works;  (ii)  studies  to  improve  knowledge  on  relevant  technical, 
environmental  and  social  aspects  of  the  Piauí-Canindé  basin;  technical,  economic, 
environmental and social feasibility of engineering studies of basic projects to regularize the 
availability  of  water  supply  in  the  basin;  and  (iii)  diagnostics  and  pilot  experiences  that 
contribute to the development of a state policy to support innovation in rural areas.  
II. 
Implementation Arrangements 
Lead Project Agency.  The Lead Project Agency of the Project will be the Borrower, 
6. 
through the State Secretariat for Planning (SEPLAN), in which a Project Management Unit 
(PMU) will be created. The Secretary of State for Family Farming (SAF), the Secretary of 
State for the Environment and Water Resources (SEMAR) and the Land Institute of Piauí 
(INTERPI)  will  act  as  additional  Project  parties  in  the  implementation  of  the  Project's 
actions, in accordance with their legal competences. 
7. 
Project Coordination Committee. A Project Coordination Committee with operational 
responsibilities  will  also  be  created,  composed  of  representatives  of  the  UCP  and  the 
operational teams of SAF, SEMAR and INTERPI. 
8. 
Project Management Unit (PMU).  The Lead Project Agency, through the PMU, will be 
responsible for the overall management and coordination of the Project, and will  ensure 
compliance  with  this  Agreement  and  the  PIM.  Among  other  attributions,  it  will  be 
responsible  for:  (i)  maintaining  formal  communication  with  the  IDB;  (ii)  submit 
disbursement  and  accountability  requests  to  the  IDB;  (iii)  coordinate  monitoring  and 
evaluation activities; (iv) submit to the IDB the consolidated Annual Operational Plan and 
Budget (AWPB), Implementation Plan of the Project (PEP), Procurement Plans and progress 
reports;  and  (v)  coordinate  with  SAF,  SEMAR  and  INTERPI  the  execution  of  activities, 
monitor  the  execution  of  the  budget  and  obtain  the  necessary  inputs  for  the  financial 
records  and  the  due  rendering  of  accounts  to  the  IDB.  The  PMU  will  have  the  following 
6 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
minimum  team:  (i)  a  project  coordinator;  (ii) a  finance  specialist;  (iii)  two  procurement 
specialists; (iv) an environmental specialist; (v) a gender specialist; and (vi) a monitoring 
and  evaluation  (M&E)  specialist  and  (vii)  a  civil  engineer.  SAF  will  be  responsible  for 
Component 1. Component 2 will be the shared responsibility of SAF (PAPs and PNs), SEMAR 
(PRAs) and INTERPI (land and environmental regularization). SEPLAN will be responsible 
for Component 3, with the support of SAF, SEMAR and INTERPI.   
9.  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (M&E).  The  Project  will  also  fund  equipment  and 
consultancy  needed  for  administration  and  management,  monitoring  and  evaluation, 
knowledge management and auditing. 
10.  Knowledge Management (KM) and Policy Dialogue. IFAD strong collaboration with the 
State of Piauí led to the production of Knowledge Management materials for many of the 
areas  which  will  be  covered  by  the  PSI.  It  has  also  developed  partnerships  in  Piauí  in 
knowledge management, which will be linked to policy dialogue initiatives.  
11.  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  (ROP  in  IDB  language).  The  Project 
implementation  will  be  in  accordance  with  this  Agreement  and  the  PIM.  In  case  of 
discrepancy between this Agreement and the PIM, the Agreement will prevail. Any change 
or modification in the PIM, will require prior no objection from the IDB. The PIM will include 
operational details regarding the IDB and IFAD financing and supervision arrangements.  
7 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Schedule 2 
Allocation Table 
Allocation of Loan Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the components of Eligible 
1. 
Expenditures  to  be  financed  by  the  Loan  and  the  allocation  of  the  amounts  to  each 
component of the Financing and the percentages of expenditures for items to be financed in 
each component: 
Component 
IFAD Loan 
Amount 
Allocated 
(Expressed in 
USD) 
State of Piauí 
Percentage 
Amount Allocated         
(Expressed in 
USD) 
Water security and 
rural sanitation 
7 238 000 
1 809 000 
8 690 000 
2 173 000 
864 000 
216 000 
1 208 000 
302 000 
Adaptation to 
climate change and 
Inclusive Social and 
Environmental 
Recovery 
Institutional 
Strengthening 
Management, 
monitoring, 
evaluation, 
knowledge 
management and 
auditing 
TOTAL 
18 000 000 
4 500 000 
(b) 
The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows: 
IFAD 100% net 
of taxes 
IFAD 100% net 
of taxes  
IFAD 100% net 
of taxes  
IFAD 100% net 
of taxes  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Water  security  and  rural  sanitation:  Eligible  Expenditures  under 
Component  1  including  small  works,  consultancies,  studies,  technical 
assistance,  workshops,  training,  goods,  services,  equipment,  and 
materials. 
Adaptation  to  climate  change  and  Inclusive  Social  and  Environmental 
Recovery:  Eligible  Expenditures  under  Component  2,  including  grants 
and  subsidies  for  productive  investments,  small  works,  consultancies, 
studies,  technical  assistance,  workshops,  training,  goods,  services, 
equipment and materials;  
Institutional Strengthening: Eligible Expenditures under Component 3, 
including  small  works,  consultancies,  studies,  technical  assistance, 
workshops, training, goods, services, equipment and materials. 
Management,  monitoring,  evaluation,  knowledge  management  and 
auditing: Eligible Expenditures for the operation of the Project, including 
salaries and allowances (in the case of permanent staff, to be financed 
only  by  the  State  Government),  consultancies,  studies,  workshops, 
8 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
training, goods, services, equipment, and materials, related to both the 
PMU and the Territorial Management Units (TMU). 
2.  Disbursement arrangements  
(a)  Start-up Costs. Withdrawals in respect of expenditures for start-up costs (in III 
and  IV  component(s)  incurred  before  the  satisfaction  of  the  general  conditions 
precedent  to  withdrawal  shall  not  exceed  an  aggregate  amount  of  USD 200 000the 
following  amounts  per  component.  Activities  to  be  financed  by  Start-up  Costs  will 
require the no objection from IFAD to be considered eligible. 
9 
Appendix I 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Negotiated  guarantee  agreement:  “Piauí  Inclusive  and 
Sustainable Project” 
(Negotiations concluded on 31 August 2022) 
This  GUARANTEE  AGREEMENT  is  signed  on  ____,  2022  between  the  FEDERATIVE 
REPUBLIC  OF  BRAZIL  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "Guarantor")  and  the  INTERNATIONAL 
FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (hereinafter referred to as “IFAD” or “the Fund” 
and together the “Parties”). 
WHEREAS: 
  Through  Financing  Agreement  No.  _____(hereinafter  referred  to  as  “Financing 
Agreement”), entered into on this same date in ________, between IFAD and the State 
of Piauí of the Federative Republic of Brazil (hereinafter referred to as "Borrower"), IFAD 
has agreed to provide the Borrower with a Financing of a Loan of eighteen million United 
States dollars (USD 18 000 000), provided that the Guarantor guarantees the Borrower's 
financial  obligations  for  the  Loan  and  remains  fully  bound  until  full  payment  of  such 
obligations  stipulated  in  the  referred  Financing  Agreement  and  that  the  said  Guarantor 
contracts the additional obligations specified in this Agreement.   
The  Guarantor, given the fact that  IFAD signed the Financing Agreement with the 
Borrower,  agreed  to  guarantee  unconditionally  and  irrevocably  the  due  and  timely 
payment of the principal, interest and other charges of the Loan, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Agreement.  
THE PARTIES agree the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The following documents collectively constitute an integral part of this Agreement: 
this  Agreement,  the  Financing  Agreement,  and  the  Fund’s  General  Conditions  for 
Agricultural Development Financing dated 29 April 2009, as amended in December 
2020 (the “General Conditions”). Unless the context otherwise requires, the several 
terms  defined  in  the  General  Conditions  and  the  Financing  Agreement  have  the 
respective meanings therein set forth. 
The Guarantor hereby unconditionally and irrevocably guarantees, as primary obligor 
and not as surety merely, the due and timely payment of the principal of, and the 
payment  of  interest  and  other  charges  on  the  Loan  due  under  the  Financing 
Agreement whose terms the Guarantor declares to be fully aware of. These financial 
obligations  do  not  include  the  commitment  by  the  Borrower  to  provide  additional 
resources to the execution of the Project. 
The  Guarantor  undertakes  not  to  take  any  action  or  allow,  within  the  scope  of  its 
competence,  measures  to  be  taken  that  hinder  or  prevent  the  execution  of  the 
Project or obstruct the fulfillment of any obligation of the Borrower established in the 
Financing Agreement.  
In cases of amendments to the Financing Agreement, the Borrower must obtain the 
prior approval of the Guarantor to any modifications or amendments to the Financing 
Agreement. 
5. 
The Guarantor undertakes to: 
(a)  cooperate, within the scope of its competence, to ensure the fulfillment of the 
objectives of the Financing; 
10 
Appendix I 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
(b) 
inform IFAD, as urgently as possible, of any fact that makes it difficult or may 
make it difficult to achieve the objectives of the Financing, or the fulfillment of 
the Borrower's obligations; 
(c)  within its competence, provide IFAD with the information it reasonably requests 
regarding the Borrower's situation; 
(d) 
facilitate  to  IFAD’s  representatives,  within  the  scope  of  its  competence,  the 
exercise of their functions related to the Loan and the execution of the Project; 
and 
(e) 
inform IFAD, as urgently as possible, if it is, in compliance with its obligations 
as a joint debtor, making payments corresponding to the Loan. 
The Guarantor agrees that both the principal and interests, and other charges on the 
Loan will be paid without any reduction or restriction, free of any taxes, fees, duties 
or charges set forth in the laws of the Federative Republic of  Brazil, and that both 
this  Agreement  and  Financing  Agreement  will be  exempt  from  any  applicable  tax, 
fee or duty in connection with the execution, registration and execution of contracts. 
The  Guarantor will not be  released from any liability with IFAD until the Borrower 
has  fully  complied  with  all  the  financial  obligations  assumed  in  the  Financing 
Agreement. In the event of any default by the Borrower, the Guarantor's obligation 
will  neither  be  subject  to  any  notification  or  challenge,  nor  to  any  procedural 
formality,  demand  or  prior  action  against  the  Borrower  or  against  the  Guarantor 
itself.  In  the  event  of  default  by  the  Borrower,  the  Fund  shall  not  be  required  to 
exhaust its remedies against the Borrower prior to enforcing its rights against the 
Guarantor.  The  Guarantor  also  expressly  waives  any  rights,  order  or  excussion 
benefits, faculties, favors or resources that assists, or may assist the Guarantor. The 
Guarantor declares itself aware that it will not release any of its liability to IFAD if 
there is: (a) an omission or abstention by IFAD in the exercise of any rights, powers 
or remedies that has against the Borrower; (b) IFAD’s tolerance or agreement with 
the  Borrower's  default  or  delays  that  he  may  incur  in  fulfilling  its  obligations; 
(c) deadlines extensions or any  other concessions made by  IFAD to the Borrower, 
provided that it has the prior consent of the Guarantor; (d) alteration, amendment 
or  revocation,  in  whole  or  in  part,  of  any  of  the  provisions  of  the  Financing 
Agreement, provided that they are made with the prior consent of the Guarantor.  
IFAD’s  delay  or  abstention  in  the  exercise  of  the  rights  agreed  in  this  Agreement 
cannot  be  interpreted  as  a  waiver  of  such  rights,  nor  as  an  acceptance  of  the 
circumstances that would allow it to exercise them. 
Any  dispute  that  arises  between  the  Parties  regarding  the  interpretation  or 
application of this Agreement, which cannot be resolved by mutual agreement, will 
be subject to arbitration, as established in Section 14.04 of the General Conditions. 
For  the  purposes  of  this  arbitration,  all  references  made  to  the  Borrower  in  the 
aforementioned Section apply to the Guarantor. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  Unless  a  written  agreement  stipulates  another  procedure,  all  notices,  requests  or 
communications  that  the  contracting  Parties  must  send  to  each  other  under  this 
Agreement  must  be  made,  without  exception,  in  writing  and  will  be  considered 
effective upon their delivery to the addressee, by any usual means of communication, 
at the address indicated below: 
11 
Appendix I 
For IFAD: 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
The President 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
Fax: XX 
For the Guarantor: 
Ministério da Economia  
Procuradoria-Geral da Fazenda Nacional 
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco P, 8º Andar 
CEP: 70.048-900  Brasília, DF 
Brasil 
Fax: +55 (61) 412-1740 
Copy to:  
Ministério da Economia 
Secretaria do Tesouro Nacional 
Coordenação-Geral de Controle da Dívida Pública 
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco P, Ed. Anexo, Ala A, 1º andar, sala 121 
CEP 70048-900 
Brasília – DF – Brasil 
mail: geror.codiv.df.stn@tesouro.gov.br;   codiv.df.stn@tesouro.gov.br
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  Guarantor  and  IFAD,  each  acting  through  its  authorized 
representative,  have  signed  this  Agreement  in  two  (3)  copies  one  for  IFAD,  one  for 
Guarantor  and  one  for  Borrower,    of  equal  content  and  for  a  single  effect  in  [place  of 
signature] on the date indicated above. 
FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL 
DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) 
_____________________________ 
[Name] 
[Position] 
____________________________ 
[Name] 
[Position] 
12 
Outreach 
Project Goal 
Mejorar los ingresos, el 
acceso a los servicios básicos 
y la adaptación al cambio 
climático de la población rural 
Development Objective 
Mejorar los ingresos, las 
capacidades de resiliencia y la 
seguridad alimentaria y 
nutricional de las familias 
alvos y poblaciones 
vulnerables. 
Outcome 
1. Acceso al agua para el 
consumo humano y productivo 
mejorado 
Appendix II  
Logical framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Name 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Baseline 
Mid-Term  End 
Means of Verification 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Assumptions 
1  Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project 
Males - Males 
Females - Females 
Young - Young people 
Indigenous people - Indigenous people 
Total number of persons receiving services - 
Number of people 
1.a  Corresponding number of households reached 
Households - Households 
1.b  Estimated corresponding total number of households members 
Household members - Number of people 
Índice de Pobreza Multidimensional reducido (Headcount ajustado) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
12000 
12000 
4800 
1920 
24000 
24000 
84000 
0 
0 
Target 
30000 
30000 
12000 
4800 
60000 
60000 
210000 
Project M&E System 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit 
Project M&E system 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit 
Project M&E system 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit 
IPM - Percentage (%) 
39 
35 
29 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Independent consultancy firm 
50 
7500 
25 
15000 
52500 
7500 
40 
24000 
70 
16800 
30 
7200 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6205 
2774 
4376 
50 
1800 
15 
3600 
12600 
1800 
1.2.8  Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW) 
Women (%) - Percentage (%) 
Women (number) - Females 
Households (%) - Percentage (%) 
Households (number) - Households 
Household members - Number of people 
Women-headed households - Households 
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in empowerment 
40 
Total persons - Percentage (%) 
9600 
Total persons - Number of people 
70 
Females - Percentage (%) 
6720 
Females - Females 
30 
Males - Percentage (%) 
Males - Males 
2880 
Ingreso productivo anual de los agricultores familiares aumentado 
Ingresso productor (R$ / año / productor) - Number 
Ingresso mujeres (R$ / año / productor) - Number 
Ingresso productor - comunidades tradicionales 
(R$ / año / productor) - Number 
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services 
Household members - Number of people 
Households (%) - Percentage (%) 
Households (number) - Households 
Porcentaje de agricultores familiares que utilizaron riego 
Households - Percentage (%) 
Tiempo dedicado a la recolección de agua por hogar 
Tiempo - Horas / persona / mês  - Number 
3 
3.2.3  Households reporting a significant reduction in the time spent for collecting 
water or fuel 
Households - Households 
Households - Percentage (%) 
Total household members - Number of people 
Women-headed households - Households 
Cantidad de agua consumida por hogar 
Cantidad - Litros / hogar / día  - Number 
Hogares con acceso mejorado al agua potable y saneamiento 
Households - Number 
Se mantiene tasa de mora en pago de tarifa en sistemas comunitarios de 
abastecimiento de agua  
Tasa de mora - Percentage (%) 
3668 
15 
12838 
1834 
63000 
75 
18000 
8000 
4000 
5500 
9170 
15 
32095 
4585 
11855 
7128 
6474 
0 
0 
0 
0 
23740 
0 
0 
0 
9496 
20.8 
25.7 
246 
280 
134 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
22 
0 
2 
1 
157500 
75 
45000 
13 
Outcome (COI) / 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Outcome (COI)/ 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Continuity of public 
policies and 
programs that 
support rural poverty 
reduction 
Maintenance of 
policies and 
incentives that favor 
agroecological 
productive 
transformation; 
Technical assistance 
responds to the 
needs of the market 
and the Project; 
Covid19's economic 
crisis shows 
improvement 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Outcome (COI) / 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Impact Survey 
Impact Survey 
Outcome (COI) / 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Continuidad de las 
políticas y programas 
públicos en el Estado 
de Piauí 
Impact Survey 
Impact Survey 
SISAR Piauí / Impact 
Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Appendix II  
Output 
1.1. Abastecimiento de agua 
para consumo humano 
Output 
1.2. Abastecimiento de agua 
para consumo humano 
Output 
1.3. Movilidad rural 
Outcome 
2. Mejorar las condiciones 
ambientales de las familias 
rurales y su entorno 
Output 
2.1 Planes de Adaptación 
Productiva (PAD) y Planos de 
Negocio (PN) 
Output 
2.2 Planes de Recuperación 
Ambiental 
Output 
2.3. Titulación de tierras y 
regularización ambiental 
Outcome 
3. Aumentar la adopción de 
tecnologías agropecuarias, 
incluidas las tecnologías de 
Familias apoyadas con tecnologías sociales para la recolección, almacenamiento y 
reutilización de agua 
Households - Number 
0 
Familias apoyadas con tecnologías de saneamiento  
0 
Households - Number 
13000 
27740 
3170 
6520 
10013961 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11 
20 
30 
17 
750 
1050 
9230 
9230 
0 
0 
0 
55000 
22000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10138079 
10100000 
63000 
75 
18000 
4615 
4615 
1846 
9230 
4615 
4615 
1846 
9230 
157500 
75 
45000 
Número de pasos vados para el tráfico sobre cursos de agua construidas 
Pasos vados - Number 
60 
Superficie de las cuencas de Piauí y Canindé con cobertura forestal recuperada 
Hectares - Number 
Percentage de agricultores que reportaron que el espejo de agua tenía un bosque 
ribereño completamente ausente 
Households - Percentage (%) 
Superficie de las propiedades rurales registradas en el CAR 
Hectares - Number 
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-making of local authorities 
and project-supported service providers 
Household members - Number of people 
Households (%) - Percentage (%) 
Households (number) - Households 
1.1.4  Persons trained in production practices and/or technologies 
Total number of persons trained by the project - 
Number of people 
Men trained in crop  - Males 
Women trained in crop  - Females 
Young people trained in crop  - Young people 
Total persons trained in crop - Number of people 
Agricultores familiares beneficiados por planes de negocios con cooperativas 
Agricultores - Number 
1.1.8  Households provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition 
Total persons participating - Number of people 
Males - Males 
Females - Females 
Households - Households 
Household members benefitted - Number of people 
Young - Young people 
Diagnóstico y definición de áreas prioritarias, para bosques ribereños y de cabecera 
realizados 
Diagnóstico - Number 
Planes de recuperación ambiental para áreas de 5ha de bosques maduros de los ríos 
Piauí y Canindé y sus afluentes elaborados, implementados y mantenidos 
Planes - Number 
Planes de Recuperación Ambiental para áreas de 3ha en cabeceras de las cuencas de 
los ríos Piauí y Canindé elaborados, implementados y mantenidos 
25 
Planes - Number 
Número de técnicos, productores, jóvenes rurales y docentes que participaron en 
acciones de educación ambiental 
Technical - Number 
2925 
Número de técnicos y productores que participaron de intercambios 
Technical - Number 
1145 
1.1.1 Number of beneficiaries gaining increased secure access to land 
Males - Males 
Females - Females 
Young - Young people 
Total number of beneficiaries with increased 
secure access to land - Number of people 
Porcentaje de propiedades rurales beneficiadas anualmente con regularización de 
tierras por el Proyecto con CAR realizada y/o rectificada 
Propiedades rurales - Percentage (%) 
2.2.1 Persons with new jobs/employment opportunities 
Males - Males 
Females - Females 
Young - Young people 
4112 
2056 
2056 
4112 
14392 
822 
10280 
5140 
5140 
10280 
35980 
2056 
939 
939 
94 
1878 
3130 
3130 
313 
6260 
369 
369 
148 
923 
923 
369 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5925 
2330 
100 
100 
70 
90 
33 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
14 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system and 
SEMAR 
Impact Survey 
Mid-Term and End of 
Project 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
M&E system and 
SEMAR 
Outcome (COI) / 
Impact Survey 
Semi-annual 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit 
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit 
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit 
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
Outcome (COI) / 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
La infraestructura 
básica y social 
continúa siendo 
proporcionada por el 
gobierno. 
Las sequías o el 
cambio climático se 
gestionan con las 
medidas de 
adaptación 
adecuadas 
Se mantienen las 
políticas de 
seguridad 
alimentaria; los 
fenómenos 
meteorológicos 
extremos tienen 
efectos limitados en 
la producción; Los 
proveedores de 
servicios 
proporcionan bienes 
y servicios de 
calidad. 
Continuidad de las 
políticas y programas 
públicos en el Estado 
de Piauí. 
Disponibilidad de 
equipos técnicos 
para garantizar 
servicios de calidad. 
Existen mecanismos 
para la adaptación al 
cambio climático. 
Continuidad de las 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Outcome (COI) / 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Impact Survey 
Impact Survey 
M&E system reports 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Annual 
Project M&E Unit  
Impact Survey 
Baseline, Mid-Term, 
and End of Project 
Project M&E Unit / 
Independent consultancy firm 
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
M&E system reports 
Semi-annual 
Project M&E Unit  
 Impact Survey - 
Carbon-Balance Tool 
(EX-ACT) 
 Ex ante, mid term 
and final Carbon-
Balance Tool (EX-
ACT) 
 Independent consultancy firm 
políticas y programas 
públicos en el Estado 
de Piauí. Los 
proveedores de 
servicios 
proporcionan bienes 
y servicios de 
calidad. 
Se mantienen las 
políticas vigentes de 
fortalecimiento de los 
servicios públicos de 
asesoría técnica y 
extensión. 
Existen mecanismos 
para la adaptación al 
cambio climático. 
Continuación de las 
políticas públicas y 
programas de apoyo 
a la comercialización 
de productos de la 
agricultura familiar. 
Appendix II  
adaptación y mitigación del 
cambio climático, y la 
integración de los productores 
en las cadenas de valor 
Output 
3.1 Planes de fortalecimiento 
de capacidades 
Output 
3.2 Estudios y proyectos en la 
cuenca Piauí-Canindé 
Output 
3.3 Apoyo a la innovación 
Outcome 
Total number of persons with new 
jobs/employment opportunities - Number of people 
0 
738 
1846 
0 
3.2.2  Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-
resilient technologies and practices 
Total number of household members - Number of 
people 
Households - Percentage (%) 
Women-headed households - Households 
Households - Households 
Porcentaje de agricultores familiares que participaron en asociaciones productivas o 
cooperativas 
Households - Percentage (%) 
Porcentaje de agricultores familiares que vendieron su producción en los mercados 
Households - Percentage (%) 
3.2 
960 
1920 
13.7 
4110 
8220 
28770 
0 
0 
0 
6720 
27.7 
73.4 
72.3 
86.7 
40 
80 
4 
2 
0 
0 
0 
50 
70 
40 
84.8 
63.2 
31.2 
4112 
10280 
Porcentaje de mujeres que ocuparon cargos directivos en organizaciones rurales 
Females - Percentage (%) 
Agricultores con acceso mejorado a inversiones y servicios agrícolas 
Households - Number 
Instituciones con capacidades de gestión y tecnología digital reforzadas 
Instituciones - Number 
Incremento de la proporción de propietarios en el área de proyecto que se siente 
segura en sus derechos de propiedad 
Propietarios - Percentage (%) 
Planes de fortalecimiento de capacidad institucional formulados 
Planes - Number 
5 
Planes de fortalecimiento de capacidad institucional ejecutados 
Planes - Number 
Sistemas de monitoreo y evaluación elaborados  
Sistemas - Number 
Equipos ejecutores y co-ejecutores capacitados en el uso de sistemas de monitoreo y 
evaluación y ejecución de las actividades para los fines del Proyecto  
Equipos - Number 
Estudios técnicos y socioambientales para el desarrollo de la cuenca, subcuencas y 
de obras de represas elaborados 
Estudios - Number 
5 
Planes de gestión de las cuencas Canindé/Piauí elaborados e implementados 
Planes - Number 
3 
Número de diagnósticos sobre la demanda y oferta de servicios de innovación 
tecnológica concluídos 
Diagnósticos - Number 
Número de cooperativas apoyadas con acciones de innovación 
Cooperativas - Number 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
2 
5 
0 
5 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4 
2 
4 
3.2.1 Tons of Greenhouse gas emissions (tCO2e) avoided and/or sequestered 
Hectares of land - Area (ha) 
tCO2e/20 years - Number 
tCO2e/ha - Number 
tCO2e/ha/year - Number 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
424 
-99805 
-4990 
-11.77 
15 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Integrated project risk matrix 
Risk Category / Subcategory  
Inherent 
risk 
Residual risk 
Country Context 
Political Commitment 
Governance 
Macroeconomic 
Fragility and Security 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
Policy alignment 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Moderate 
 Low 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
High 
High 
 Moderate 
 Moderate 
Policy Development and Implementation 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
 No risk envisaged - 
not applicable 
 Low 
Environment and Climate Context 
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions 
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts 
Project Scope 
Project Relevance 
High 
High 
High 
 Moderate 
 Moderate 
 Moderate 
Moderate 
 Low 
Technical Soundness 
Moderate 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
Substantial 
Moderate 
Implementation Arrangements 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
Moderate 
 Low 
Project Financial Management 
Project Organization and Staffing 
Project Budgeting 
Substantial 
 Low 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Project Internal Controls 
Substantial 
 Low 
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting 
Moderate 
Project External Audit 
Project Procurement 
Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Accountability and Transparency 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
 Low 
 Low 
 Low 
 Low 
 Low 
Capability in Public Procurement 
Moderate 
 Moderate 
Public Procurement Processes 
Moderate 
 Low 
Environment, Social and Climate Impact 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Biodiversity Conservation 
Moderate 
 Low 
16 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Risk Category / Subcategory  
Inherent 
risk 
Residual risk 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Cultural Heritage 
Indigenous People 
 No risk envisaged - 
not applicable 
 Low 
Low 
Labour and Working Conditions 
Moderate 
 Low 
Community Health and Safety 
Physical and Economic Resettlement 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Substantial 
 No risk envisaged - 
not applicable 
 No risk envisaged - 
not applicable 
 Moderate 
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems 
to climate variability and hazards 
High 
Substantial 
Stakeholders 
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination 
Stakeholder Grievances 
Overall 
Country Context 
Political Commitment 
Risk:  
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
 Low 
 Low 
 Low 
Substantial 
 Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Changes in political authorities at the state and national levels 
are relevant and could alter the executing agency's priorities and 
produce changes in the technical teams, delaying the Project 
implementation. Although PSI enjoys full political support from 
the State Government's current leadership, the result of the 
upcoming 2022´s elections may slightly change the scenario 
concerning the political commitment to the Project. 
Mitigations:  
The project responds directly to the state government’s priorities 
and interests. It aligns with programs and public policies that are 
not expected to change in the medium term. The PSI also fits 
the Federal Government's priorities according to the criteria 
established for external financing, as evidenced by the high 
rating of the Project by the Commission for External Financing 
(COFIEX). The risks will be mitigated through the involvement 
of several other partners in PSI development, including public 
state agencies, civil society, private sector. Also, IDB and IFAD 
17 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
will keep a continuous dialogue with state and federal 
counterparts to inform new authorities of Project characteristics 
and benefits, as well as keep participating in policy dialogue 
platforms such as the Forum of State Secretaries and Northeast 
Consortium. IFAD Office in Salvador will play a critical role in 
monitoring changing political scenario.  
Governance 
Risk:  
Weakening of state government secretariats aimed at rural 
development, family farming, environmental conservation, and 
poverty reduction due to increased political power of the 
agribusiness sectors (monoculture for export) may interfere in 
the allocation of resources to rural development. Nevertheless, 
this risk is considered low to moderate, as the country and state 
institutions are solid and exhibit a long-term commitment to 
family farming and poverty alleviation policies targeting the 
poorest and most vulnerable rural populations.  
Mitigations:  
The project will adopt a multisectoral approach to tackle the 
main problems affecting the rural populations of the Project 
area. PSI will strengthen, integrate and develop government 
programs and policies related to sustainable rural development. 
Besides, the Project will include a capacity-building component 
to help strengthen key rural development institutions and 
secretariats at the state level. 
Macroeconomic 
Risk:  
i) Unstable political and economic environment with trends of 
increase in inflation, unemployment, decreasing/low GDP 
growth, and deterioration of public accounts. ii) If the fiscal 
situation worsens due to the lingering economic effects of 
COVID-19 and unfavorable developments in the international 
and national context, this could undermine the state 
government's capacity to mobilize and allocate sufficient 
funding to the Project and could delay implementation. iii) If the 
Brazilian Real appreciates compared to the Dollar, the Program 
costs could increase (in Dollars), and the budget would be 
insufficient to execute the Project activities as planned. iv) The 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
18 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
effects of the Ukraine war in Brazil, and in Piauí as a 
consequence, are the increase in costs of fertilizers imported and 
in commodities prices, particularly corn, wheat, oil and 
sunflower oil, which could affect general food prices. The 
restrictions of the supply – or just the possibility of lower 
availability – already boosted prices and worsen the national 
inflation rates. 
Mitigations:  
i) Close monitoring of the macroeconomic situation and 
policies. ii) Consistent political dialogue at federal and state 
levels. iii) Elaborating PSI action plans, considering the most 
likely future scenarios, and adjusting priority actions and Project 
disbursement according to contextual changes whenever 
necessary. iv) Regarding the impacts of the war in Ukraine, the 
Project will partner with procurement consultants and technical 
assistance (TA) teams to map a wider network of suppliers, how 
their peers are handling the crisis, and support innovative 
solutions to manage the impacts of the war in supply availability 
and costs. Besides, the productive investment plans that will 
benefit producers (ERP, PAPs and BP) will take current and 
future inflation macroeconomic tendencies into consideration in 
their economic feasibility analysis. 
Fragility and Security 
Risk:  
The economic fragility in the past years, coupled with the 
drastic effects of a pandemic of undetermined duration, led to 
high unemployment rates and an exponential increase in the 
population living below the poverty line in Brazil. That figure, 
which was 9.5 million people in August 2020, tripled to more 
than 27 million in February 2021. With the upsurge of the 
pandemic, the number of people in food insecurity also 
considerably increased, especially in the North and Northeast 
regions. In 2020, food and nutrition insecurity affected 71,9% of 
households in the Northeast region. These trends, along with the 
political tensions that precede the 2022 elections may lead to a 
serious situation of institutional insecurity.  
Mitigations:  
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
19 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
PSI´s integrated resilience approach shall help address various 
climate, economic and environmental shocks. Besides activities 
aimed at improving family farmers' ability to recover from 
hazards, Project interventions aim to assure food and nutritional 
security, poverty reduction, and minimization of target groups' 
economic losses to external shocks. The PSI has in its general 
objective food security.  
Sector Strategies and Policies 
Policy alignment 
Risk:  
There is a risk that possible public policies are not sufficiently 
aligned with IFAD and IDB´s priorities (especially regarding 
access to land, environment, climate, gender, diversity, youth, 
food and nutrition), potentially limiting the scope of PSI’s 
development objectives and operation. In addition, there may be 
discrepancies between state and federal political priorities, 
which may also affect the Project. 
Mitigations:  
The Project design is fully aligned with Piaui´s Pluriannual Plan 
(PPA) for 2020-2023, Piauí’s Water Resources Plan, Pillars of 
Growth and Social Inclusion Project, and Pro Piauí. PSI will be 
implemented at the state level and in an area of poverty 
prevalence, where the water issue is a consensual priority, 
reducing the risks of misalignment. At the federal level, PSI is 
aligned with several policies and programs, such as Brazil´s 
Determined National Contribution (NDC) objective of 
establishing sustainable agriculture that is resilient to climate 
change; National Adaptation Strategy (ENAAC), and National 
Adaptation Plan to Climate Change (PNA); Cisterns Program, 
National Rural Environmental Registry System (SICAR), 
National Technical Assistance and Rural Extension Policy for 
Family Farming and Agrarian Reform (PNATER), PAA, 
PNAE, and PRONAF. The exceptionally high rating of the 
project by the Commission for External Financing (COFIEX) 
illustrates the sound alignment with federal policies. IFAD and 
IDB will continue dialoguing with the federal agencies to ensure 
their awareness of the project objectives and activities. 
Policy Development and Implementation 
High 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
20 
Appendix III 
Risk:  
The risk that strategies and policies aimed at the rural and 
agricultural sector are not based on solid evidence, do not 
accurately represent rural organizations' views and are 
inadequately supported by a regulatory framework, affecting the 
Project implementation and the achievement of its goals. 
Mitigations:  
i) The Project will build a solid basis for collaboration with 
research institutions and civil society partners with strong 
experience regarding the semiarid context, besides counting on 
the capacity and experience of a strong M&E system to ensure 
that empirical data and information can guide its 
implementation. ii) PSI will be based on a bottom-up rural 
development approach, facilitating beneficiary participation in 
Project implementation and building the capacity of poor rural 
people and their organizations. iii) The Project’s Steering 
Committee will serve as a participatory mechanism, ensuring 
that there is broad representation in the implementation of the 
Project. iv) IDB and IFAD will ensure PSI receives constant 
feedback on innovative approaches, good practices, and policies 
from other projects in their portfolios. v) The partnership 
between IFAD and the IDB, both international bodies with a 
state and federal impact, will help to minimize the risks. vi) In 
addition, IFAD grants, such as DAKI-Semiárido Vivo, can help 
and support the preparation for Project implementation. vii) 
Finally, IFAD continues to support policy dialogue instruments, 
thus ensuring the effective implementation of the PSI. 
Environment and Climate Context 
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions 
Risk:  
The Project area faces long-term degradation of Caatinga’s 
ecological and productive functions, with 33% of the Piauí 
biome (84.000 km2) affected by moderate desertification 
processes. Degraded riverside areas also affect the hydrological 
functioning of the basin. This context constitutes a risk to the 
productivity of the agricultural activities supported by the 
Project.  
Mitigations:  
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Substantial Moderate 
High 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
21 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
i) The Project’s interventions include the environmental 
recovery of priority protection areas (riparian forests) to 
improve hydrological services in the Piauí and Canindé 
watersheds, co-benefits for biological corridors, environmental 
regularization initiatives, investments in basic rural sanitation, 
and institutional strengthening in territorial environmental 
management. ii) The PSI productive component will also 
contribute to reducing environmental vulnerability by 
supporting family farmers and communities with technical 
assistance to adopt agroecological and resilient productive 
practices. (i.e. water access technologies, such as household 
cisterns, greywater reuse systems, solar powered desalination 
units, among others) iii) To fulfill the requirements of IDB´s 
Environmental and Social Policy Framework and the provisions 
of the Performance Standards (PS), the executing entity will 
implement an Environmental and Social Management System 
for the PSI and has already elaborated and disclosed a 
preliminary Strategic Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment. 
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts 
Risk:  
Almost all of the project area belongs to the semiarid region. 
Therefore, it is constantly subject to climatic risks and water 
scarcity, both due to the lack of precipitations and high 
evapotranspiration. The increase in temperature and the 
variability of rainfall patterns with more frequent, prolonged, 
and severe droughts present a risk of significant impacts on 
production systems. These climate risks may reduce 
productivity, and family farmers' income, resulting in 
deterioration of target population livelihoods and ecosystems. 
The need for water for crops and animals is increasing in a 
context already characterized by water scarcity and where 
access to water for human consumption still has ample gaps. 
Mitigations:  
Project will invest in climate change adaptation, environmental 
recovery, and the conservation of areas essential for the 
hydrological functioning of the Piauí and Canindé watershed, 
social technologies for capturing, storing, and recycling water, 
22 
High 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
and supporting the adoption of agroecological practices to 
increase productive systems’ resilience.  
Project Scope 
Project Relevance 
No relevant risk for the project’s objectives and interventions 
being not fully aligned with IFAD’s or the country’s 
development priorities. The Project corresponds to the central 
challenges of production and access to services for the rural 
poor, and the design is also aligned with state policies and 
priorities. Besides, PSI has a participatory approach that will 
allow ownership, relevance, and alignment with target groups’ 
needs and priorities 
Technical Soundness 
Risk:  
: There is a low to moderate technical risk in implementation 
due to the current capacities of state-level public institutions as 
Project activities require strong coordination and integrated 
planning.  
Mitigations:  
Moderate  Low 
No risk 
envisaged - 
not applicable 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
i) Designing the Project based on lessons learned from PVSA 
and IDB projects in the Brazilian Northeast (1633/OC-BR, 
5440/OC-BR, 4723/OC-BR, 4732/OC-BR, ATN/LC-17432-
BR). PSI is highly robust also based on IFAD’s and IDB´s solid 
technical experience. ii) Establishing effective management and 
coordination structure. iii) The Project includes an institutional 
strengthening component of SEMAR, SAF, and EMATER. iv) 
Building alliances with third-party suppliers of technical 
assistance to producers and communities, which are very 
common in IFAD projects in Brazil and have achieved excellent 
results in innovation and technical quality.  
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability  Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Implementation Arrangements 
Risk:  
i) The execution of the Project by several government entities 
and organizations of rural producers (who manage the 
beneficiaries' investment plans) is the main risk identified. If 
Substantial Moderate 
23 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
there is no adequate coordination between the key institutions, 
execution can be delayed and the technical quality of the Project 
products affected. ii) There is also a risk that the capacities of 
the project executing agency are insufficient for adequate and 
effective Project management, generating delays and lower 
execution quality. iii) For some jobs, such as technical 
assistance and provision of specialized services, as in the 
project's water component, there is a risk of a lack of qualified 
personnel in the state. iv) Lack of clarity in institutional 
responsibilities could delay the execution of water and 
sanitation works and compromise their proper operation and 
maintenance.  
Mitigations:  
i) Establishing a Project Management Unit (PMU) in SEPLAN, 
which will be responsible for the general Project coordination 
and management. This PMU will coordinate planning, financial 
management and implementation, and will report on the 
technical and financial evolution of the Project. Each executing 
institution with signed investment plans shall continuously 
monitor their implementation by rural organizations. ii) 
Establishing a Coordination Committee made up of 
representatives from the PMU and the operational teams of 
SAF, SEMAR, and INTERPI that will meet monthly to 
coordinate Project communication activities, the planning of 
community actions, review the progress in the Annual 
Operational Plan, review environmental and social aspects, 
among other themes. iii) The institutional strengthening of 
component 3 will offer training and capacity building and, when 
necessary, the PSI may bring in technical personnel from other 
states, as the PVSA did. IFAD grant projects, such as DAKI-
Semiárido Vivo, will also provide training to teams, mainly TA, 
for climate change adaptation practices and approaches. iv) 
Cooperation agreements will be signed with each municipality 
in which the water and sanitation type of works; training and 
technical assistance will be provided to community 
organizations and beneficiary families to ensure adequate 
management, operation, and maintenance of the project 
investments. 
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
Risk:  
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
24 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
The risk of poor M&E performance is considered low because 
PVSA has built a strong M&E capacity, based on which PSI 
will improve and develop the necessary systems. i) As the 
execution of the Project will take place in a decentralized 
manner (by several entities of the public administration), the 
task of monitoring physical progress will be more complex, 
which may result in information loss. ii) The Project may have 
difficulties in composing a specialized M&E team to work at the 
PMU, as well as in the PMUs of the co-executors, both in the 
state’s professional staff and in hiring specialist consultants.  
Mitigations:  
i) IDB has prepared a robust M&E Plan, which defines key 
aspects and methodologies for monitoring and evaluating PSI 
results. This plan will be updated by the M&E team at the 
beginning of the PSI execution, to include the monitoring 
arrangement to guarantee the fluidity of information between 
the bodies responsible for implementing the Project and define 
each professional’s roles. ii) Although each co-executing entity 
will be responsible for monitoring its activities, SEPLAN will 
consolidate the M&E data of the project as a whole. iii) The 
SIGMA, a system used by the SAF team for the World Bank 
Project (Pillars of Growth - Pilares do Crescimento), will be 
used, adapted, and made available online for the co-executors to 
manage information. There is a budget planned for the system 
improvement and this will be an important legacy for the state. 
iv) Strengthening the M&E team’s capacities in the context of 
developing the institutional capacities of key state entities.  
Project Financial Management 
Project Organization and Staffing 
Risk:  
Financial team from the Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
limited experience in the financial management of IFAD and 
IDB funded projects, resulting in limited ability to fulfil the 
functional needs of the Project 
Mitigations:  
Provide training of the financial team, with the support of IFAD 
and IDB, in management processes for the use and reporting of 
external funds 
25 
Substantial Low 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Project Budgeting 
Risk:  
SEPLAN is the state entity that leads the policies related to 
external financing with multilateral agencies and will be the 
main executing entity. SEPLAN may have little fiscal margin to 
provide counterpart budget and funds on time. 
Mitigations:  
IFAD and IDB teams will ensure a strong commitment of 
SEPLAN to the Project and its articulation with SEFAZ for 
ensuring the allocation of sufficient counterpart financial 
resources for Project implementation 
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements 
Risk:  
The State Government will maintain a USD denominated bank 
account in order to receive IFAD loan funds. The parri passu 
mechanism will be implemented for the IDB-IFAD cofinanced 
components. Beneficiary organizations, which will manage 
resources and implement investment might have weak 
capability around management of resources, are not able to 
submit timely and quality investments plans and financial 
reporting which might delay implementation. 
Mitigations:  
Include definition of parri passu arrangement in the Program 
Operating Regulations.  
Financial reporting and accountability mechanism of 
implementing organizations will be clearly established in 
Program Operating Regulations and a model agreement will be 
prepared to be signed with the organizations clearly stating 
responsibilities and mechanisms to be applied.  
Technical assistance will be provided by IDB to implement the 
requirements as per Program Operating Regulations and 
agreements signed. 
Project Internal Controls 
Risk:  
Substantial Low 
Substantial Low 
26 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
The project will have an appropriate organizational structure, 
procedures, manuals, systems, established workflows and staff 
responsibilities, segregation of duties, chart of accounts, asset 
control, and audit functions. The area that will require special 
attention is the supervision of the funds transferred to rural 
organizations. If these organizations fail to submit timely and 
adequate accounts to SAF for the resources transferred, 
execution may be delayed 
Mitigations:  
The preliminary Program Operating Regulations were 
elaborated and will be further developed to ensure adequate 
support and supervision of rural organizations. Key aspects will 
be clearly establishing oversight responsibilities of project staff 
and mechanism of supervision; capacity-building plan for rural 
organizations, disbursement and reporting procedures, and 
external auditors' review of rural organization transactions to 
ensure a continuous improvement of rural organizations’ 
management capacities for the adequate use of Project funds. 
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting 
Risk:  
The accounting policies used in the State system and acceptable 
and in line with international standards. The State financial 
management system is reliable and suitable for operations; 
however, it does not fully comply with IFAD reporting 
requirements and might lack the capability to produce the 
management reporting needed for proper decision making by 
the project team 
Mitigations:  
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
The project will implement a complementary financial system to 
allow for monitoring of budget and execution by funding source 
component and category which generates reporting as required 
by IFAD and IDB. 
Project External Audit 
Risk:  
Low 
Low 
The IDB is responsible for the fiduciary oversight of the project. 
The external audit of the project will be carried by an external 
firm acceptable to the IDB (regional audit courts responsible for 
Low 
Low 
27 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
audits at state level are not accredited by the World bank). As 
per the cooperation agreement audited financial statements will 
be shared by IDB to IFAD no later than 6 months after end of 
fiscal year. 
Mitigations:  
No measures 
Project Procurement 
Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Risk:  
The new federal regulatory framework for tenders and 
administrative contracts (Law no. 14.133/2021), establishes 
important changes that will have direct repercussions on State 
public Procurement. Considering the new law will have a 
mandatory application from April 2023, there is a risk of 
possible interruptions and delays in the project procurement 
execution. In addition, the risk linked to changes and 
innovations brought by the new legislation is also highlighted, 
which can directly impact the development of the Project as the 
teams may find it difficult to assimilate and implement the 
changes at the appropriate time. From the data extracted on the 
PEFA program website (Public Expenditure and Financial 
Accountability), it is also possible to identify the risk related to 
the weaknesses of public access to information on purchases 
and contracts, which can generate gaps for irregular practices, 
distrust of the legitimacy of activities, and questioning by the 
control bodies. 
Mitigations:  
To reduce the risks inherent to the changes brought by the new 
regulatory framework, it is recommended that the conditions 
and methods peculiar to the selection and contracting contained 
in the IFAD and IDB norms, when applicable, are indicated in 
the Grant Agreement, and their use is subject to a favorable 
opinion from the legal body of the grantee prior to the execution 
of said Agreement. Providing training and retraining on the 
rules applicable to the personnel involved in procurement 
activities and continuous monitoring of the Project's 
procurement team regarding the changes in the new law are also 
strongly recommended. 
Accountability and Transparency 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
Low 
Low 
28 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Low 
Low 
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate  Moderate 
Appendix III 
Risk:  
In terms of accountability, the absence of clear protocols in the 
National systems can lead to failures in the direction of demands 
and, consequently, impact the investigations and solving any 
irregularities, with a potential risk of questioning the legitimacy 
of some decisions taken under an apparent conflict of interests. 
The inexistence of a 2-tiered system to handle complaints can 
generate a lack of exemption in the evaluation, mistaken 
conclusions and/or ineffective treatment of the information, 
directly impacting the necessary corrective measures and 
affecting the reputation, and culture of the Project. 
Mitigations:  
i) implement specific protocols for receiving/handling 
complaints that include general and exception rules, 
dissemination, training, and communication plans, as well as 
non-retaliation policies against whistle-blowers, among others; 
ii) adopt a 2-tiered system for handling complaints with rules 
well defined in a specific manual; iii) implement an ethics and 
compliance council to deliberate on complaints; iv) adopt the 
practice of conducting prior research in procurement/contracting 
activities (third party due diligence) through consultation of 
federal and state debarred lists and other relevant tools. 
Capability in Public Procurement 
Risk:  
i) Hiring according to IADB guidelines and procedures is 
unusual for the state government (except for SAF, the executing 
agency of PVSA) and needs specific capabilities in public 
procurement, although executing agencies already have 
professionals with experience in biddings of this nature. ii) 
Acquisitions will be carried out by several government entities 
and by rural organizations that will receive, funds for the 
implementation of PAPs and BP have to carry out a large 
volume of contracts. 
Mitigations:  
i) Provide training and retraining on the rules applicable to the 
personnel involved in procurement activities. ii) Establish a 
Procurement Management sector at the PMU to coordinate the 
procurement issues and carry out the primary and more complex 
29 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
selection and acquisition processes, and coordinate the 
operations on the topic of acquisitions with the entities involved 
in Project execution. iii) The PSI should provide training and 
retraining on the applicable rules for all professionals involved 
in procurement activities, including producer organizations  
Public Procurement Processes 
Risk:  
Procurement processes follow a fragmented flow between 
different sectors of the executing agency, showing a low degree 
of communication and interaction between those involved, 
especially regarding the planning phase of activities. This can 
lead to a lack of understanding of the procurement and 
contracting processes, problems with specification and 
identification of needs, difficulties in choosing the applicable 
method, adoption of unrealistic plans, and non-compliance with 
deadlines for each process, among others. Such risks can 
severely impact the efficiency and quality of the Project's 
procurement and contracting activities. Lack of knowledge 
about IADB’s procurement rules represents a risk that can lead 
to delays and failures in the development of activities in the 
area.  
Mitigations:  
i) The Project shall adopt participative and integrated planning 
of procurement involving its coordination and the technical and 
financial area; ii) procurement and contracting flows and 
procedures will be clearly described in the Program Operating 
Regulations Manual; iii) the project procurement team will be 
trained in IADB guidelines which are in line with IFAD’s. 
Environment, Social and Climate Impact 
Biodiversity Conservation 
Risk:  
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
Substantial Moderate 
Moderate  Low 
The PSI is within the Caatinga biome, which, despite the 
adverse conditions, presents great biodiversity, with a high rate 
of fauna and flora endemism. Changes in the water regime may 
affect protected and/or endemic species of both fauna and flora. 
Moderate  Low 
Mitigations:  
30 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Mitigations: i) The Project design has already included the 
prepared and disclosed preliminary Strategic Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment. ii) Carrying out studies of the biotic 
environment, surveying the existing fauna and flora, and 
proposing periodic monitoring and rescue programs for 
endangered species. ii) Implementing activities to improve 
family farmers' productivity and income exclude critical habitat 
areas. iii) In addition, in line with IDB policies, the PSI will not 
be able to carry out any activities that cause significant 
conversion or degradation of natural habitats. 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
Risk:  
i) The development of productive activities generate the risk of 
soil degradation, loss of forest cover, deforestation, burning, 
contamination of soil and water, and the generation of 
solid/liquid waste. ii) The lack of proper sanitation and sewage 
treatment is a leading cause of pollution in the project area. iii) 
The high concentration of salt in soils refers to the natural 
process of salinization of surface and ground waters, a 
characteristic of the Project area. The use of high salinity water 
can lead to a rapid deterioration of soil conditions 
Mitigations:  
i) The Project will mitigate these possible risks through 
fostering agroecological practices (organic fertilizer, water for 
reuse, recovery of degraded areas, among others), actions to 
strengthen public institutions and the Piauí-Canindé river basin 
committee itself, and activities aimed at training and 
environmental education for fostering ecosystem conservation. 
PSI will help communities (particularly quilombola) obtain land 
titling, strengthening incentives for them to invest in 
conservation practices. Besides, the project will offer financial 
literacy to producers receiving land ownership to ensure land is 
used responsibly and to beneficiaries’ maximum value creation 
and protection. ii) The Project will invest in basic sanitation 
infrastructures, including individual systems for treating 
household sewage, greywater reuse systems, and green pits. iii) 
Unlike other identified risks, this is a permanent one. Still, it can 
be mitigated by implementing technologies to desalinate well 
water and other water sources and periodically monitor the 
31 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
characteristics of irrigated soil. Besides, the project will 
constantly monitor water quality, particularly in the context of 
supervision missions and ad hoc implementation support 
missions, in accordance with national standards. 
Cultural Heritage 
There is no risk the Project may cause significant degradation of 
cultural or physical resources, including threats to resources of 
historical, religious, or cultural importance or their loss. 
Indigenous People 
Risk:  
There is no risk the Project may have a significant physical, 
social, or economic negative impact on indigenous peoples, or 
that it threatens resources of historical or cultural importance to 
them or the loss of these resources. Indigenous peoples will not 
be adversely impacted by PSI actions.  
Mitigations:  
i) Project eligibility/exclusion criteria prohibit the acquisition or 
restriction of land use in areas of indigenous and traditional 
communities. ii) The Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will include a Plan for Disclosure and 
Public Consultations, contemplating the participation of 
quilombola, indigenous and other traditional communities, 
informing about the Project and location of proposed 
interventions in the communities, reporting on the activities and 
location of any intervention in the area bordering the 
demarcated Territory. iii) The ESMF will also include a Social 
Communication and Community Participation program that 
respects and includes forms of documenting and means of 
communication accessible and adequate to the cultural 
specificities of indigenous peoples and traditional communities 
of the Project area. 
Labour and Working Conditions 
Risk:  
Risk that the Project may result in abusive labor practices (for 
example, forced or child labor), cases of gender violence, 
discriminatory and unsafe/unhealthy working conditions for 
No risk 
envisaged - 
not applicable 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
32 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
those employees of the Project, including third parties and large 
suppliers. 
Mitigations:  
All contracts with contractors, suppliers, and third parties to be 
financed with IFAD funds will include provisions that prohibit 
child labor and promote decent work. The Project will recruit a 
social specialist for the PMU. An action plan for gender equality 
will also be developed, examining measures to prevent and 
combat gender-based violence. 
Community Health and Safety 
Risk: There is no risk the Project will have adverse effects on 
the health and safety of the community.  
Physical and Economic Resettlement 
The Project’s intervention should not cause the resettlement of 
families.  
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Risk:  
The degradation of the Caatinga biome due to unsustainable 
agricultural practices could lead to rising greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions. The setbacks in environmental policy and control in 
recent years point to a tendency for increased emissions. 
Mitigations:  
PSI’s components of environmental recovery aim to contribute 
to the recovery and conservation of water resources in the Piauí-
Canindé river basin through actions such as the recovery of 
riparian forests and environmental revitalization of springs 
through reforestation with native seedlings. These activities will 
reduce GHG emissions. In fact, they will even sequester carbon. 
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate 
variability and hazards 
Risk:  
i) In the semi-arid region, variations of the usual rainfall pattern 
in the semi-arid region are somewhat frequent. This factor 
No risk 
envisaged - 
not applicable 
No risk 
envisaged - 
not applicable 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
High 
Substantial 
High 
Substantial 
33 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
influences the water availability and puts the communities’ 
ability to maintain water supply for drinking and other uses at 
risk. ii) According to the Drought Monitoring System of the 
North-eastern Brazil, the state of Piauí has a wide range of 
drought intensity both in the short and long term: from low-
intensity droughts to extreme droughts. Projections indicate that, 
for the next 30 years, the average increase in temperature in the 
region will be between 0,5o and 1,5oC. In the Project area, 
drought is the main climate threat and, from 2012 to 2018, the 
region has faced the most severe and prolonged drought in a 
hundred years, demonstrating the high vulnerability of the 
populations and their production systems to climate variability 
and hazards. 
Mitigations:  
i) This possible risk can be prevented or mitigated through 
measures focused on sustainable water management and access, 
mainly for human consumption, agricultural production, and the 
safety of children. The installation of small dams may help 
regulate the flow of rivers and recharge the water table. ii) IDB 
has conducted a climate change and disaster analysis that 
concluded that the drought and flood risk management plans to 
be financed by PSI will ensure adequate risk mitigation 
measures.  
Stakeholders 
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination 
Risk:  
There is a low risk that the main players invited to be part of the 
Project show little interest or commitment toward the project’s 
objectives and activities. Some civil society organizations 
represent different interests relevant to the Project - Movement 
of Landless Workers (MST), COOTAPI, and FETAG of Oeiras. 
The design team met their representatives as part of the 
consultation process for this Project’s concept note. The 
objectives and approaches of the Project align with the interests 
of these organizations. Also, IDB, in line with its Environmental 
and Social Policy Framework (ESPF) has carried out a public 
consultation process.  
Mitigations:  
Moderate  Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
34 
Appendix III 
EB 2022/136/R.28/Rev.1 
SEPLAN coordinates the participation of interested sectorial 
institutions (SEMAR, SAF, EMATER, INTERPI, IDEPI) both 
during Project design and implementation. At the community 
level, the Project will implement a participatory process to 
develop Productive Adaptation Plans (PAP) and Business Plans 
(BP) to ensure the participation and representation of the needs 
and aspirations of the different groups in defining the specific 
supports to be offered by the Project. PSI will also establish 
continuous communication, awareness-raising, and coordination 
with the many partners at all levels (local, state, and federal) 
starting at the project design stage, and activities on visibility 
aimed at promoting and clarifying potential outcomes of project 
activities, both for target groups and partners involved in 
implementation. 
Stakeholder Grievances 
Risk:  
Moderate  Low 
Project implementation may entail the submission of complaints 
by several involved or impacted groups, thus affecting the 
continuity of activities and the established schedule. 
Moderate  Low 
Mitigations:  
The Project will incorporate a clear and effective mechanism for 
grievance/complaints redress, to be designed in a participatory 
way in line with IDB methodologies and guidelines 
(Mecanismo de Resolução de Queixas - MRQ). During the 
design, a public consultation was conducted with stakeholders. 
The procedure includes mechanisms to manifest the claim or 
complaint, response time, and resolution spheres. This 
mechanism shall be easily accessible to the population and have 
a speedy resolution, ensuring that submitted complaints are 
quickly reviewed and situations are mutually agreed upon in a 
satisfactory way for the parties involved. 
35 
