Document:
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
Date:
Distribution:
Original:
17 April 2015
Public
English
E
President’s report
Proposed loan to the Republic of Fiji for the
Fiji Agricultural Partnerships Project
Note to Executive Board representatives
Focal points:
Technical questions:
Dispatch of documentation:
Chase Palmeri
Country Programme Manager
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2449
e-mail: ch.palmeri@ifad.org
Deirdre McGrenra
Head, Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2374
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org
For: Approval
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
ii
iii
iv
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
5
5
6
7
7
7
7
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
10
10
10
11
Contents
Abbreviations and acronyms
Map of the project area
Financing summary
Recommendation for approval
I.
Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP
II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
B. Project development objective
C. Components/outcomes
III. Project implementation
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Approach
Organizational framework
Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management
Financial management, procurement and governance
Supervision
IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
B. Project financing
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
D. Sustainability
E. Risk identification and mitigation
V.
Corporate considerations
A.
B.
C.
D.
Compliance with IFAD policies
Alignment and harmonization
Innovations and scaling up
Policy engagement
VI. Legal instruments and authority
VII. Recommendation
Annex
Negotiated financing agreement
Appendix
Logical framework
i
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
Abbreviations and acronyms
ADU
AWP/B
FAPP
FCLC
M&E
MoA
MORDI
PHVA
PSC
RIMS
SMEs
agribusiness development unit
annual work plan and budget
Fiji Agricultural Partnerships Project
Fiji Crop and Livestock Council
monitoring and evaluation
Ministry of Agriculture
Mainstreaming of Rural Development Innovations Programme
Partnership in High Value Agriculture
project steering committee
Results and Impact Management System
small and medium-sized enterprises
ii
i
i
i
M
a
p
o
f
t
h
e
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
a
r
e
a
E
B
2
0
1
5
/
L
O
T
/
P
.
6
/
R
e
v
.
1
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
The Republic of Fiji
Fiji Agricultural Partnerships Project
Financing summary
Initiating institution:
IFAD
Borrower:
Executing agency:
Total project cost:
Amount of IFAD loan:
Republic of Fiji
Ministry of Agriculture
US$6.05 million
EUR 3.1 million (equivalent to approximately
US$3.52 million)
Terms of IFAD loan:
Ordinary
Cofinancier(s):
Financing institutions
Amount of cofinancing:
US$0.93 million
Contribution of borrower:
US$1.03 million
Contribution of beneficiaries:
US$0.57 million
Appraising institution:
Cooperating institution:
IFAD
IFAD
iv
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Fiji for the Fiji Agricultural Partnerships Project, as contained
in paragraph 63.
Proposed loan to the Republic of Fiji for the Fiji
Agricultural Partnerships Project
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1.
The Republic of Fiji is an archipelago of some 330 islands and more than 500 islets
with a total land area of 18,200 square kilometres and a tropical climate. The 2007
census recorded a population of 874,271 people with 51 per cent living in urban
areas and 80 per cent on the main island of Viti Levu. Following elections in
September 2014, the new Government was recognized as a democratically elected
government by the United Nations General Assembly.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Economic and social development is driven by the Republic of Fiji Roadmap for
Democracy and Sustainable Socio-Economic Development 2010-2014 (RDSSED).
The nation-building agenda of the RDSSED emphasizes the strengthening of social
cohesion among all Fijian citizens. Priorities for economic development include
maintaining macroeconomic stability, promoting exports, substituting imports,
raising investment levels, and making more land available for productive and social
purposes. The RDSSED emphasizes two strategic objectives related to agriculture
and rural development: improving the availability of and access to nutritious,
locally produced foods for poor and vulnerable rural households; and increasing
rural incomes from farm and non-farm income-generating and employment
opportunities.
Fiji’s main exports of sugar, fish, crude coconut oil, root crops, and horticultural
crops face stiff international competition. The country still imports many basic food
requirements for the tourism sector and about 90 per cent of the food items in
supermarkets.
Over the past decade, the agriculture sector contributed an average of
10.6 per cent of Fiji’s total annual GDP, declining from 16 per cent in the 1990s to
9.2 per cent in 2012. The sector employs close to two thirds of the labour force.
Recent challenges have included the decline in the sugar industry, inability to cope
with trade liberalization, natural disasters, pest and disease outbreaks, and trade
restrictions in export markets. Agriculture, forestry and marine ecosystems are
under threat from increasing population pressure and the adverse effects of climate
change.
One third of Fiji’s population lives in poverty,1 and the incidence of rural poverty
increased between 2003 and 2008. The main factors correlating with poverty have
been identified as household size, the presence of elderly people and children in
the household, the education level of the head of household, having a woman as
sole head of household, and unemployment of the head of household. All five of
these factors are more marked in rural areas. While the income of urban
households increased by 51 per cent between 2002/03 and 2008/09, that of rural
households increased by only 10 per cent.
1 World Bank, 2011.
1
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
6.
7.
RB-COSOP
Smallholder farmers in Fiji have good resource potential and a demonstrated
willingness to produce marketable surpluses to increase their incomes. There is
strong demand for domestically produced agricultural products. However, value
chains are underdeveloped and commercial relationships are weak.
The highlands of Viti Levu have an advantage in selected horticultural products.
This advantage derives from the highlands lower temperatures when it is too hot
for horticultural production in coastal areas. The Government of Fiji is committed to
improving incomes for highland communities by addressing constraints to
production and the higher marketing costs due to their remote location. It is also
seeking to promote farming as a business.
II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8.
The project will benefit all small-scale and semi-subsistence farm households in Fiji
by improving government policies, procedures and services for agribusiness and
expanding the services provided by private traders, processors and transporters
that purchase the small-scale farmers’ output. It will have a special focus on poorer
communities located in the interior of Viti Levu at elevations exceeding 450 metres
(1,500 feet), comprising some 2,000 households. The project may also include
communities contiguous to these highland communities, to the extent that project
resources permit.
9.
Households in the target group traditionally have their own food gardens, located
on communally owned land. Currently, most households plant less than
0.1 hectares of vegetables as part of cropping rotations that include staple root
crops (cassava, sweet potatoes and yams), cash root crops (taro and kava), fruits
(bananas, plantains, pineapples and citrus fruits) and staple leafy greens (bele and
rourou). They live in traditional villages that are governed by chiefs and village by-
laws. Discrimination by gender and age is strong in village and household decision-
making.
B. Project development objective
10. The overall goal of the Fiji Agricultural Partnerships Project (FAPP) is to reduce
hardship in remote rural communities. The key indicator of achievement of this
objective will be a substantial increase in the household asset ownership index.
11. The project’s development objective is to engage small-scale producers in
sustainable farming as a business in remote areas, particularly the highlands. The
principal measure of progress towards this objective will be 50 per cent of
households in the highlands regularly market agricultural outputs to trading or
processing enterprises.
C. Components/outcomes
12. Component 1: Public-sector capacity to support agribusiness. The FAPP will
support the Government in strengthening the private agribusiness sector,
improving the public environment for agribusiness and promoting agricultural value
chains, thereby expanding income-earning opportunities for poor farmers. It will
assist the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) in promoting effective policies, working
effectively with the private sector, advising farmers on agribusiness matters and
ensuring an appropriate regulatory environment for agribusiness. In the process,
the FAPP will create the capacity to carry out such work in the future through the
establishment and initial operation of an agribusiness development unit (ADU)
within MoA.
2
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
13. Skills development of ADU staff will be provided on the job by an internationally
recruited senior agribusiness development adviser and through staff training. The
ADU will arrange courses to develop the capacity of extension staff to advise on
farming as a business. The ADU will carry out value chain studies to prepare
evidence-based policy recommendations. It will promote consultation among
stakeholders in value chains and support development of value chain associations,
in partnership with organizations such as the Fiji Crop and Livestock Council (FCLC)
and the Fiji Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
14. The overall outcome of this component will be enhanced MoA capacity to promote
private-sector agribusiness.
15. Component 2: Assistance to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
working with smallholders will improve the businesses of operators that buy
agricultural outputs from or sell farm inputs to small-scale farmers. Value chain
intermediaries are often reluctant to take the risks involved in developing new
linkages to small farmers. The FAPP will provide access to mentoring on request to
SMEs seeking to expand operations with small-scale farmers, and matching grants
to SMEs with access to financial services from private banks.
16.
Provision has been made for mentoring approximately 45 SMEs over the first three
years of the FAPP. In addition, grants of up to US$25,000 will be given to match
owner equity contributions of up to 25 per cent of a planned investment. Examples
of investments for expanding operations might include the purchase of a vehicle to
enable the SME to reach remote farming areas, infrastructure for upgrading
marketing facilities, or operating capital to address cash-flow constraints for
contract farming ventures.
17. The overall outcome of the component will be strong linkages between SMEs and
rural agricultural producers.
18. Component 3: Farming as a business for highland communities. In the
highlands, organized communities are central to mobilizing the human and land
resources necessary for a successful transition from semi-subsistence to
commercial agriculture. Community members require an understanding of
leadership skills and good governance, resource management and planning,
addressing gender disparity and related justice issues, and environmental
sustainability.
19. Through training, the FAPP will transfer skills covering all aspects of farm enterprise
management. The project will facilitate relationships between producers and value
chain operators, combining training with meetings between farmers and potential
buyers. Special support will be given to women who have to travel to reach retail
markets.
20. The FAPP will promote the adoption of environmentally sound climate change-
resilient technologies and effective farm management, enabling farmers to benefit
from the comparative advantage of their location. The project will support the
enhancement of traditional farming skills using a peer-to-peer knowledge-sharing
approach. Technology transfer may include use of vegetable seedlings, improved
germplasm, group development of planting material enterprises, and training in
post-harvest handling.
21. The FAPP will provide technical assistance and internal controls for participatory
certification and sustainable commercialization of selected highland products,
replicating experiences of the Pacific Organic and Ethical Trade Community
(supported by IFAD), under which farmers in other parts of Fiji are expanding the
production of organically certified virgin coconut oil and papaya.
22. The overall outcome of this component will be reoriented highland farmers with
skills and capacity to do farming as a business.
3
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
III. Project implementation
Approach
A.
23. The project will be implemented from 2015 to 2019, with the first six months
devoted to planning and preparatory activities, then three years of investment and
follow-up activities, and the final six months for winding down and assisting in the
design of project replication for other parts of Fiji.
24. The project approach will be based on scaling up features of successful
interventions under two recent IFAD initiatives: a regional grant to the
Mainstreaming of Rural Development Innovations Programme (MORDI), and a
national grant to the Partnership in High Value Agriculture Project (PHVA), which is
a two-year programme with a Fijian NGO building on the MORDI model. The FAPP
will use the MORDI model of community empowerment through investment
planning. From PHVA, it will draw on pilot interventions in community development
and the commercialization of high-value fruits and vegetables. PHVA has been
extended to the end of 2015 to provide continuity and overlap with the FAPP. Under
component 3, the FAPP will expand PHVA activities to all highland communities on
Viti Levu, and possibly to additional contiguous areas.
25. The project approach will address gender issues systematically. Measures will
include gender mainstreaming in project implementation and management;
targeted capacity-building for women and youth; emphasis on women’s
participation in community decision-making; where possible, the use of women as
community facilitators in the highlands; and measurable monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) indicators to ensure that women’s participation in FAPP activities is
monitored closely and indicators are disaggregated by gender.
26. Under component 1 on public-sector capacity to support agribusiness, the ADU will
be established as the main vehicle for augmenting the capacity to support
agribusiness. It will be created prior to project start up and will host the project
staff. The ADU will be supported by a senior agribusiness development adviser,
recruited internationally in consultation with IFAD. The project will be flexible in
using its allocated resources to secure technical advisory services for agribusiness,
and may secure additional resources and services for the ADU to enable its staff to
operate at the highest possible level.
27. Service providers will be selected by MoA according to agreed procurement
procedures. All implementing partners will be monitored closely by managers,
supervision missions and the FAPP management information system. Coordination
will be through the ADU within MoA, where staff will be learning by doing, with
leadership and on-the-job advice from the full-time senior agribusiness
development adviser. The FAPP will also provide short international training
courses. Training of extension officers in agricultural marketing, agribusiness and
value chains will be conducted by the senior agribusiness development adviser,
members of the ADU and contracted experts. Studies will be commissioned to
support policy development and the promotion of agribusiness. The FAPP will join
MoA initiatives to strengthen MoA’s commodity councils, and will work with FCLC on
strengthening FCLC’s constituent associations, eventually merging its
council/association activities with those of MoA.
28. Component 2 on assistance to SMEs working with smallholders will be overseen by
the ADU, but mentoring will be contracted to external companies and individuals
with business-mentoring skills. Participating banks will evaluate the viability of
business plans presented by SMEs and the degree to which SMEs satisfy the banks’
criteria for lending. The ADU will verify the eligibility of proposed recipients of
matching grants – with respect to the purpose of the investment – and will provide
SMEs with grants through the banks.
4
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
29. Component 3 on farming as a business for highland communities will be overseen
by ADU but carried out through a service agreement with a selected lead
implementing partner. This partner will be responsible for overall day-to-day
coordination and implementation of the entire component. Other specialized
service providers will be subcontracted for specific deliverables such as training on
basic business skills and financial literacy, support to traditional marketing practices
by women, technology transfer and organic certification. A plan for procuring
specialized services under subcontracts with the lead implementing partner will be
cleared by the project manager at the same time as the overall procurement plan
and the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B).
Organizational framework
B.
30. MoA will be the lead project agency for the FAPP. Oversight and guidance will be
provided by a project steering committee (PSC) led by the Permanent Secretary of
MoA and fully representative of all stakeholders.
31.
32.
Project management and implementation support staff will be fully integrated into
relevant MoA operational structures according to their functions for the duration of
the project and will be supported by the ADU.
Full-time professional staff with responsibility for management and implementation
support will include a project manager and an administrative assistant located in
the ADU, a finance officer and an assistant in MoA’s finance section, and an M&E
person in MoA’s M&E office. These staff members will be recruited competitively on
fixed-term contracts. Selection of these and other key staff will be in consultation
with IFAD.
C.
Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management
33. An integrated system of planning, M&E and knowledge management will be
established to meet the need for timely and accurate information on
implementation progress, to provide constant feedback for decision-making, and to
facilitate continuous knowledge sharing.
34. The FAPP will prepare an AWP/B for review and approval by the PSC each year. The
AWP/B will provide a detailed description of activities to be carried out during the
following year, and the sources and use of funds. To ensure that adequate
counterpart funds are budgeted, AWP/Bs will be submitted well in advance of the
Government’s annual budgeting process.
35. An integrated management information system focusing on continuous analysis of
information from different sources will be used to ensure that subsequent project
activities are more responsive to client needs and project objectives. All activities
will be monitored, with twice-yearly reports submitted to the PSC and IFAD.
Monitoring reports will highlight other MoA initiatives that may negatively affect the
marketing of agricultural products by small-scale producers.
36. The M&E function will be guided by the project’s logical framework. Where possible,
all M&E data will be disaggregated by gender. A number of key indicators will form
the basis of the monitoring system, with emphasis on outcomes and outputs. The
indicators selected for assessing performance include standard first-level, second-
level and supporting indicators from IFAD’s Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS). These indicators relate to policy and community programming,
rural enterprise development and employment, agricultural technologies and
production, and markets.
37. The FAPP will carry out or commission: (i) baseline and end-of-project impact
surveys; (ii) annual project planning and implementation reviews; (iii) participatory
impact assessment studies; (iv) a midterm review; and (v) a project completion
report. The midterm review will give special attention to the question of expanding
5
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
the project area. It will also draw the Government’s attention to any MoA
marketing programmes that may be having a negative impact on agribusiness
development and small-scale producers.
38. The project’s knowledge management strategy will focus on fostering linkages and
sharing information, knowledge and experiences among actors within communities,
value chains and institutions. Knowledge management will be rooted in the
planning and M&E system to enable continuous improvement. The FAPP will seek to
facilitate the collection, sharing and dissemination of information, lessons learned
and best practices amongst stakeholders in Fiji. A collaborative website will be
created in the IFAD Asia and the Pacific portal for online sharing.
Financial management, procurement and governance
D.
39. Financial management. Financial management arrangements for the FAPP will be
fully integrated with those in place at MoA. The project manager will have the
overall fiduciary responsibility for the project, and will be supported by a financial
management and procurement officer and a financial management and
procurement assistant integrated in MoA’s Finance and Accounts Division. The FAPP
will prepare its AWP/Bs, including procurement plans, in consultation with
implementing partners and service providers. Each year’s AWP/B will be subject to
the approval of the PSC. The FAPP will use the accounting software of MoA’s
Finance and Accounts Division – the Financial Management and Information
System. The Accounts Division will open a dedicated business unit or cost centre in
this system for recording all project-related transactions. These records will provide
the basis for preparing financial reports. The FAPP will use cash-based accounting,
in line with MoA and national requirements. The FAPP financial statements will be
prepared annually from the general ledger of MoA. The statements will contain
specific information and disclosure as required by IFAD. The FAPP’s internal
controls will rely on the Government’s accounting and internal control guidelines as
documented in local legislation. These organizational arrangements will ensure
adequate segregation of duties and the correct set-up for internal control
mechanisms.
40. Flow of funds. Through the Ministry of Finance’s Debt and Cash Flow Management
Unit, the Borrower will open and maintain a designated account in Fijian dollars
with the Reserve Bank of Fiji. IFAD will disburse funds into the designated account
following the imprest account mechanism. There will also be a project account in
Fijian dollars maintained by MoA, held in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD.
The FAPP will request the Debt and Cash Flow Management Unit for release of
funds to the project account in Fijian dollars.
41. Audit. Ministry of Finance staff deployed to the internal audit unit of MoA are
responsible for all internal audit activities under MoA. The unit will include the FAPP
in its annual internal audit plans, subjecting the FAPP to audit at least once a year.
In line with its mandate under relevant national legislation, the Auditor General is
the sole entity responsible for auditing all public funds received by government
ministries, agencies and departments. The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) will
audit the FAPP’s financial statements in accordance with International Standards on
Auditing. Should OAG delegate audit work to external firms, the firms would be
selected through a competitive bidding process. In any case, the formal and final
audit reports will be issued from OAG.
42.
Public procurement in Fiji is governed by the Procurement Regulations 2010. These
match the expectations of IFAD’s procurement guidelines. The FAPP will liaise with
the Fiji Procurement Office to effect all project procurement. As stipulated in IFAD
guidelines, the project should provide IFAD with an 18-month procurement plan,
together with the initial AWP/B. Thereafter, the FAPP will prepare an annual
procurement plan, approved by the PSC on a no objection basis.
6
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
E.
43.
Supervision
IFAD will supervise the project directly, including loan administration and the
provision of project implementation support. This will be a continuous process.
Implementation support will include collaboration in the project start-up workshop,
and support to reporting processes at project completion. Annual supervision and
support activities during implementation will be determined in the light of joint
IFAD and Government requirements, but will consist of at least one annual
supervision mission.
IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
44. Total estimated project costs are US$6.05 million over a four-year implementation
period. They include US$0.25 million of physical and price contingencies. Indicative
programme costs by component and financier are detailed in table 1.
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Euros)
Government
IFAD loan
Financing
institutions
Component
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
529 973
34.4
1 009 282
65.6
-
Beneficiaries
Total
%
-
Amount
-
%
-
Amount
%
1 539 255
25.4
1. Public-sector
capacity to
support
agribusiness
2. Assistance to
SMEs working
with
smallholders
3. Farming as a
business for
highland
communities
4. Project
implementation
support
4 120
0.2
612 585
30.2
932 642
46.0
479 979
23.7
2 029 327
33.5
50 288
3.2
1 429 368
91.3
449 329
48.9
469 072
51.1
-
-
-
-
86 176
5.5
1 565 833
25.9
-
-
918 401
15.2
Total
1 033 709
17.1
3 520 308
58.2
932 642
15.4
566 155
9.4
6 052 815
100.0
B. Project financing
45.
IFAD loan resources available amount to EUR 3.1 million (equivalent to
approximately US$3.52 million). These funds will be complemented by about
US$1 million from the Government of Fiji. Participating banks will implement the
matching grant scheme. Overall contributions from beneficiaries, primarily in terms
of equity capital in association with matching grants, are estimated at
US$0.56 million of total project costs. The project will also seek partnerships with
other donors.
7
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Euros)
Expenditure category
Amount
Amount
Amount
Amount
Government
IFAD loan
Financing institutions
Beneficiaries
Goods, services and inputsa
Consultancies
Workshops and meetingsb
Grants and subsidies
Salaries and allowancesc
Total project costs
71 816
1 551 358
-
33 672
-
928 222
1 033 710
633 112
190 806
466 321
678 712
3 520 309
a Includes equipment, materials and vehicles.
b Includes training.
c Includes operating costs.
-
-
-
86 176
13 658
-
932 642
466 321
-
-
932 642
566 155
Total
Amount
1 709 350
646 770
224 478
1 865 284
1 606 934
6 052 816
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
46. The FAPP should generate benefits for all actors involved in the production, trade,
processing and export of high-value agricultural products, and for consumers and
the country as a whole. Among the projected benefits are: (i) increased sales and
reduced transaction costs for fruit and vegetable traders, wholesalers, processors
and retailers; (ii) increased export earnings; (iii) foreign exchange savings
resulting from import substitution; and (iv) revenue inflows for the Government
from additional income tax. The project is also expected to bring about
unquantifiable nutritional and environmental benefits, while the agribusiness sector
will benefit from more supportive policies, and stronger value chains will bring
access to better-quality domestic produce.
47. Measurable outcomes will include mentoring support for approximately 45 SMEs, at
least 30 of which will also receive matching grants. Other direct beneficiaries will
be the residents of 41 villages in 7 highland districts of Viti Levu. Representative
farm and enterprise models have been constructed and have proved financially
viable under realistic assumptions.
48. An economic analysis was undertaken to calculate the project’s overall benefits to
Fiji. The base-case scenario for a 15-year period of analysis shows an economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) of 23 per cent and a net present value of
US$2.4 million, discounted at 12 per cent. This estimated EIRR can be considered
conservative, as only a few examples of project interventions were accounted for in
the benefit stream. Sensitivity analyses yielded EIRRs ranging from 16 to
27 per cent.
D. Sustainability
49. The public-sector capacity to support agribusiness that the project will achieve will
constitute one of the most important means of sustaining benefits after project
closure. MoA staff will have the analytical and operational skills to work with
private-sector players in the agriculture sector, especially on promoting the
interests of small-scale producers. Another feature designed to ensure the
sustainability of benefits is the project’s reliance on commercial banks and the
screening of investment proposals for expanding operations with small-scale
producers. This type of partnering of private-sector banks will lead to the selection
of well-designed investments by experienced entrepreneurs. Institution building at
the community level and improvement of skills in planning and production are the
grass-roots investments that will ensure sustainability of benefits for families by
enabling them to adapt, even in the face of changing market conditions. The
project will achieve environmental sustainability by introducing environmentally
friendly agronomic practices to halt the current deterioration of the agricultural
landscape.
8
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
E. Risk identification and mitigation
50. The main external risks are changes to macroeconomic conditions; reduced
government emphasis on pro-poor policies; scaling back of the Government’s
agriculture sector development programme; a policy environment that hinders the
private sector; and reluctance of private investors to commit to business
partnerships with smallholders. None of these risks appear likely to materialize in
the near term.
51. At the farmer level, there is a low to medium risk that social norms will conflict
with the farming-as-business approach. The risk will be mitigated through
awareness-raising that emphasizes sustainable additional incomes. There is a risk
that farmers will fail to produce the quantities or qualities required by crop buyers.
The project will increase extension provision and work on enhancing relationships
between farmers and traders. At the opposite extreme, if production expands
rapidly there is a risk that entrenched gender inequalities will be exacerbated if
women’s access to land for home gardens is restricted by men seeking land for
additional crop production. The project is designed to ensure the involvement of
women, strengthen women’s organizations, provide literacy and entrepreneurship
skills and monitor the impact of these and other project investments from a gender
and youth perspective.
52. Within MoA, particularly the ADU, there is a risk of staff turnover jeopardizing the
benefits of the training provided. Close dialogue will be maintained with MoA to
ensure that internal staff transfers are kept to a minimum. The delayed recruitment
of the senior agribusiness development adviser would have a negative impact on
the project. A proactive recruitment process (outlined in the project
implementation manual) should be followed, and attractive terms and conditions
have been budgeted.
53. During design of the FAPP, a financial management risk assessment was completed,
following guidelines of IFAD’s Controller’s and Financial Services Division. Overall
internal controls in MoA are reasonably robust, but there is limited experience of
managing externally funded projects and no experience of IFAD requirements.
Among the steps to be taken to mitigate possible complications arising from this
are the establishment of close contact and access to the IFAD subregional
coordinator in Suva.
V. Corporate considerations
A.
Compliance with IFAD policies
54. The design of the FAPP is aligned with the Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and all
relevant IFAD strategies and policies. These include the policies for targeting;
environment and natural resource management; supervision and implementation
support; the strategies for gender and climate change; and the Environmental and
Social Assessment Procedures. Lessons learned from IFAD’s Sub-Regional Strategic
Opportunities Paper for the Pacific Islands 2013-2017 were fully taken into account
during project design and will be incorporated into project implementation.
55. Assessments of IFAD community development interventions confirm that
empowering the poor and disenfranchised brings about concrete social and
economic returns and increases household incomes. It is important to place the
community at the centre of development initiatives. The mobilization of group
enterprises is most appropriate when groups scale up production to meet
increasing market demand and individual farmers are rewarded for their individual
efforts.
56. To ensure that project benefits reach the poor and food-insecure, target groups
have been defined, a targeting strategy has been developed, and means of
operationalizing this strategy have been integrated into design and
9
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
implementation. The project approach is geared to Fijian conditions and cultural
norms, including prevailing gender roles.
Alignment and harmonization
B.
57. The FAPP is aligned with and will be closely guided by MoA’s new policy, Fiji 2020
Agriculture Sector Policy Agenda, which aims to “build sustainable community
livelihood through competitive exports and food security”. The agenda emphasizes
the need for a farming-as-business approach and outlines ways of achieving this
end, which will be complemented by activities under the FAPP.
Innovations and scaling up
C.
58. A characteristic of recent successful operations funded by IFAD in Fiji has been the
inclusion of innovative pilot interventions with potential for scaling up. Through
these interventions, IFAD has sought to accumulate expertise and experience to
minimize risks of future project failure. Although it is too early to be certain of
sustainability, initial indications are that innovations with highland farmers have
been very successful and merit scaling up. Support to SMEs under component 2 of
the FAPP draws on the positive experiences in Fiji of allying the mentoring of SMEs
with grant financing from the Market Development Facility funded by the Australian
Agency for International Development, and on IFAD’s experience under the
Solomon Islands Rural Development Programme with matching grants for SMEs.
Policy engagement
D.
59. An important aspect of project work is to ensure a greater voice in policy
formulation for value chain stakeholders. In association with the FCLC, this will be
achieved by supporting meetings on different commodities involving all value chain
actors. These meetings will promote networking and the formation of value chain
associations that can help identify constraints and solutions, thereby making an
input into policy development. By bringing together all stakeholders, including
farmer representatives, the meetings are expected to provide value chain actors
with the opportunity to develop common positions for discussion with the
Government.
VI. Legal instruments and authority
60. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Fiji and IFAD will constitute
the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
61. The laws of the Republic of Fiji empower it to receive financing from IFAD. A copy
of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.
62.
I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.
VII. Recommendation
63.
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of
the following resolution:
RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Fiji in an amount equivalent to three million and one hundred
thousand euros (EUR 3,100,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
10
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
Negotiated financing agreement:
"Fiji Agricultural Partnership Project (FAPP)"
(Negotiations concluded on 19 February 2015)
Loan Number: [
]
Project Title: Fiji Agricultural Partnership Project (“the Project”)
The Republic of Fiji (the “Borrower”)
and
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)
(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)
hereby agree as follows:
Section A
1.
The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation  Arrangements (Schedule 1) and the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2).
2.
The  Fund’s General Conditions  for Agricultural  Development  Financing dated
29 April 2009, as  amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from
time to time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all
provisions thereof shall apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement
the terms defined in the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.
The  Fund  shall provide a  Loan to the Borrower
3.
Borrower shall use to implement
conditions of this Agreement.
the Project
(the  “Financing”), which the
in accordance with the terms and
Section B
The amount of  the Loan is
1.
(EUR 3 100 000).
three million one hundred thousand euros
2.
The Loan is granted on ordinary terms, and  shall have a  maturity period of
15 years, including a grace period of  three ( 3) years starting from the date that the
Fund has determined that all general conditions precedent to withdrawal have been
fulfilled in accordance with Section 4.02(b) of the General Conditions.
3.
4.
The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be EUR.
The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.
Payments of principal and interest shall be payable on each 15 June and
5.
15 December.
6.
There shall be a Designated Account denominated in Fijian Dollars and maintained
by the  Borrower in the Reserve Bank of Fiji through which the Loan proceeds shall be
channeled.  The Designated Account shall be protected against set-off, seizure or
11
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
attachment on terms and conditions proposed by the Borrower and accepted by the
Fund.
7.
The Borrower shall provide counterpart financing for the Project in the amount of
approximately USD 1.03 million. Project beneficiaries  shall provide a contribution in
shall
cash or kind of approximately USD 0.57 million and participating  banks
contribute  approximately USD 0.93 million. The counterpart
funds shall be made
available for the Project.
The Ministry  of  Agriculture (“MoA”) shall maintain a Project Account in local
8.
currency in a Bank acceptable to the Fund to receive the proceeds of the Financing and
counterpart funding.
Section C
The Lead Project Agency ( “LPA”) shall be the MoA, responsible for the overall
1.
coordination and implementation of the Project activities.
The following are designated as additional Project Parties: participating banks,
2.
private sector partners, non-governmental organizations and civil society groups.
The Project Completion Date shall be the fourth anniversary of the date of entry
3.
into force of this Agreement.
Section D
The Loan will be administered  and the Project supervised by the Fund. In addition to
supervision missions, which shall normally be carried out each six (6) months, the Fund
shall conduct a mid-term review out towards the second year of Project implementation.
Section E
1.
The following are designated as additional grounds for suspension:
The Project Implementation Manual (“PIM”), or any provision thereof, has been
waived, suspended, terminated, amended or modified without the prior consent of
the Fund, and the Fund has determined that such waiver, suspension, termination,
amendment or modification has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect
on the Project.
The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent
2.
withdrawal:
to
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The Borrower
Development Unit (“ADU”);
shall have established within MoA the Agribusiness
The Borrower shall have selected the relevant Project staff to be responsible
for overall Project implementation, in accordance with Schedule 1, Section II
to this Agreement;
The Borrower, through the LPA, shall have submitted, and the  Fund shall
the
have received, an official document confirming the availability of
adequate counterpart funds for the first Project Year;
The Designated  Account  shall have been duly opened, the authorized
signatories  shall have been submitted to the Fund and a dedicated cost
centre has been created in the Financial  Management  Information System
(“FMIS”) to record the Project’s related transactions; and
12
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
(e)
The Borrower has prepared a draft PIM in form and substance satisfactory
to the Fund.
3.
to
The  following is designated as  an additional  specific  condition precedent
withdrawal, namely that no withdrawals shall be made in respect of expenditures under
Category IV (Grants and Subsidies) until the Borrower, through MoA, has entered into a
memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) with at least one participating bank for the
implementation of the matching grants under Component 2, in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the MOU model defined in the PIM.
4.
This Agreement is subject to ratification by the Borrower.
The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
5.
communication related to this Agreement:
For the Borrower:
Minister for Finance
Ministry of Finance
Ro Lalabalavu House
370 Victoria Parade
P.O. Box 2212
Suva, Republic of Fiji
For the Fund:
President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono, 44
00142 Rome, Italy
This Agreement, dated [
original copies, three (3) for the Fund and three (3) for the Borrower.
], has been prepared in the English language in six (6)
REPUBLIC OF FIJI
Authorized Representative
[Title]
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
13
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
Schedule 1
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements
I.
Project Description
1.
Target Population. The Project shall benefit all small-scale and semi-subsistence
farm households  in the Borrower’s territory, with emphasis on the poor communities
located in the interior of Viti Levu in selected districts, including the seven districts of the
provinces of Ba, Nadroga/Navosa and Naitasiri (the “Project Area”).
2.
Goal. The Project goal is to reduce hardship in remote rural communities.
3.
Objective. The objective of the Project is that small-scale producers are engaged
in sustainable farming and business partnerships in remote areas, particularly the
highlands.
Components. The Project shall
4.
the following three components,
which support and complement each other to achieve the anticipated impact in the Project
Area:
consist of
Component 1 – Public sector capacity to support agribusiness
The objective of this  component is to facilitate the private agribusiness sector, address
the public environment for agribusiness, and widen and deepen agricultural value chains,
thereby expanding income-earning opportunities for small-scale farmers, through (i) the
enhancement of MoA’s institutional capacity to promote private sector agribusiness,
including, inter alia, the provision of technical assistance to consolidate and extend the
technical and managerial capacity of public sector cadres and the establishment and
initial operation of the ADU, to support the private sector and to facilitate supply chains
and the conduct of business; (ii) the upgrading through training of extension of MoA’s
staff and of selected professionals in skills in agribusiness; (iii) the refinement of the
agribusiness public sector framework, including carrying out of studies and review of the
relevant agribusiness regulation and procedures related to agricultural value chain and
foreign trade; (iv) carrying out of a value chain mapping of products grown by
smallholders; (v) the creation and operation of technical working groups to stimulate the
creation of an agribusiness network and of trade associations; and (vi) the promotion of
private sector information exchange, to promote the exchange of agribusiness know-how
and practical experiences.
Component 2 – Assistance to SMEs working with smallholders
The objective of this component is to improve the conditions of doing business with
small-scale farmers, with focus on operators buying from highland communities, through
(i) the provision of training and advisory services in business planning and management
mentoring support for the expansion of individual Small- and  Medium-sized  Enterprises
(“SMEs”); and (ii) provision of matching grants to SMEs, in accordance with the eligibility
criteria and procedures set forth in the PIM, to expand business operations of small-scale
farmers.
Component 3 – Farming as a business for highland communities
The objective of this  component is to support selected communities in the transition
from  semi-commercial agriculture to commercial agriculture,  through, inter alia, the
farm enterprise
provision of training and technical assistance on all aspects of
management,
technology transfer,
traditional
post-harvest handling, participatory certification and sustainable commercialisation of
selected products.
the  enhancement of
farming skills,
14
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
II.
Implementation Arrangements
A.
Organization and Management
1.
Lead Project Agency (“LPA”)
1.1. The LPA shall be the Ministry o f Agriculture (“MoA”), who shall have the
overall responsibility for the execution of the Project.
2.
Project Steering Committee (“PSC”)
2.1. Establishment and Composition. The Borrower, through MoA, shall establish a
PSC. The PSC shall be chaired by MoA’s Permanent Secretary  and comprise
representatives as indicated in the PIM. The PSC shall meet at least once a year and as
often as required and the ADU Project Manager shall act as secretary of the PSC.
2.2. Responsibilities. The PSC is responsible for Project oversight and strategic
guidance,  as detailed in the PIM, including: (i) approval of the AWPB and of the initial
Procurement  Plan; (ii) approval of the PIM and its subsequent revisions; (iii) vigilance
over full
transparency  and accountability  in Project management; (iv) review  and
follow-up of supervision and audit recommendations; (v) promotion of cooperation with
all development partners; and (vi) identification of policy issues for attention by  the
Borrower.
3.
Agribusiness Development Unit (“ADU”)
3.1. Establishment and Composition. An  ADU shall be established within MoA,
with structure, functions and responsibilities acceptable to the Fund and in accordance
with the PIM.  The ADU shall include the Head of the  ADU and it shall host one Project
Manager and one administrative assistant. Qualified staff shall be selected according to
the  Borrower’s applicable procedures acceptable to the Fund. Termination of
the
contract of the Project Manager and his/her replacement shall be subject to the Fund’s
no-objection.
is
3.2. Responsibilities. The  Project  Manager
Project
implementation  and coordination, including, inter alia: (i) preparation of the AWPB;
(ii) financial management; (iii) procurement; (iv) Project monitoring and evaluation
(M&E); (v) knowledge management; (vi) preparation and consolidation of SOEs, financial
statements and withdrawal applications; (vii) Project reporting; and (viii) coordination of
all Project implementing partners. The Head of the ADU is responsible for the technical
and operational day-to-day implementation of the Project, in consultation with the
Project Manager.
responsible
overall
for
4.
Project Management and Implementation Staff
Project management  and
and/or
4.1. Composition. MoA  shall
implementation support staff within the relevant MoA departments, including a Financial
Management and Procurement Officer, a Knowledge Management/M&E Officer and
an Assistant to the Financial Management and Procurement Officer. Qualified staff shall
be selected according to the Borrower’s applicable procedures acceptable to the Fund.
appoint
recruit
4.2. Responsibilities. The Project  management and implementation support staff is
responsible for management and implementation  of the Project under the direction of
the PSC and of the ADU.
15
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
5. MOUs with Participating Banks
5.1. To collaborate with and facilitate the award of matching grants under
Component 2,  MoA shall enter into  a MOU, in form and substance as set forth in the
PIM, with each participating bank selected in accordance with eligibility and selection
criteria defined in the PIM. The MOU shall provide, amongst other things, the obligation
of the participating banks to (i) inform the LPA of loans approved in accordance  with
their own lending criteria that also qualify for matching grants,
in accordance with
the eligibility  criteria for matching grants defined in the PIM; and (ii) provide the
required support to channel the matching grants to the matching grant beneficiaries, in
accordance with the procedures defined in the PIM and the terms and conditions of the
MOU. Payment of matching grants shall be made by the Project
through the
participating banks.
B.
Implementation of Components
6.
Component 1: Public sector capacity to support agribusiness
6.1. Capacity building of MoA staff and the ADU shall be through the staff
learning-by-doing,  with on-the-job  advice from a full-time Senior Agribusiness
Development Advisor (“SADA”), to be selected and contracted in accordance  with this
Agreement  and increased by participation in suitable training provided by other
institutions. Training of extension officers in agricultural marketing, agribusiness and
value chains  shall be  conducted by the SADA, ADU staff and specialist trainers
contracted in accordance  with this Agreement. The ADU will be responsible for
strengthening MoA’s commodity councils  and work with the  Fiji  Crop  and  Livestock
Council (“FCLC”) to strengthen its constituent associations.
7.
Component 2: Assistance to SMEs working with smallholders
7.1. Project activities under this component will be implemented by the ADU and
service providers with business mentoring skills, contracted in accordance  with this
the
Agreement. The ADU shall carry out a widespread promotion campaign of
mentoring  scheme to SMEs and establish a small committee to review  all applications
for mentoring  support. Selected participating banks  shall receive loan applications,
evaluate and deliver loans to approved beneficiaries in accordance with the procedures
defined in the PIM and the terms and conditions of the relevant MOU.
8.
Component 3: Farming as a business for highland communities
this  component  shall be  carried out
through service
8.1. The  activities under
agreements with a competent Lead Implementing Partner (“LIP”) to be selected in
accordance with the criteria specified in the PIM and, for specific deliverables, with
other specialized service providers. All under the technical supervision of the SADA and
with  field coordination by the LIP, MoA field staff, to be contracted in accordance with
this  Agreement, and the community facilitators. The LIP shall be responsible  for
overall coordination  of  the implementation of the entire component.  Consultants  and
specialists  shall be contracted to provide training on basic business skills and financial
literacy,  support to traditional  marketing practices by women, technology transfer and
organic certification.
16
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
C.
Project Implementation Manual (“PIM”)
Preparation. The MoA shall prepare a draft PIM which shall include, among other
9.
things:
(a)
Terms of reference  and implementation responsibilities of  Project staff,
consultants and likely service providers;
(b) Criteria  for
the performance  appraisal of
the Project and of  Project
professional staff;
(c)
Eligibility criteria for the matching grants;
(d) Operational procedures to be followed in the matching grants scheme;
(e) A model of the MOU to be entered into by the selected participating banks
for the implementation of the matching grants;
(f) M&E
system and
procedures
including
the
Results
and
Impact
Management System (“RIMS”); and
(g)
Project operational, financial and procurement procedures.
10. Approval and Adoption. The LPA, shall forward the draft PIM to the  Fund for
comments and approval. The LPA shall adopt the PIM,  substantially in the form
approved by the Fund, and the LPA shall promptly provide copies thereof to the Fund.
If the Fund does not comment on the draft  PIM within thirty (30) days after receipt, it
shall be deemed approved.
17
Annex
EB 2015/LOT/P.6/Rev.1
Schedule 2
Allocation Table
Allocation of Loan Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the Categories of
1.
Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and the allocation of the amounts of the
Loan to each Category and the percentages of expenditures for items to be financed in
each Category:
Category
Loan Amount Allocated
(expressed in EUR)
Percentage
I-
Goods, Services and
Inputs
1 240 000
100% net of taxes and
contribution from beneficiaries
II-
Consultancies
500 000
100% net of taxes and
contribution from beneficiaries
III- Workshops
150 000
100% net of taxes
IV- Grants and Subsidies
370 000
V-
Salaries and allowances
540 000
Unallocated
TOTAL
300 000
3 100 000
100% net of taxes,
contribution from Financing
Institutions and contribution
from beneficiaries
100% net of taxes and
contribution from Borrower
(b)
The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:
include eligible
“Goods, Services  and Inputs” under  Category I  shall
expenditures incurred for equipment, materials and vehicles, net of taxes,
under all components.
“Consultancies”
eligible
expenditures of Component 2 and 100% of eligible expenditures under other
components.
Category II
90% of
include
under
shall
“Workshops” under Category III shall include 100% of eligible expenditures
incurred for workshops and training, net of taxes, under Component 1 and
others listed under ‘project implementation support’.
“Grants and Subsidies” under Category IV shall
expenditures under Component 2.
include  25% of eligible
“Salaries and allowances” under Category V shall
expenditures under Component 1 only.
include 100% of eligible
2.
Start-up Costs. Withdrawals in respect of expenditures for start-up costs  for
Categories I,  II,  III  and  V incurred before the  satisfaction of the general conditions
precedent to withdrawal shall not exceed an aggregate amount of EUR 100 000.
18
Logical framework
Narrative Summary
Goal:
Reduced hardship in remote rural communities.
Project Development Objective:
Small-scale producers are engaged in sustainable
farming and business partnerships in remote
areas, particularly the highlands.
Outcome 1: Public sector capacity to support
agribusiness.
Enhanced MoA capacity to promote private sector
agribusiness.
Outputs:
Agribusiness Development Unit (ADU) in
Ministry of Agriculture
1
Five well-trained agribusiness staff promoting
private sector agricultural development
Key Performance Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions (A) / Risks (R)
Improvement of at least 20% in Household assets
ownership.
Impact Survey at
completion.
Continued GoF commitment to
poverty reduction. (A)
920 households in the highlands regularly marketing
agricultural outputs to trading or processing enterprises.
Impact Survey at
completion.
Traders, processors, exporters and farmers rate Ministry
of Agriculture highly as a partner that enables growth of
agriculture as a business.
Progress reports.
Baseline, mid-term and
completion surveys.
GoF policies support private
sector-led economic growth. (A)
Agribusiness Unit is created and fully staffed with
provisions for operating budget that are routinely
included in annual MOA budget submission
On-the-job training delivered by Senior Agribusiness
Development Officer to at least 5 qualified MoA for
more than 2 years.
 MOA budget and
organigram
Presence of trained
staff in unit
Progress report
Circulated minutes of
meetings
Delayed recruitment of
Senior Agribusiness
Development Adviser. (R)
GoF remains committed to
creating a conducive
environment for
agribusiness. (A)
150 trained extension staff better able to advise
small farmers and small enterprises on
agribusiness and related issues.
 Working partnerships between ADU, MOA the
Fiji Chamber of Commerce and the Fiji Crop
and Livestock Council
Training delivered to 150 extension workers on staff
in MOA on promoting agribusiness partnerships and
farming as a business.
 Monthly meetings between partners to raise issues
and exchange ideas on farming and agricultural
business
Outcome 2: Assistance to SMEs working with
smallholders.
Strengthened linkages between SMEs and rural
agricultural producers.
30 viable enterprises are procuring agricultural
products from 3 000 domestic producers presently
not well served by private sector.
45 enterprises accessing non-financial services
facilitated by the project.
RIMS surveys.
Case studies.
Private investors interested in
business partnerships with
smallholders. (A)
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
E
B
2
0
1
5
/
L
O
T
/
P
.
6
/
R
e
v
.
1













Narrative Summary
Outputs:
Key Performance Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions (A) / Risks (R)
 Mentoring programme for SMEs established.
45 enterprises have completed the SME mentoring
programme.
Grants and loans being awarded to SMEs.
30 matching grants awarded to SMEs.
Outcome 3: Farming as a business for highland
communities.
Reorientation of highland farmers from subsistence to
production for profit.
920 highland farm households are newly engaged in
profitable marketing of agricultural products.
Progress reports from
service providers.
Project MIS.
Reports from banks.
Project MIS
Progress reports.
Case studies.
RIMS surveys.
Private investors interested
in business partnerships
with smallholders. (A)
Private investors interested
in business partnerships
with smallholders. (A)
Economic and social
stability in target area. (A)
GoF prepared to partner
specialist service
providers. (A)
Continued maintenance of
roads in highland areas to
present standards. (A)
2
Outputs:
Highland communities preparing annual plans
for Environmental & Natural Resource
Management.
Farm household members reporting increased
income from commercial farming activities.
Farm household members that have adopted
environmentally sound and sustainable
production practices and technologies.
920 people using crates or adopting new post-
production practices in processing and
marketing.
26highland communities trained by the project in the
preparation of annual Community Development
Plans.
500 men and 300 women market vendors report
have received training in agribusiness and
entrepreneurship for "farming as a business" .
920 farm household members trained in
environmentally sound and sustainable crop
production practices and technologies.
Progress reports.
Reports from service
providers.
Preparatory studies.
920 farm households trained in use of crates and/or
other new post-production practices.
Project MIS.
Facilitated grower-buyer meetings to identify
success factors and make deals.
At least 920 farm households or farmers’ groups
having a stable business relationship with a trader.
Planting material supply enterprises (including
organic) in the highlands.
At least 11 commercial nurseries established in the
highlands.
Participatory Guarantee Systems (PGSs)
established for three crop groups.
400 farmers benefit from organic and wild harvest
certification.
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
E
B
2
0
1
5
/
L
O
T
/
P
.
6
/
R
e
v
.
1


































