Document: 
Date: 
Distribution: 
Original: 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
17 September 2020 
Public 
English 
E 
President’s report 
Proposed loan 
Republic of Ghana 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and 
Food Systems Exposed to COVID-19 
Project ID: 2000003387 
Note to Executive Board representatives 
Focal points: 
Dispatch of documentation: 
Deirdre Mc Grenra 
Chief 
Institutional Governance and 
Member Relations 
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2374 
e-mail: gb@ifad.org 
Technical questions: 
Lisandro Martin 
Regional Director 
West and Central Africa Division 
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2388  
e-mail: lisandro.martin@ifad.org 
Hani Abdelkader Elsadani Salem 
Country Director 
Tel.: +233 55 255 9489 
e-mail: h.elsadani@ifad.org 
For: Approval 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
ii 
iii 
1 
Contents 
Map of the project area 
Financing summary 
I. 
Context 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement .............................1 
II.  Project description 
3 
A.   Objectives, geographical area of intervention and target groups .............3 
B.  Components, outcomes and activities ..................................................4 
C.  Theory of change ..............................................................................6 
D.  Alignment, ownership and partnerships ...............................................6 
E.  Costs, benefits and financing ..............................................................6 
III.  Risks 
8 
A.  Risks and mitigation measures ...........................................................8 
B.  Environmental and social category ......................................................8 
C.  Climate risk classification ...................................................................8 
D.  Debt sustainability ............................................................................9 
IV.  Implementation 
9 
A.  Organizational framework ..................................................................9 
B.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning, knowledge  
  management and communications ......................................................9 
C.  Implementation plans ...................................................................... 10 
V. 
Legal instruments and authority 
VI.  Recommendation 
10 
10 
Appendices 
I.   Negotiated financing agreement 
II.   Logical framework 
Project delivery team 
Regional Director: 
Country Director 
Technical Lead: 
Finance Officer: 
Climate and Environment Specialist: 
Legal Officer: 
Lisandro Martin 
Hani Abdelkader Elsadani Salem 
Mylene Kherallah 
Ebele Ikezogwo 
Rahul Antao 
Itziar Garcia Villanueva 
i 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
AWP/B 
ESRF 
FAO 
FBO 
GASIP 
M&E 
MoFA 
ORMS 
PCU 
PFJ 
REP 
SDG 
SERRP 
WFP 
annual workplan and budget 
Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed to 
COVID-19 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
farmer-based organization 
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme 
monitoring and evaluation 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
Operational and Results Management System 
project coordination unit 
Planting for Food and Jobs 
Rural Enterprises Programme 
Sustainable Development Goal 
socio-economic response and recovery plan 
World Food Programme 
ii 
Map of the project area 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4  
iii 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Financing summary 
Initiating institution: 
IFAD 
Borrower/recipient: 
Republic of Ghana 
Executing agency: 
Total project cost: 
Amount of IFAD loan: 
Terms of IFAD loan:  
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
US$41.5 million 
US$20 million  
50 per cent highly concessional and 50 per cent blend 
terms 
Cofinancier:  
World Food Programme (WFP) 
Amount of cofinancing: 
Terms of cofinancing:  
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO) 
Government of Canada 
WFP: US$2.0 million 
FAO: US$0.4 million 
Government of Canada: US$2.6 million 
The partners will implement their activities in parallel 
with the Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and 
Food Systems Exposed to COVID-19 (ESRF) 
initiative, will target the same geographical areas and 
will benefit the ESRF target group.  
Contribution of borrower/recipient: 
US$5.2 million 
Contribution of beneficiaries: 
US$11.2 million 
iv 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4  
Recommendation for approval 
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation contained in 
paragraph 55. 
I.  Context 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
National context 
COVID-19’s impact on the IFAD target group. Currently, Ghana is among the 
countries with the highest number of COVID-19 cases in Western Africa. The 
number of cases has grown rapidly from 2,014 cases on 1 May 2020 to 43,094 
cases on 19 August 2020. The disease has spread to all regions of the country and 
has triggered an economic slowdown. The most recent estimate of the 
International Monetary Fund is that GDP growth will drop to 1.5 per cent for 2020, 
resulting in a decline in per capita income and an increase in poverty. The  
COVID-19 crisis began just when the planting season was starting. The increasing 
strain on the national budget and drop in revenue could reduce the planned 
investments in the agricultural sector, resulting in threats to crop production, food 
security and rural agribusiness linkages.  
Crop production. The threat to crop production during the crisis and recovery 
period arises from: (i) the Government’s budgetary constraints, which diminish its 
ability to support subsidy programmes for the poor; (ii) disruptions in agricultural 
input supply chains (seeds, fertilizers); (iii) disruptions in marketing linkages, 
limiting the timely sale of produce and causing cash shortages for smallholder 
families; (iv) limited access to extension services as a consequence of restrictions 
on public gatherings; and (v) external price shocks that are reducing the capacity 
of the market to offtake farmers’ harvests. 
Food insecurity. The possibility of food insecurity, nutrition deficiencies and 
hunger during the crisis and recovery period stems from: (i) the threat posed to 
the production of field crops and vegetables; (ii) the rise in food prices caused by 
artificial shortages and the closure and/or limitation of the maximum number of 
people allowed inside food outlets; and (iii) cash shortages that limit people’s 
ability to purchase sufficient and nutritious food.  
Agribusiness. Under the current circumstances, there is a risk that agribusinesses 
may be hesitant to develop or intensify their marketing linkages with smallholders 
owing to: (i) demand uncertainties resulting from the potential shift in consumers’ 
dietary habits; (ii) potential reductions in output and profits due to the economic 
slowdown; and (iii) working capital shortages.  
Impact on IFAD projects. IFAD supports two ongoing operations in Ghana: the 
Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (GASIP) and the Rural 
Enterprises Programme (REP). There is also a newly approved project, the 
Affordable Agricultural Financing for Resilient Rural Development Project, and 
another – Promoting Rural Opportunities, Sustainable Profits and Environmental 
Resilience – is now at the concept stage. Most ongoing or upcoming  
IFAD-supported operations are focusing on developing value chain linkages 
between input suppliers, agribusinesses and targeted households. The current 
disruptions can weaken the position of all value chain stakeholders, make them 
risk-averse and diminish their ability to partner with the Fund, thus interfering with 
the progress of the above-mentioned operations.  
6. 
The Government’s response to the crisis. The Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
(MoFA) intends to supply and subsidize improved seeds and fertilizers to 1.2 million 
farmers through its Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) programme in order to support 
immediate crop production and mitigate food insecurity risks. Over the last few 
1 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4  
years, the PFJ has made clear progress in increasing staple food production 
(e.g. rice, maize and soya) by supplying improved inputs, strengthening extension 
services and facilitating marketing linkages. Additionally, to mitigate the impact of 
the crisis on rural youth, MoFA plans to supply young producers with poultry and 
small ruminant production inputs (breeding stock, feed, medicines) through the 
Youth in Agriculture Programme.  
Special aspects relating to IFAD’s corporate mainstreaming priorities 
7.  Gender and social inclusion. Since more women than men tend to engage in 
informal work and vulnerable forms of employment, they can potentially be left out 
of formal social protection measures targeted at workers. Quarantine measures can 
also put women at a heightened risk of violence in the home, since they are cut off 
from protection services and social networks. Census figures indicate that 
3 per cent of the population of the country has some form of disability. Many 
persons with disabilities have specific underlying conditions that make COVID-19 
more dangerous for them, and they may find it harder to keep active and healthy 
during the COVID-19 crisis, especially if they live in low-income households 
impacted by food insecurity and nutritional deficits. 
8. 
Youth. The Government of Ghana defines “youth” as people from 15 to 35 years of 
age. The country has a youth bulge, with 57 per cent of the total population below 
the age of 25. The lack of employment opportunities in rural areas has resulted in 
an increase in youth migration from rural to urban areas, and COVID-19-related 
rural youth unemployment is likely to increase. At the same time, job losses in 
urban areas have triggered an inflow of unemployed youth from urban to rural 
areas, which is also likely to drive up rural unemployment levels. 
9.  Nutrition. Overall, 6.1 per cent of the population was undernourished in 2017. 
Loss of livelihoods and income as a consequence of COVID-19 and the limitation of 
access to fresh foods and food markets may reduce the intake of nutrient-rich 
foods. Under conditions of food insecurity, girls and women may reduce their intake 
of nutrient-rich foods and calories in order to leave more for boys and men. At the 
same time, the disruption of supply chains for nutrient-rich food and cash 
shortages can undermine people’s nutritional status.  
10.  Climate and environment. The average annual temperature in Ghana has risen 
by 1.0° C since 1960. The number of hot days per year has increased by 
13.2 per cent, while the number of hot nights per year has increased by 
20 per cent. Experts have projected that rising temperatures will lower the yields of 
major staple crops. Delayed or diminished rains in Ghana’s northern areas are 
likely to cause total crop failure approximately once every five years. Smallholder 
and subsistence farmers are particularly vulnerable, as they are more exposed to 
pest and disease outbreaks, droughts (especially in northern Ghana) and extreme 
weather events, which reduce production and increase food insecurity.  
Rationale for IFAD involvement 
11.  A serious threat to crop production and food security and the risk of 
increased poverty. The COVID-19 crisis has heightened the risk of poor harvests 
and the threat of food insecurity and poverty among vulnerable groups. The 
pandemic has also reduced the flow of remittances to rural areas, exacerbating 
cash shortages that can leave households without enough money to buy food. An 
International Food Policy Research Institute assessment indicates that household 
income losses resulting from the initial economic disruptions caused by COVID-19 
are already substantial, ranging from 19.8 per cent for the poorest households to 
29.8 per cent for the wealthiest. That assessment also estimates that income 
losses could cause around 3.8 million Ghanaians to become temporarily poor. Many 
vulnerable households will remain economically weakened over the next  
6-12 months, and they will need support to recover, re-engage and restore their 
productive capacities and income levels.  
2 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4  
12.  IFAD’s deep concern about the well-being, livelihoods and food security of 
poor people. IFAD has designed a response framework for channelling urgent 
support to Member States though the Rural Poor Stimulus Facility and by 
repurposing some funding, providing additional financing and organizing 
emergency operations. The Government of Ghana has already formulated a 
strategy for supporting rural households and has requested IFAD to support 
emergency operations to mitigate the threats to production and to the food 
security and livelihoods of the rural poor and persons with disabilities. 
13.  Threat to the progress of other IFAD projects. The crisis may make 
agribusinesses risk-averse and may lead them to reduce their contractual linkages 
with smallholders (e.g. for pre-financing crop production and buying produce). This 
situation can adversely impact smallholders’ market participation and their access 
to finance, technology and support for institutional strengthening. This may hinder 
the progress of IFAD projects that are structured around developing, expanding 
and intensifying the commercial linkages between agribusinesses and target 
households.  
14.  IFAD’s capacity to provide a fast-track response. IFAD is well placed to 
deliver fast-track responses to smallholders and vulnerable groups. IFAD has a 
proven track record in Ghana in building resilience and social cohesion in rural 
areas, promoting leadership and proactive roles for women and strengthening rural 
youth employment opportunities. IFAD leads the donors’ agricultural coordination 
group and is in a strong position to pursue collaborative donor initiatives in 
complementary areas. The GASIP project coordination unit (PCU), which will also 
implement the Emergency Support to Rural Livelihoods and Food Systems Exposed 
to COVID-19 (ESRF), can capitalize on its existing network to fast-track ESRF 
implementation. 
15.  Ownership and sustainability of results. The ESRF will partner with the existing 
rural development programmes of MoFA, such as the PFJ initiative and the Youth in 
Agriculture Programme, to deliver crop inputs and small ruminants to the 
beneficiaries. It will also collaborate with other partners in implementing different 
project activities. For example, it will work with the World Food Programme (WFP) 
to implement cash transfer and nutrition support activities using existing WFP 
platforms. Building on the proven delivery mechanisms of existing 
projects/initiatives will enable the ESRF to achieve quick results by supporting 
existing solutions. These partnerships will also promote the ownership and 
sustainability of the results achieved. 
II.  Project description 
A.  Objectives, geographical area of intervention and target 
groups 
16.  Goal. The ESRF will help to protect the livelihoods and incomes and to build the 
resilience of the target groups suffering from the impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic and climate change. 
17.  Objective. The ESRF will mitigate the threats to production, food security and 
market access posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change. 
18.  Expected results. The ESRF’s expected results are: (i) targeted households will 
maintain or increase their production, food security and climate change resilience 
relative to their pre-COVID-19 situation; and (ii) targeted households will maintain 
or increase their market linkages, sales volumes and income levels from market 
participation relative to their pre-COVID-19 situation. 
19.  Project duration. The ESRF’s duration is 18 months. 
20.  Project outreach. The ESRF will provide services to 50,000 direct beneficiaries in 
25,000 households. The group of beneficiaries will include equal proportions of 
3 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4  
women, men and youth. Persons with disabilities will constitute 5 per cent of the 
target group.  
21.  Geographical area of intervention. The ESRF will be implemented at the 
national level. Its national scope is consistent with the current spread of COVID-19 
to almost all regions.  
22.  Value chain support. The ESRF will support investments mainly for maize, rice, 
soya bean, root and tuber, and small ruminant value chains. Its investments could 
be expanded to include other value chains, such as those for fruits and vegetables, 
based on local opportunities. Tree crops will be supported through extension work 
and marketing activities. 
23.  Target groups. The direct target group will comprise smallholders, youth, women 
and persons with disabilities. The smallholders included in this group will come 
from vulnerable semi-subsistence households that have up to 2 ha of cultivable 
land and that are at risk of a decline in production, food shortages and nutritional 
deficiencies as a result of the crisis. Some 50 per cent of the project target group 
will be composed of rural youth between 18 and 35 years of age and young people 
who are migrating back from urban areas to their villages because they have lost 
their jobs. Women, including women heads of household and young mothers with 
children under 5 years of age, will comprise 50 per cent of the target group. 
Disadvantaged persons with disabilities will comprise 5 per cent of the target 
group. This segment of the group will include persons with disabilities from the 
poorest families experiencing major difficulties in keeping active and healthy during 
the COVID-19 crisis. 
24.  Targeting strategy. The ESRF will select beneficiaries by applying a combination 
of geographical targeting, self-targeting and direct targeting mechanisms. 
Geographical targeting will be used to identify areas with a higher concentration of 
vulnerable groups and higher climate change vulnerabilities. In the GASIP areas, 
the beneficiaries of that ongoing programme have developed linkages to input 
suppliers and will be eligible for ESRF services other than crop input supplies.  
Self-targeting will involve restricting the extent of ESRF assistance to levels that 
are relevant and of interest only to poor target households. For example, the 
subsidy for inputs offered to households with a maximum of 2 ha of cultivable land 
will be too small to attract better-off farmers looking for larger support packages. 
Direct targeting will include cash transfers to vulnerable people such as women 
heads of household.  
B.  Components, outcomes and activities 
25.  The project will have the following components: (i) protecting against hunger and 
building resilient livelihoods; (ii) safeguarding rural marketing linkages and food 
security.  
Component 1: Protecting against hunger and building resilient livelihoods 
26.  This component will support the efforts of targeted households to maintain or 
increase their production levels, food security, defences against the COVID-19 
pandemic and climate change resilience by providing access to quality agricultural 
inputs and ICT-driven extension services. It will make targeted households less 
vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic by reducing their food insecurity and 
nutritional deficiencies. It will also support income-generating activities aimed at 
increasing their cash flow and supporting diversified sources of food and nutrition. 
27.  Subcomponent 1.1: Secured access to agricultural inputs and food. This 
subcomponent will: (i) provide 35,000 beneficiaries with timely access to 
subsidized inputs, in collaboration with the Government’s PFJ programme, to help 
them increase production levels; (ii) support 5,000 vulnerable beneficiaries, 
including persons with disabilities, with direct cash transfers and nutritional 
support, in collaboration with WFP, to overcome hunger and prevent nutritional 
4 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4  
deficiencies; (iii) carry out market surveillance, in coordination with WFP in 
relevant districts, to ensure the smooth supply of food items at a fair price; 
(iv) help to prevent the spread of COVID-19 by disseminating awareness messages 
and supplying protective equipment; and (v) strengthen ICT-driven extension 
services to overcome the challenges posed to conventional extension services by 
the COVID-19 pandemic. These activities will be implemented in coordination with 
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) early warning 
and market surveillance e-systems and e-extension initiatives and the support 
being provided by the Government of Canada to MoFA to strengthen its capacity to 
offer digital extension services. 
28.  Subcomponent 1.2: Income-generating activities and diversification of the 
food and nutrient supply. This subcomponent will support income-generating 
activities aimed at increasing the incomes and diversifying the sources of food and 
nutrition of targeted households. It will support 6,000 women and youth with 
subsidized breeding stock, inputs (feed, vaccines, etc.) and medicines for poultry 
and small ruminant production. The ESRF will coordinate the implementation of 
these activities with FAO’s upcoming project on developing the resilience of 
smallholder farmers by diversifying their livelihoods into such activities as poultry 
and small ruminant production. These activities will also improve the nutritional 
status of target groups by increasing their protein intake.  
29.  The ESRF will also provide support for the participation of 1,750 women and youth 
in income-generating activities related to food processing, conservation and 
preservation (e.g. root and tuber processing). This support will be provided in 
coordination with WFP and will include training, capacity-building and the supply of 
small equipment (e.g. dryers, canners, blenders), as preserved food can easily be 
used as a supplementary source of nutrition during food crises. The ESRF will 
coordinate with FAO’s upcoming project on household nutrition in response to 
COVID-19 to educate targeted households about healthy nutritional diets and 
backyard gardening. The ESRF will also collaborate with the Government of 
Canada’s initiative to help MoFA to strengthen its capacity to support food 
preservation and conservation activities for smallholders.  
Component 2: Safeguarding rural marketing linkages and food security 
30.  This component will provide support to help targeted households to maintain or 
increase their market linkages with other value chain actors. The ESRF will connect 
the target group up with a range of output marketing options and will also support 
the use of digital marketing platforms. 
31.  Subcomponent 2.1: Support for output marketing linkages. Under 
subcomponent 2.1, the National Food Buffer Stock Company, the Ghana 
Commodity Exchange and agribusinesses will be provided with an incentive in the 
form of working capital for use in buying surplus stock from 25,000 beneficiaries, 
including distressed smallholder producers of roots, tubers and tree crops who are 
facing marketing challenges. The ESRF will reimburse these marketing partners for 
25 per cent of the amounts they pay to purchase surplus stock from ESRF target 
households. In coordination with WFP, the ESRF will facilitate output marketing 
agreements between beneficiaries and marketing partners, training and capacity-
building for beneficiaries in relation to the use of production technologies and post-
harvest practices needed to meet the product quality standards required by their 
marketing partners.  
32.  Subcomponent 2.2: Support for digital marketing platforms. The ESRF, in 
coordination with WFP, will help to build the digital marketing capacities of  
farmer-based organizations (FBOs), strengthen their self-reliance in conducting 
marketing activities and diversify their output markets. The ESRF will partner with 
existing digital marketing platforms to support capacity-building for farmers and 
their integration into existing marketing platforms. The ESRF activities in this 
5 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4  
connection will be limited to providing targeted households with introductory 
exposure to digital marketing initiatives, however. Then, based on the interest and 
initiative demonstrated by targeted households, future IFAD project(s) will provide 
follow-up support to strengthen these achievements. The ESRF will collaborate with 
the Government of Canada’s ongoing programme for strengthening MoFA’s capacity 
to support digital marketing opportunities for farmers and farmers’ organizations.  
C.  Theory of change 
33.  Component 1 will support crop and livestock input supply, ICT-driven extension 
services, cash transfers, food rations delivery, COVID-19-related awareness 
campaigns, supplies of personal protective equipment and income-generating 
activities. These activities will help targeted households to maintain or increase 
their production, food security and defences against COVID-19. Component 2 will 
support crop marketing, income assurance and access to digital marketing 
platforms, which will improve the beneficiaries’ market linkages. The outputs of the 
two components will support progress towards the ESRF’s objective of mitigating 
the threats to production, food security, market access and health posed by the 
COVID-19 pandemic and climate change. 
D.  Alignment, ownership and partnerships 
34.  Alignment and ownership. The ESRF is aligned with Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG) 1 (no poverty), SDG 2 (zero hunger) and SDG 5 (gender equality), the 
development strategies of the Government of Ghana and IFAD’s Strategic 
Framework 2016-2025. The project interventions will help sustain gains made 
under the current and previous country strategic opportunities programmes with 
Ghana. The ESRF will also dovetail with the Government’s agricultural plan in 
response to COVID-19, which spans the period from June 2020 to December 2021. 
In addition, the ESRF will build on United Nations crisis response mechanisms, 
including the United Nations Country Team COVID‐19 Strategic Preparedness and 
Response Plan and the socio-economic response and recovery plan (SERRP) for 
Ghana. More specifically, the ESRF aligns with the proposed SERRP pillar 2 
(protecting people, social protection and basic services) and pillar 3 (protecting 
jobs and economic recovery) of the plan. 
35.  Synergies and partnerships. The ESRF will partner with MoFA’s PFJ programme 
to supply subsidized inputs and purchases of surplus produce from beneficiaries. 
Further, it will coordinate with WFP to carry out cash transfer activities, provide 
nutrition support to the target group, conduct output marketing surveillance, 
support income-generating activities, promote smallholders’ output marketing 
linkages and build FBO digital marketing capacity. The ESRF will also coordinate 
with upcoming FAO projects on market surveillance, e-extension development, 
smallholder livelihood diversification, backyard gardening and nutrition education. 
Additionally, the ESRF will coordinate with the Government of Canada’s initiative to 
provide support to MoFA for its efforts to strengthen digital extension services, food 
preservation and conservation activities, and digital marketing opportunities for 
FBOs. 
E.  Costs, benefits and financing 
36.  Project costs: The total cost of the ESRF is estimated at US$41.5 million. 
Component 1, “Protecting against hunger and building resilient livelihoods”, will 
require US$33.7 million (81.0 per cent), while component 2, “Safeguarding rural 
marketing linkages and food security”, will account for US$7.1 million (17.2 per 
cent). Component 3, “Project management, monitoring and evaluation”, is 
budgeted at US$0.7 million (1.8 per cent). 
6 
Table 1  
Project cost by component, subcomponent and financier 
(Millions of United States dollars) 
Component/subcomponent 
1. Protecting against hunger and building resilient livelihoods 
  1.1. Secured access to agricultural inputs and food supply 
  1.2. Income-generating activities and diversification of food and nutrition supply 
Subtotal 
2. Safeguarding rural marketing linkages and food security 
  2.1. Support for output marketing linkages 
  2.2. Support for digital marketing platforms  
Subtotal 
3. Project management, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
  3.1. Coordination and M&E 
Total project costs 
Table 2 
Project costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Millions of United States dollars) 
7
Expenditure category 
I. Investment costs 
  A. Equipment and materials 
Equipment 
Goods 
Subtotal (equipment and materials) 
  B. Agricultural inputs and produce 
  C. Services 
National technical assistance 
Training 
Workshops 
Consultancies 
Subtotal services 
  D. Social and financial support to households 
Grants 
Total investment costs 
II. Recurrent costs 
  A. Salaries 
  B. Operation and maintenance 
Total recurrent costs 
Total project costs 
IFAD 
WFP 
FAO 
Government 
of Canada 
Government  
of Ghana 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Amount 
%  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount 
%  Amount 
%  Amount 
% 
13 828 
3 808 
17 636 
1 543 
136 
1 679 
54.8 
45.2 
52.4 
25.4 
12.9 
23.5 
1 766  7.0 
200  2.4 
1 965  5.8 
210  0.8 
206  2.4 
416  1.2 
1 424  5.6 
417  4.9 
1 841  5.5 
139 
450 
590 
7 887  31.2  25 254 
0.6 
5.3 
8 430 
3 349  39.7 
1.8  11 236  33.4  33 683 
48  0.8 
9  0.9 
57  0.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
803  76.3 
803  11.3 
4 492  73.8 
105  10.0 
4 597  64.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6 083 
1 053 
7 136 
685 
20 000 
92.2 
48.1 
- 
- 
2 022  4.9 
- 
- 
416  1.0 
- 
- 
2 644  6.4 
IFAD 
WFP 
FAO 
Government 
of Canada 
Amount 
%  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount  %  Amount 
Government 
of Ghana 
Beneficiaries 
%  Amount  % 
58 
743 
5 245  12.6  11 236  27.0  41 562 
7.8 
- 
- 
60.8 
20.3 
81.0 
14.6 
2.5 
17.2 
1.8 
100.0 
- 
- 
1 496  25.0 
1 496  24.0 
15 059  55.8 
1 434  32.9 
91  20.4 
68  95.0 
73  90.0 
1 666  33.6 
40  16.5 
- 
0.6 
0.7 
- 
40 
200 
178 
- 
- 
- 
178 
4.1 
- 
- 
- 
3.6 
1 506  48.4 
19 726  47.8 
1 604  51.6 
4.9 
2 022 
181  100.0 
93  88.7 
274  95.8 
20 000  48.1 
- 
- 
- 
2 022 
- 
- 
- 
4.9 
- 
- 
- 
101 
- 
- 
- 
0.4 
210 
4.8 
105  23.5 
- 
- 
6.3 
- 
- 
315 
- 
416 
- 
- 
- 
416 
- 
1.0 
- 
- 
- 
1.0 
168  69.4 
- 
2.7 
- 
- 
168 
- 
2 263  51.9 
212  47.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 475  49.9 
- 
2 644 
- 
- 
- 
2 644 
- 
6.4 
- 
- 
- 
6.4 
34  14.1 
4 487  75.0 
4 521  72.6 
- 
- 
- 
1.4  11 236  41.6 
- 
- 
- 
384 
6.4 
277 
8.8 
39 
4 
5.0 
8  10.0 
6.6 
328 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5 233  12.7  11 236  27.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
12  11.3 
4.2 
12 
- 
- 
- 
5 245  12.6  11 236  27.0 
- 
- 
- 
Total 
Amount 
% 
243 
5 983 
6 225 
26 979 
4 362 
447 
72 
81 
4 962 
0.6 
14.4 
15.0 
64.9 
10.5 
1.1 
0.2 
0.2 
11.9 
3 110 
41 276 
7.5 
99.3 
181 
105 
286 
0.4 
0.3 
0.7 
41 562  100.0 
E
B
2
0
2
0
/
1
3
0
/
V
.
B
.
C
.
4
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Table 3 
Project cost by component, subcomponent and project year 
(Millions of United States dollars) 
Component/subcomponent 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Total 
1. Protecting against hunger and building resilient livelihoods 
  1.1. Secured access to agricultural inputs and food supply 
  1.2. Income-generating activities and diversification of food and nutrition supply 
Subtotal 
2. Safeguarding rural marketing linkages and food security 
  2.1. Support for output marketing linkages 
  2.2. Support for digital marketing platforms  
Subtotal  
3. Project management, and monitoring and evaluation 
  3.1. Coordination and M&E 
Subtotal  
Total project costs 
23 085 
3 916 
27 001 
4 835 
375 
5 210 
1 982 
4 514 
6 496 
1 248 
422 
1 670 
- 
- 
137 
137 
186 
- 
186 
- 
255 
255 
606 
606 
25 254 
8 430 
33 683 
6 083 
1 053 
7 136 
743 
743 
32 211 
8 303 
1 048 
41 562 
37.  Financing and cofinancing strategy and plan. The IFAD loan will cover 
US$20 million of the cost, the Government of Ghana will finance US$5.24 million 
through taxes, duty exemptions and cash contributions, and beneficiaries will 
provide US$11.2 million in the form of in-kind and cash contributions. The 
Government had originally requested US$32 million from IFAD, but this sum was 
later revised on the basis of subsequent discussions with the Government and a 
review of the planned pipeline. 
38.  Additionally, US$2 million in cofinancing will be provided by WFP, US$0.4 million by 
FAO and US$2.6 million by the Government of Canada. These development 
partners will implement their activities in parallel in the same geographical areas 
for the benefit of the ESRF target group. FAO, WFP and the Government of Canada 
have provided confirmation of their cofinancing arrangements. All of the above will 
take the form of parallel cash financing under projects that are ongoing or under 
design. 
39.  Disbursement. Out of the total project cost, equipment and materials account for 
US$6.2 million (15 per cent); agricultural inputs and produce are valued at 
US$27.0 million (65 per cent); services (national technical assistance, training, 
workshops and consultancies) represent US$5.0 million (12 per cent); and grants 
to households correspond to US$3.1 million (7 per cent). Total recurrent costs of 
US$0.3 million represent 0.7 per cent. The project will submit the projected 
expenditures for a six-month period for the initial withdrawal of funds from the 
loan. Subsequent withdrawals will be based on net cash requirements. The project 
will use a cash-based accounting methodology and will submit quarterly interim 
financial reports on the sources and uses of project funds.  
40.  Exit strategy and sustainability. The ESRF exit strategy and sustainability are 
based on three main pillars. First, it will develop strong implementation-level 
linkages with ongoing and upcoming IFAD projects to ensure the smooth 
integration of ESRF achievements into the outreach framework of the other IFAD 
projects. Second, the emergency goods and services to be supplied by the ESRF 
will be routed through commercial channels in order to develop the capacity for 
these arrangements to operate on their own if they are needed in the future. Third, 
the ESRF will work to ensure a high level of outreach for the digital extension and 
digital marketing services, which will be likely to produce positive results even after 
the end of the project. 
7 
III.  Risks 
A.  Risks and mitigation measures 
41.  Key project risks and mitigation measures are presented below. 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Table 4 
Risks and mitigation measures 
Category 
Country context 
COVID-19 uncertainties may prompt market 
actors to engage in profiteering that would 
trigger an artificial food crisis and a high rate of 
inflation in food prices.  
The budgetary constraints that diminish the 
Government’s ability to support subsidy 
programmes for the poor could cause food 
insecurity, especially among the very poor.  
Inherent risk  Residual risk  Mitigation measures 
Substantial  Moderate 
Market surveillance (availability, prices) 
in project areas 
Substantial  Moderate 
Support for crop and small ruminant 
production, food processing/ 
preservation activities and cash 
transfers to vulnerable groups 
Strict hygiene and sanitization 
protocols, physical distancing, use of 
personal protective equipment, digital 
extension facilitation 
COVID-19 infections may spread during project 
activities. 
High 
Substantial 
Environment and climate context 
Climate change may negatively impact 
agricultural productivity in project areas.  
Project scope 
High 
Substantial 
Distribution of drought-resilient, pest-
resistant seed varieties 
There is a risk of elite capture. 
Substantial  Substantial 
The use of self-, geographical and 
direct targeting measures to identify 
vulnerable groups and poor 
households 
Procurement 
A lack of capacity or a failure to adhere to IFAD 
guidelines may result in a weak regulatory 
framework and delays. 
Financial management 
An insufficient flow of funds and disbursement 
challenges (especially in the case of 
counterpart funding) could be exacerbated by 
the short implementation period.  
Weaknesses have been identified in internal 
auditing procedures, including the continuing 
lack of an internal audit report.  
Substantial  Moderate 
Specific training, use of consultancy 
services to support activities 
implementation 
Substantial  Moderate 
The limitation of government 
counterpart funding to tax exemptions 
and activities with existing allocation, 
such as buying produce from farmers; 
making the submission of an internal 
audit report by MoFA a condition for 
disbursement 
Overall 
Substantial  Moderate 
B.  Environmental and social category 
42.  Based on an assessment of the main environmental and social issues in the project 
area and the identification of (positive and negative) social concerns likely to be 
associated with the ESRF, it has been classified as an environmental and social 
category B operation. There is no risk of any significant negative impact. 
Nevertheless, some light mitigation measures will be implemented for input use 
and farming systems under COVID-19. 
C.  Climate risk classification 
43.  A significant portion of the project’s beneficiaries are located in northern Ghana, 
where the impact of climate change is high. In line with the Social, Environmental 
and Climate Assessment Procedures of IFAD, the project’s climate risk classification 
has been deemed to be high. To mitigate this risk, given that the project focus is 
primarily on input distribution, it is recommended that steps be taken to ensure 
that the seeds to be distributed are climate-resilient and pest-resistant and that 
they correspond to highly nutritious varieties of the plants concerned. Similarly, 
organic fertilizers and crop protection inputs are recommended.  
8 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
D.  Debt sustainability  
44. 
In December 2019, the International Monetary Fund and World Bank jointly 
assessed Ghana’s overall risk of debt distress as high in view of its high external 
debt service-to-exports and external debt service-to-revenue ratios. Ghana’s 
external public debt amounted to an estimated 32 per cent of GDP at end-2019, 
and the country is at risk of external debt distress owing to its increasingly  
non-concessional borrowings from multilateral creditors, bilateral creditors and 
lenders on the international market, as well as COVID-19-related fiscal impacts.  
IV.  Implementation 
A.  Organizational framework 
Project management and coordination 
45.  The GASIP PCU will implement the ESRF. The PCU is experienced in implementing 
national projects, organizing the supply of inputs for crop production and 
coordinating with FBOs and agribusinesses. The PCU works in close coordination 
with the MoFA and relevant agricultural departments at the regional and district 
levels. All staff positions are already filled and operational. The PCU has vehicles, 
equipment and office space to support the ESRF. GASIP performance received a 
rating of 4 on its two key supervision and implementation support indicators during 
the last supervision mission. 
Financial management, procurement and governance  
46.  The project’s financial management risk is rated as substantial. GASIP’s finance 
unit, headed by the finance manager and supported by three accountants, will be 
responsible for the day-to-day fiduciary functions of the ESRF. An assessment done 
in May 2020 found the capacity of the GASIP finance unit to be satisfactory. Ghana 
Audit Service will carry out the annual external audits. The ESRF will submit annual 
audited financial statements to IFAD within six months of the end of the 
Government of Ghana’s fiscal year (31 December).  
47.  The PCU will follow advance contracting procedures to ensure that beneficiaries 
receive timely support, including the inputs they need in time for the planting 
season. ESRF procurement procedures will follow IFAD’s Project Procurement 
Guidelines. The project will be subject to the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing 
Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations of December 2018. The MoFA 
will be the Government’s lead agency and will be responsible for oversight of the 
ESRF. GASIP’s national programme steering committee will be responsible for the 
ESRF’s overall governance and strategic direction. 
B.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning, knowledge 
management and communications 
48.  The ESRF will use the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) as its primary planning 
tool. ESRF progress and performance will be measured against AWP/B targets and 
periodic impact assessments. Baseline information will be collected from GASIP 
baseline surveys in project areas. A results-based approach will be adopted 
through the M&E system. The Operational Results Management System will be 
incorporated into the M&E system to monitor the different programme indicators. 
Key M&E activities will include quarterly, semi-annual and annual progress reports, 
a beneficiaries’ database, outcome studies and a project completion survey.  
49.  Knowledge management and learning will be addressed in coordination with 
implementation partners, i.e. the Government, WFP, FAO and the Government of 
Canada, on a basis of shared responsibility. Success stories, beneficiary 
testimonials and lessons learned will be captured in the regular progress reports 
and in separate bulletins where necessary. Knowledge management and lessons 
learned will be part of the agenda of the review meetings held with financing 
partners. The items identified for dissemination on a larger scale will be given 
9 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
visibility through GASIP, MoFA and other financing partners’ knowledge 
management structures.  
C.  Implementation plans 
Implementation readiness and start-up plans 
50.  The GASIP PCU, which will be responsible for ESRF implementation, is already 
active, fully staffed, well resourced and networked with government departments, 
private sector actors, FBOs and community representatives across the country. In 
coordination with IFAD, the PCU will immediately embark on beneficiary 
identification routines. The PCU will engage with the National Food Buffer Stock 
Company, the Ghana Commodity Exchange and agribusinesses to develop a surplus 
produce purchasing plan for ESRF beneficiaries. The PCU will also enter into 
partnership discussions with local digital extension and marketing platforms. The 
cash transfer activities will be implemented in coordination with WFP in the 
geographical areas where WFP nutrition activities are being implemented. The cash 
transfers will be managed using SCOPE, which is the WFP corporate digital 
beneficiary information and transfer management platform. WFP will provide 
specialized supplies of nutritious food and other fortified foodstuffs to those cash 
transfer beneficiary households that are also enrolled in WFP’s nutrition programme 
through the WFP voucher distribution system.  
Supervision, midterm review and completion plans 
51.  The ESRF will be supervised directly by IFAD. One supervision mission and one 
follow-up mission will be undertaken. An implementation support mission will be 
conducted soon after start-up. Given that 73 per cent of IFAD’s US$20 million loan 
will be spent on input subsidies and cash transfers, the fiduciary duty of care 
necessitates careful monitoring of recipient identities and documentation of proof of 
delivery to the thousands of direct beneficiaries. Financial management supervision 
missions will therefore have a strong anti-fraud focus and will provide for continual 
monitoring of the matching grant mechanism and seed/fertilizer utilization, as was 
done in the February 2020 mission. The MoFA, as the lead project agency, will 
organize the project completion review and will submit the report to the Fund after 
the project completion date but no later than the financing closing date. 
V.  Legal instruments and authority 
52.  A project financing agreement between the Government of Ghana and IFAD will 
constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the 
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as 
appendix I.  
53.  The Government of Ghana is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 
IFAD. 
54. 
I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing. 
VI.  Recommendation 
55. 
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 
the following resolution:  
RESOLVED: That the Fund shall provide a loan on fifty per cent highly 
concessional and fifty per cent blend terms to the Republic of Ghana in the 
amount of twenty million United States dollars (US$20 million) and upon such 
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms 
and conditions presented herein. 
Gilbert F. Houngbo 
President 
10 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Negotiated financing agreement 
"Emergency Support to Rural livelihoods and Food 
systems exposed to COVID-19 (ESRF)” 
(Negotiations concluded on 11 September 2020) 
Loan No:  
Loan No: 
Project  name:  Emergency  Support  to  Rural  livelihoods  and  Food  systems  exposed  to 
COVID-19 (“the ESRF/ the Project”) 
Republic of Ghana (the “Borrower”), represented by the Ministry of Finance 
and 
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”) 
(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”) 
WHEREAS the Borrower has requested two loans from the Fund for the purpose of financing 
the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Agreement;  
WHEREAS, the Fund has agreed to provide financing for the Project; 
NOW THEREFORE, the Parties hereby agree as follows: 
Section A 
1. 
The  following  documents  collectively  form  this  Agreement:  this  document,  the 
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), the Allocation Table 
(Schedule 2) and the Special Covenants (Schedule 3). 
2. 
The  Fund’s  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Development  Financing  dated 
29 April 2009, amended as  of December 2018, and as may be amended hereafter  from 
time to time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions 
thereof  shall  apply  to  this  Agreement.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  the  terms 
defined  in  the  General  Conditions  shall  have  the  meanings  set  forth  therein,  unless  the 
Parties shall otherwise agree in this Agreement. 
3. 
The  Fund  shall  provide  two  Loans  (the  “Financing”)  to  the  Borrower,  which  the 
Borrower shall use to implement the Project in accordance with the terms and conditions 
of this Agreement. 
Section B 
The amount of the Loan eligible for highly concessional terms is ten million United 
1. 
States dollars (USD 10 000 000). 
1 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
The amount of the Loan eligible for blend terms is ten million Unites States dollars 
2. 
(USD 10 000 000). 
3. 
The  Loan  granted  on  highly  concessional  terms  shall  be  free  of  interest  but  shall 
bear  a  fixed  service  charge  as  determined  by  the  Fund  at  the  date  of  approval  of  the 
Financing by the Fund’s Executive Board. The rate is fixed for the life of the loan based on 
the related service charge in force at the time of approval of the Loan. The Loan is payable 
semi-annually  in  the  Loan  Service  Payment  Currency.  The  Loan  shall  have  a  maturity 
period of forty (40) years, including a grace period of ten (10) years starting from the date 
of approval of the Loan by the Fund’s Executive Board. 
The Loan granted on blend terms shall be subject to interest on the principal amount 
4. 
outstanding and a service charge as determined by the Fund at the date of approval of the 
Loan by the Fund’s Executive Board. The interest rate and service charge determined will 
be  fixed  for  the  life  cycle  of  the  loan  and  payable  semi-annually  in  the  Loan  Service 
Payment Currency, and shall have a maturity period of twenty-five (25) years, including a 
grace period of five (5) years starting from the date of approval of the Loan by the Fund’s 
Executive Board.   
5. 
6. 
The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be in United States Dollars (USD). 
The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be the first of January. 
Payments of principal and service charge shall be payable on each 31 January and 
7. 
31 July. 
8. 
There shall be a Designated Account in United States dollars, for the exclusive use 
of the Project opened in the Central Bank of Ghana, which will receive the Financing. Funds 
shall  be  periodically  transferred  from  the  Designated  Account  to  the  Project  Operational 
Account for the purpose of financing the Project’s eligible expenditures financed by IFAD. 
The Borrower shall inform the Fund of the officials authorized to operate the Designated 
Account. 
9. 
The  Borrower  will  provide  counterpart  financing  for  the  Project  in  the  amount  of 
approximately  US$  5.3  million,  that  includes  taxes  and  duties  exemptions  as  well  as 
payments  for  purchase  of  surplus  crop  from  target  households  through  existing 
government channels. 
Section C 
The Lead Project Implementing Agency shall be the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
1. 
(MoFA). 
2. 
The following are designated as additional Project implementing Partners: the World 
Food Programme (WFP), the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) 
the Government of Canada (GoC), the Ministry of Health (MoH), the Ministry of Gender, 
Children and Social Protection (MoGCSP) and the Ministry of Local Government and Rural 
Development (MLGRD). 
3. 
The Project Completion Date shall be the 18 month anniversary of the date of entry 
into  force  of  this  Agreement  and  the  Financing  Closing  Date  shall  be 6  months  later,  or 
such other date as the Fund may designate by notice to the Borrower. 
2 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the Financing shall be carried 
4. 
out 
in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  procurement  section  of  the  Project 
Implementation  Manual  (PIM),  as  approved  internally  and  shared  by  the  Parties  during 
negotiations, or any amendments of such PIM provided that such amendment has received 
IFAD  no  objection  as  well  as  the  Borrower's  procurement  laws,  to  the  extent  such  are 
consistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
Section D 
1. 
The Fund will administer the Financing and supervise the Project, and the Borrower 
will implement and conduct its own administration and supervision of  the Financing and 
the Project. 
Section E 
The  following  are  designated  as  additional  grounds  for  suspension  of  this 
1. 
Agreement:  the  PIM  and/or  any  provision  thereof,  has  been  waived,  suspended, 
terminated, amended or modified without the prior agreement of the Fund and the Fund, 
after consultation with the Borrower, has determined that it has had, or is likely to have, 
a material adverse effect on the Project. 
2. 
The  following  is  designated  as  an  additional  general  conditions  precedent  to 
withdrawal: IFAD no objection to the change in the Project Coordinator, Finance Manager 
or the Procurement Manager shall have been obtained. 
3. 
This Agreement is subject to ratification by the Borrower. 
The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any 
4. 
communication related to this Agreement: 
For the Republic of Ghana: 
Chief Director  
Ministry of Finance 
Finance Drive, Accra 
PO Box MB 40 
Accra 
Republic of Ghana 
For the Fund: 
President 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
3 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
This  Agreement,  [dated  _____],  has  been  prepared  in  the  English  language  in  two  (2) 
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Borrower. 
REPUBLIC OF GHANA 
Date: ____________ 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR 
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT  
___________________ 
Gilbert F. Houngbo  
President 
Date: ______________ 
4 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Schedule 1 
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements 
I. 
Project Description 
Target  Population.  The  ESRF  will  provide  services  directly  to  50,000  smallholder 
1. 
beneficiaries from 25,000 households. The beneficiaries will include an equal proportion of 
women, men and youth. Persons with disabilities will constitute 5 percent of the target group. 
Smallholders  will  consist  of  vulnerable  semi-subsistence  households  who  have  up  to  2ha 
cultivable land, and risk a decline in production, food shortages and nutrition deficiency due 
to the COVID-19 crisis. Geographical targeting will be used to identify areas with a higher 
concentration of vulnerable groups and higher climate change vulnerabilities as well as those 
hardest  hit  by  the  COVID-19  crisis.  In  the  GASIP  areas,  the  project  beneficiaries  have 
developed  linkages  to  input  suppliers  through  GASIP’s  activities.  They  will  be  eligible  for 
ESRF services other than crop inputs supply. Self-targeting will involve restricting the size of 
the  ESRF  assistance  to  levels  that  are  relevant  and  of  interest  only  to  targeted  poor 
households.  For  example;  inputs  supply  (seed  at  80  percent  and  fertilizer  at  50  percent) 
subsidy to households with maximum 2ha cultivable land. Cash transfers will be restricted 
to  vulnerable  people  such  as  women  headed  households.  ESRF  will  support  investments 
mainly  for  maize,  rice,  soya  beans,  roots  and  tubers,  small  ruminants  and  poultry  value 
chains. Its investments could expand to other value chains, such as fruits and vegetables, 
based  on  local  opportunities.  Tree  crops  will  be  supported  through  extension  work  and 
marketing activities. 
2. 
Project area. The ESRF will be implemented at the national level (the “Project Area”).    
Goal. The ESRF will contribute to protecting the livelihoods, incomes, and resilience 
3. 
of the target groups suffering from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and climate 
change. 
Objective. The ESRF will mitigate the threats to production, food security and market 
4. 
access posed by COVID-19 pandemic and climate change. 
Components.  The  Project  shall  consist  of  the  following  Components:  (i)  Protect 
5. 
against hunger and build resilient livelihoods; (ii) Safeguard rural marketing linkages and 
food security.  
5.1.  Component 1: Protect against hunger and build resilient livelihoods.This component 
will  support  the  efforts  of  targeted  households  to  maintain  or  increase  their  production, 
food security, defence against COVID-19 pandemic and climate change resilience through 
access  to  quality  agricultural  inputs,  and  ICT  driven  extension  services.  It  will  reduce 
targeted households' vulnerability to COVID-19 pandemic by reducing food insecurity and 
nutrition deficiency. It  will also support income generation activities aimed at increasing 
cash flows and supporting diversified sources of food and nutrition. 
5.1.1.  Subcomponent  (SC)  1.1:  Secured  access  to  agricultural  inputs  and  food  supply. 
SC 1.1  will:  i)  provide  35,000  beneficiaries  with  timely  access  to  subsidised  inputs  in 
collaboration  with  the  GoG’s  Planting  for  Food  and  Jobs  (PFJ)  programme  to  increase 
production;  ii)  support  5,000  vulnerable  beneficiaries,  including  people  with  disabilities 
with direct cash transfers and nutritional support, in collaboration with WFP, to overcome 
hunger and prevent nutritional gaps; iii) carry out market surveillance, in coordination with 
5 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
WFP in relevant districts, to improve the smooth supply of food items at a fair price; iv) 
strengthen  ICT  driven  extension  services  to  overcome  the  challenges  to  conventional 
extension  services  caused  by  COVID-19.  These  activities  will  be  implemented  in 
coordination  with  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization’s  (FAO)  e-systems  for  early 
warning, market surveillance and e-extension initiatives and the Government of Canada’s 
(GoC) support to MoFA to strengthen MoFA’s capacity to offer digital extension services; 
and v) contribute to preventing the spread of COVID-19 through awareness messages and 
supply of protective equipment.   
5.1.2.  Subcomponent  1.2:  Income  generation  activities  and  diversification  of  food  and 
nutrition  supply.  SC  1.2  will  support  income  generation  activities;  it  will  increase  the 
income  and  diversify  the  sources  of  food  and  nutrition  of  targeted  households.  It  will 
support  6,000  women  and  youth  with  subsidised  breeding  stock,  inputs  (feed,  vaccine, 
etc.) and medicines for poultry and small ruminants’ production. The ESRF will coordinate 
the  implementation  of  these  activities  with  FAO’s  upcoming  project  on  developing  the 
resilience of smallholder farmers by diversifying their livelihoods through activities such as 
poultry  and  small  ruminants’  production.  These  activities  will  also  improve  the  food 
nutritional quality of target groups through increased protein intake.  
The ESRF will also support 1,750 women and youth with food processing, conservation and 
preservation-based income-generating activities including roots and tubers processing. The 
support will be implemented in coordination with WFP and will include training, capacity 
building  and  small  equipment  supply  (e.g.  dryer,  canner,  blender).  Preserved  food  can 
easily be used as supplementary resources of nutrition during situations of food crisis. The 
ESRF will also coordinate with FAO’s upcoming project on household nutrition response to 
COVID-19 for educating targeted households on healthy nutrition and backyard gardening. 
Likewise,  the  ESRF  will  collaborate  with  the  GoC  support  to  MoFA  to  strengthen  MoFA’s 
capacity to support food preservation and conservation activities for smallholders.  
5.2.  Component  2:  Safeguard  rural  marketing  linkages  and  food  security.This 
component  will  support  the  targeted  households  to  maintain  or  increase  their  market 
linkages with other value chain actors. The ESRF will link the target group to a range of 
output marketing options and will also support the use of digital marketing platforms. 
5.2.1.  Subcomponent  2.1:  Support  to  output  marketing  linkages.  SC2.1  will  provide 
National Food Buffer Stock Company (NAFCO), the Ghana Commodity Exchange (GCX) and 
agribusinesses  with  a  working  capital  stimulus  for  buying  surplus  stock  from  25,000 
beneficiaries  including  distressed  smallholders  facing  marketing  challenges  related  to 
roots, tubers and tree crops. The ESRF will reimburse these marketing partners with 25 per 
cent of amounts paid to the ESRF target households for purchasing surplus stock. ESRF in 
coordination with WFP  will facilitate output marketing agreements between beneficiaries 
and  marketing  partners,  training  and  capacity  building  of  beneficiaries  on  production 
technologies  and  post-harvest  practices  needed  to  meet  the  product  quality  standards 
required by the marketing partners.  
5.2.2.  Subcomponent 2.2: Support digital marketing platforms. The ESRF, in coordination 
with  WFP,  will  develop  the  Farmers  Based  Organizations  (FBO)'s  capacities  on  digital 
marketing, strengthen their marketing self-reliance and diversify their output markets. The 
ESRF  will  partner  with  existing  digital  marketing  platforms  to  support  farmers  capacity 
building and integration in these existing marketing platforms. The ESRF will only provide 
introductory  exposure to the targeted households on digital marketing initiatives.  Based 
on  the  interest  and  the  initiatives  demonstrated  by  targeted  households,  future  IFAD 
6 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
project(s) will provide follow-up support to strengthen these achievements. The ESRF will 
collaborate  with  the  GoC  ongoing  programme  to  strengthen  MoFA’s  capacity  to  support 
digital marketing opportunities for farmers and farmers’ organisations. 
7 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
II. 
Implementation Arrangements 
A. 
Organisation and Management 
Lead Project Implementation Agency(LPIA). The LPIA shall be the Ministry of Food 
6. 
and Agriculture (MoFA). 
7. 
Project Steering Committee (PSC).  
7.1.  Establishment and Composition. GASIP’s Programme Steering Committee will also 
be responsible for ESRF. The PSC is chaired by the MoFA Chief Director. It has currently a 
membership  of  the  directors  of  key  MoFA  departments  and  GASIP  National  Programme 
Coordinator,  as  well  as  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Environment 
Protection Agency; a Civil Society Organisation and Ghana Agricultural Workers’ Union. To 
strengthen the PSC capacity to oversee ESRF’s implementation, MoFA will invite additional 
representatives to the PSC from the national government ministries  and agencies (such 
as  Ministry  of  Trade  and  Industry,  Ministry  of  Health,  Ministry  of  Gender,  Children  and 
Social  Protection  and  Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  Rural  Development),  regions  of 
implementation,  both  public  and  private  institutions  representing  financial  sector 
intermediaries  and  agricultural  market  intermediaries,  non-state  actors’  representatives 
(such as NGOs), and representatives of youth and women who operate along the relevant 
agricultural value chains as practitioners or advocates.  
7.2.  Responsibilities.  The  main  responsibilities  of  the  steering  committee  will  include: 
(i) providing  strategic  and  policy  guidance  to  the  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  for 
implementation  and  coordination  of  activities;  (ii)  ensuring  overall  conformity  with 
government  policies  and  strategies;  (iii)  reviewing  Project’s  progress  and  performance; 
(iv)  approving  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB);  (v)  resolving  implementation 
problems or conflicts; and (vi) assisting the PCU in obtaining government assistance and 
contributions to the Project when needed.  
8. 
Technical committee. GASIP’s technical committee will also be responsible for ESRF. 
The technical committee will oversee planning, review progress, facilitate linkages between 
project stakeholders and remove bottlenecks affecting smooth implementation. The GASIP 
technical  committee  currently  includes  the  Director  of  the  Directorate  of  Crop  Sciences 
(MoFA), Director of the Policy Planning Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate (MoFA), Head 
of AfDB and IFAD unit (Ministry of Finance); Representative of the National Board for Small-
Scale Industries (NBSSI), Representative of the Environmental Protection Agency and the 
National  Programme  Coordinator  (GASIP).  To  strengthen  the  technical  committee’s 
capacity to oversee ESRF’s implementation MoFA will invite additional representatives to 
the technical committee drawn from the Ministry of Health (MoH), the Ministry of Gender, 
Children  and  Social  Protection  (MGSP);  the  Ministry  of  Local  Government  and  Rural 
Development (MLGRD); and representative of ESRF co-financier (when finalised) as well 
as any other additional membership that would be deemed necessary. 
Project Implementation Structure. ESRF will be implemented through the two-level 
9. 
organisational  structure,  which  is  currently  in  place  for  managing  GASIP;  namely,  the 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) located in Accra and three Zonal Coordination Units (ZCUs) 
located in the northern belt (Tamale), middle belt (Kumasi) and southern belt (Dodowa). 
All staff in the PCU and the ZCUs are competitively recruited on a full-time basis. All staff 
will be managing ESRF in addition to their current responsibilities in managing GASIP. 
8 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
PCU  staff  and  responsibilities.  The  PCU  is  headed  by  the  National  Programme 
9.1. 
Coordinator (NPC) and is supported by a Finance Manager (FM), an Infrastructure Manager 
(IM),  a  Value  Chain  and  Agribusiness  Manager  (VCAM),  a  Programme  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation  Manager  (PMEM),  a  Climate  Change  Adaptation  Manager  (CCAM)  and  a 
Procurement Manager (PPM). A gender strategy specialist on need basis  provides inputs 
to the PCU and the ZCUs on the IFAD mainstreaming areas.   
9.2.  Zonal Coordination Unit (ZCU). The ZCUs will be responsible for the zonal operations 
of ESRF in addition to current responsibilities with regard to GASIP. The ZCUs shall carry 
out  project  implementation  at  the  community  level  with  the  support  of  partners  in  the 
public  and  private  sectors  (Regional  and  District  Departments  of  Agriculture,  Business 
Advisory  Centers,  Business  Resources  Centers),  service  providers,  NGOs,  etc.  It  shall 
monitor and ensure that implementation is coordinated in each community according to 
these plans leading to harmonisation of resources and interconnectivity of the components. 
The  key  staff  in  the  three  ZCUs  comprise  two  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Officers,  three 
Zonal Value Chain and Agribusiness Officers, three Accountants, one Procurement Officer 
and one Zonal Infrastructure Officer. The staffing structure above and responsibilities for 
both the PCU and the three ZCUs are outlined in detail in the PIM (as approved internally 
and  shared  by  the  Parties  during  negotiations).  Where  changes  to  the  PCU  structure  or 
staffing, as outlined in the PIM, becomes necessary, they should receive IFAD non objection 
before they take effect. 
Planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation,  knowledge  management  and 
B. 
communications 
10.  Monitoring  and  Evaluation.  The  ESRF  will  use  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget 
(AWPB) as the primary planning tool. ESRF progress and performance will be measured 
against AWPB targets and periodic assessments of impact achieved. Baseline information 
will be collected from GASIP baseline surveys in project areas. A results-based approach 
will be adopted through the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. The Operational and 
Results  Management  System  (ORMS)  will  be  incorporated  within  the  M&E  system  to 
monitor  the  different  programme  indicators.  Key  M&E  activities  will  include  progress 
reports (quarterly, semi-annual and annual), beneficiaries' database, outcome studies and 
project completion survey. The ESRF will promote visibility and effective flow of information 
and facilitate exchanges with other projects and agencies and disseminate results. 
11. 
 Knowledge Management. ESRF’s KM and learning will be addressed in coordination 
and  through  shared  responsibility  of  the  co-financing/implementation  partners,  i.e. 
Government of Ghana, WFP, FAO and Government of Canada. Success stories, beneficiary 
testimonies and lessons learned will be captured in the regular progress reports as well as 
separate bulletins where necessary. KM and lessons learned will be a part of the agenda 
of  the  review  meetings  between  the  financing  partners.  The  items  identified  for  larger 
publicity will be given visibility through the PCUs ongoing GASIP related KM structure, the 
MoFA website (particularly the PFJ section) and the KM structures of the other financing 
partners.  
9 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
C. 
Procurement and advance contracting  
Procurement arrangements. Procurement arrangements under ESRF will follow the  
12. 
procurement section of the PIM, as approved internally and shared  by the parties during 
negotiations. 
Advance contracting. Number of procurement activities have been started ahead of 
13. 
ESRF  approval  in  order  to  allow  meeting  critical  timeline  and  support  the  beneficiaries 
during the growing season. These activities include: 
i) 
Procurement starts ahead of ESRF approval, contracts signed and services 
delivery / supply starts ahead of entry into force of this Agreement; such as supply 
of seeds and fertilizers. 
ii) 
Procurement starts ahead of ESRF approval, contracts signed and services 
delivery  /  supply  starts  after  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement;  such  as 
engagement of a firm to develop content and provide digital extension services. 
14. 
All  activities  that  would  be  procured  using  advance  procurement  arrangements 
should be included in a provisional procurement plan that is subject to IFAD no objection. 
15. 
In such cases, for the activities procured using advance contracting to be eligible 
for  IFAD  financing  after  entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement,  they  should  follow 
implementation arrangements, set forth in the PIM as approved internally and shared  by 
the  parties  during  negotiations,  or  any  amended  version  of  the  PIM  provided  that  such 
amended version has received IFAD no objection. This includes compliance with inter alia 
procurement arrangements, targeting approach, etc.  
10 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Schedule 2 
Allocation Table 
Allocation of Loan  Proceeds.    The  Table below  sets  forth the Categories of  Eligible 
1. 
Expenditures to be financed by the 2 Loans and the allocation of the amounts of the Loans 
to  each  Category.  The  2  loans,  one  under  highly  concessional  terms  for  an  amount  of 
USD 10 million and the other on blend terms for an amount of USD 10 million are aggregated 
in the table below: Project expenditures will be split pari passu across both loans. All eligible 
expenditures  belonging  to  the  categories  below  will  be  fully  apportioned  to  the  Loans 
Financing as shown below.  
Category 
Loan Amount 
Allocated in 
USD 
Loan Amount 
Allocated in 
USD 
Percentage (net of taxes) 
I. 
Goods & Inputs 
6 776 550 
6 776 550  100% net of taxes, WFP, 
GOC and beneficiaries 
contributions 
II. 
Services 
749 700 
749 700  100% net of taxes, WFP, 
III. 
IV. 
Grants & 
Subsidies 
Equipment & 
Materials 
V. 
Salaries & 
allowances 
GOC and beneficiaries 
contributions 
677 700 
677 700  100% net of WFP 
contributions 
673 200 
673 200  100% net of taxes, WFP 
and GOC contributions 
122 850 
122 850  100% net of taxes  
Unallocated 
1 000 000 
1 000 000 
Total 
10 000 000 
10 000 000 
(a) 
The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows: 
I) 
Category I. includes expenditures related to Agricultural inputs and produce.  
II)  Category II. includes expenditures related to National Technical Assistance, 
Consultancies, Trainings & Workshops; 
III)  Category V. includes expenditures related to Operating Costs 
11 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Schedule 3 
Special Covenants 
In  accordance  with  Section  12.01(a)(xxiii)  of  the  General  Conditions,  the  Fund  may 
suspend, in whole or in part, the right of the  Borrower to  request withdrawals from the 
Loan Account if the Borrower has defaulted in the performance of any covenant set forth 
below,  and  the  Fund  has  determined  that  such  default  has  had,  or  is  likely  to  have,  a 
material adverse effect on the Project:  
1. 
Within six (6) months of entry into force of the Financing Agreement, the Project 
will customize its own  accounting software to ensure alignment to International Accounting 
Standards and IFAD's requirements. 
Indigenous People Concerns. The Borrower shall ensure that the concerns of IPs are 
2. 
given due consideration in implementing the Project and, to this end, shall ensure that: 
(a) 
(b) 
the Project is carried out in accordance with the applicable provisions of the 
relevant IP national legislation; 
indigenous people are adequately and fairly represented in all local planning 
for Project activities; 
IP rights are duly respected; 
(c) 
(d) 
IP communities, participate in policy dialogue and local governance; 
(e)  The terms of Declarations, Covenants and/or Conventions  ratified by the 
(f) 
Borrower on the subject are respected; 
The Project will not involve encroachment on traditional territories used or 
occupied by indigenous communities.  
3. 
Land tenure security. The Borrower shall ensure that the land acquisition process 
has  already  been  completed  and  that  compensation  processes  were  consistent  with 
international best practice and free prior and informed consent principles. 
4. 
Compliance  with  the  Social  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures 
(SECAP).  The  Borrower  shall  ensure  that  the  Project  will  be  implemented  in  compliance 
with IFAD's SECAP and more specifically that the following measures shall be taken:  
implemented 
in  strict  conformity  with 
Environment  and  Social  Safeguards.  The  Borrower  shall  ensure  that:  (a) all  project 
activities  are 
the  Borrower’s  relevant 
laws/regulations; (b) all Project activities give special consideration to the participation and 
practices  of  ethnic  minority  population  in  compliance  with  IFAD’s  Policy  on  Indigenous 
Peoples (2009), as appropriate; (c) proposals for civil works include confirmation that no 
involuntary land acquisition or resettlement is required under the Project. In the event of 
unforeseen  land  acquisition  or  involuntary  resettlement  under  the  Project,  the  Borrower 
shall  immediately  inform  the  Fund  and  prepare  the  necessary  planning  documents; 
(d) women and men shall be paid equal remuneration for work of equal value under the 
Project;  (e) recourse  to  child  labour  is  not  made  under  the  Project;  (f) the  measures 
included  in  the  Gender  Action  Plan  prepared  for  the  Project  are  undertaken,  and  the 
resources needed for their implementation are  made available, in a timely manner; and 
(g) all necessary and appropriate measures to implement the Gender Action Plan to ensure 
that women can participate and benefit equitably under the Project are duly taken. 
12 
Appendix I 
EB 2020/130/V.B.C.4 
Anticorruption Measures. The Borrower shall comply with IFAD Policy on Preventing 
5. 
Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations. 
6. 
Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. The Borrower and the Project 
Parties shall ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 
IFAD Policy on Preventing and Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and 
Abuse, as may be amended from time to time.  
13 
Logical framework 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Name of Indicator 
Unit 
Baseli
ne 
Persons  0 
Source 
End 
Target 
50,000  Project 
reports 
Freque
ncy 
Semi-
annual 
Respons
ibility 
PCU 
Results 
Hierarchy 
Outreach 
ORM
S No. 
1. 
1a 
1b 
Number of 
persons/beneficiaries* 
receiving services promoted 
or supported by ESRF 
Men 
Women 
Youth 
Corresponding number of 
households reached 
Estimated corresponding 
total number of households 
members**  
Percentage of households 
reporting that income was 
maintained or improved, 
compared with before the 
COVID-19 outbreak(same 
month/period in 2019) 
Persons  0 
Persons  0 
Persons  0 
0 
HH 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
25,000 
Persons  0 
150,000 
 percent 
0 
70 
percent 
End of 
project 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Ghana 
Statistical 
and 
health 
Services/ 
ESRF 
surveys/ 
Completi
on report 
1
4
Goal:  
Contribute to 
Protecting the 
livelihoods, 
incomes, health 
and resilience of 
target groups 
suffering from 
the impacts of 
the COVID-19 
pandemic and 
from climate 
change. 
Development 
Objective: 
Mitigate the 
threats to 
production, food 
security, market 
access and 
health posed by 
the COVID-19 
pandemic and 
climate change 
Outcome 1 
Target 
households’ 
production, food 
security, 
defence against 
COVID-19 and 
climate change 
resilience is 
maintained or 
increased 
Output 1.1 
Target 
households’ 
access to good 
quality, climate 
resilient, 
agricultural 
inputs and 
services is 
established. 
Output 1.2 
Target 
households’ 
access to food 
and nutrition is 
1.2.2 
1.1.3 
1.2.4  Percentage of households 
 percent  0 
reporting that production 
was maintained or 
improved. 
1.2.8  Percentage of women 
 percent  0 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Political 
stability. 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
70 
percent 
70 
percent 
70 
percent 
70 
percent 
50 
percent 
reporting minimum dietary 
diversity (MDDW) 
Households with at least 
one woman 
Percentage of households 
reporting that their sales 
volumes were maintained 
or improved 
Percentage of households 
reporting that the adoption 
of new/improved inputs, 
technologies or practices 
maintained or increased. 
 percent 
 percent 
 percent 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
 percent 
 percent 
Percentage of households 
accessing improved 
production inputs and/or 
technological packages 
Percentage of households 
exposed to environmentally 
sustainable and climate-
resilient technologies and 
practices  
70 
percent 
50 
percent 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
1.1.8 
Number of persons 
provided with targeted 
support to improve their 
nutrition  
HH 
5,000 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
0
/
1
3
0
/
V
.
B
.
C
.
4
Assumpt
ions 
Effective 
stakehold
er 
identificati
on, and 
gender/yo
uth 
targeting 
is carried 
out at the 
communit
y level  
Macro-
economic 
condition
s remain 
stable or 
improve. 
COVID-
19 
situation 
in the 
country 
remains 
stable, 
possibly 
improving 
over time. 
No major 
political 
or social 
shocks in 
the 
region. 
maintained or 
improved. 
Output 1.3 
1.1.4 
Capacity to 
produce and 
diversify income 
increased 
2.1.2  
1
5
Output 1.4 
Awareness and 
adoption of 
preventive 
measures 
against the 
spread of 
COVID-19 
increased. 
Outcome 2 
Market linkages 
between 
smallholder 
farmers and 
other value 
chain actors 
maintained or 
improved 
Output 2.1 
Marketing 
partnerships 
developed 
Output 2.2 
Marketing 
capacity 
increased 
Number of persons trained 
in production practices 
and/or technologies through 
e-extension services 
Number of persons trained 
in income-generating 
activities or business 
management through e-
extension services 
Number of persons trained 
on COVID-19 preventive 
hygiene and sanitary 
practices 
Number of persons 
supplied with personal 
protective equipment 
Persons 
35,000 
Persons 
35,000 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
Persons 
30,000 
Persons 
30,000 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Project 
reports/C
ompletion 
report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
Percentage of households 
reporting that marketing 
linkages with 
agribusinesses maintained 
or increased 
 percent 
50 
percent 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
Percentage of households 
formally linked to markets 
through contracts with 
agribusinesses 
2.2.2  Percentage of supported 
rural enterprises reporting 
an increase in profit  
Percentage of households 
trained on using electronic 
marketing platforms  
Percentage of households 
regularly accessing 
electronic marketing 
platforms  
 percent 
/ 
Househ
olds 
 percent 
 percent 
 percent 
 50 
percent 
50 
percent 
50 
percent 
30 
percent 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
PCU and 
ZCUs 
Project 
reports/ 
Completi
on report 
Semi 
annual 
and end 
of 
project 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
0
/
1
3
0
/
V
.
B
.
C
.
4
