Document:
Date:
Distribution:
Original:
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
26 November 2016
Public
English
E
President’s report
Proposed loan and grant to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project
Note to Executive Board representatives
Focal points:
Technical questions:
Dispatch of documentation:
Ladislao Rubio
Country Programme Manager
Latin America and the Caribbean
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2575
e-mail: l.rubio@ifad.org
William Skinner
Chief
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2974
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org
For: Approval
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
ii
iii
iv
1
1
1
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
5
5
6
6
6
6
7
7
7
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
Contents
Abbreviations and acronyms
Map of project area
Financing summary
Recommendation for approval
I.
Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and COSOP
II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
B. Project development objective
C. Components/outcomes
III. Project implementation
Approach
A.
B. Organizational framework
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management
D. Financial management, procurement and governance
E. Supervision
IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
B. Project financing
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
D. Sustainability
E. Risk identification and mitigation
V.
Corporate considerations
A.
B.
C.
D.
Compliance with IFAD policies
Alignment and harmonization
Innovations and scaling up
Policy engagement
VI. Legal instruments and authority
VII. Recommendation
Appendices
I.
II.
Negotiated financing agreement
Logical framework
i
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Abbreviations and acronyms
ASDU
CTP
FAO
IDB
M&E
NSC
P/CIP
UNDP
Agriculture Sector Development Unit
community training plan
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Inter-American Development Bank
monitoring and evaluation
national steering committee
public/collective investment plan
United Nations Development Programme
ii
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Map of project area
Cooperative Republic of Guyana
IFAD-funded operations
iii
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Cooperative Republic of Guyana
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project
Financing summary
Initiating institution:
IFAD
Borrower:
Executing agency:
Total project cost:
Amount of IFAD loan:
Amount of IFAD grant:
Terms of IFAD loan:
Cooperative Republic of Guyana
Ministry of Agriculture
US$11.15 million
US$7.96 million
US$0.5 million
Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of five years, with a fixed interest rate of 1.25 per
cent per annum plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent
per annum.
Contribution of borrower:
US$2.43 million
Contribution of beneficiaries:
US$270,000
Appraising institution:
IFAD
Cooperating institution:
Directly supervised by IFAD
iv
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
x
I
I
[
C
l
i
c
k
h
e
r
e
a
n
d
i
n
s
e
r
t
E
B
.
.
/
.
.
/
R
.
.
]
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally
Sustainable Agricultural Development Project, as contained in paragraph 59.
Proposed loan and grant to the Cooperative Republic of
Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1.
Situated on the northern coast of South America, Guyana borders the Atlantic
Ocean, Brazil, Suriname and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; it belongs to the
Guiana Shield region, part of the Amazon Biome. Guyana hosts a vast expanse of
primary tropical forest, freshwater resources and a unique savannah ecosystem. It
covers an area of 215,000 km2 with a population of 747,883. Indigenous peoples
account for more than three quarters of the population in regions 8 and 9
(75.9 per cent and 89.2 per cent, respectively) and about two thirds of the
population in region 1 (62.2 per cent).
2.
3.
4.
5.
The World Bank estimates that Guyana’s GDP, based on the Atlas Method, was
US$3,763 in 2014. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, economic growth
is expected to reach 3.2 per cent in 2016 and 3.7 per cent in 2017 as substantial
new gold mining projects are launched.
Agriculture and rural development. Agriculture is a significant contributor to the
country’s development. It is predominantly undertaken by small-scale farmers and
indigenous people farming less than 5 ha of land. Cultivated crops include rice
(90,000 ha), sugar (48,000 ha) and coconut (25,000 ha); non-traditional crops
occupy between 30,000 and 40,000 ha while 158,473 ha are used for livestock.
Agricultural products, excluding forest products, make up approximately
31 per cent of total exports; the main exported commodities are rice and sugar.
Poverty, nutrition and food security. According to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), since 1992, the proportion of households living
in moderate poverty (on US$2 per day) has declined from 43 per cent to
36.3 per cent, and extreme poverty has dropped from 28.7 per cent to
19.1 per cent. The outlook remains far less favourable for indigenous peoples,
77 per cent of whom are poor, and inhabitants of the hinterland, where three out of
four people are poor.
Studies show that household food security in hinterland region 9 is compromised;
the situation worsens during drought and flood seasons. A rising dependence on
remittances, driven by migration towards mining and logging areas, is negatively
affecting consumption patterns in indigenous areas. Changes in indigenous peoples’
diets (which include increased consumption of refined carbohydrates, processed
foods, sweetened and calorie-dense foods) are likely responsible for the rise in
chronic diseases in this region.
6. Main natural resource constraints for agriculture and rural people in
regions 1 and 9. Agriculture and rural livelihoods in regions 1 and 9 are affected
by increased variability in rainfall patterns. In region 9, severe floods and prolonged
dry spells, coupled with a lack of adequate water-management technologies and
1
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
low fertility of the savannah soil, are major challenges for agriculture and livestock.
In region 1, salt water intrusion is a major impact of climate change, which over
time will affect arable land and freshwater resources in coastal areas. Climate
change is affecting the sustainability of established production patterns in both
regions, and the transition to new production patterns needs to involve greater
adaptability to changing climatic and economic conditions. This will require access
to knowledge, investment and technologies for natural resource management,
which are currently lacking.
7.
Economic constraints in regions 1 and 9. The remoteness of regions 1 and 9
remains a challenge for the generation of business and income-generation
opportunities. Poor transportation and telecommunication networks limit market
access and hinder these regions’ integration into the national economy. There is
also a lack of access to information, technology and energy needed to support
investments in productive activities, and promote adaptation to changing economic
and environmental conditions.
8. Main challenges. Persistent poverty and climate change are severely straining the
target group’s resilience and social cohesion. The capacity of hinterland
communities to respond to new economic and environmental challenges is further
limited by a lack of incentives for investments that reduce economic and climate
risks.
9.
10.
Opportunities to improve livelihoods of indigenous people and small
farmers in the project area. Despite these challenges, both regions offer
opportunities for improving the livelihoods of the target group and generating
income from agriculture and related activities.
In the long term, the Ministry of Agriculture intends to strengthen hinterland
agriculture by moving production away from traditional export products and from
coastal areas that are vulnerable to salinization. In the short term, consultations
and field visits in regions 1 and 9 have confirmed that these regions offer: (i) high
levels of human capital, including education, skills, motivation and entrepreneurial
attitude; (ii) widespread awareness of the need to improve livelihood strategies to
adapt to economic, environmental and climate challenges; (iii) appreciation of the
value of ecosystems and biodiversity; (iv) common land titles, strong community
governance and familiarity with participatory planning approaches; (v) local
markets and local public procurement, which provide opportunities for small and
medium-sized agricultural producers (with little competition from large businesses);
and (vi) producer groups (including women’s associations) that have established
partnerships with NGOs and local government agencies.
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
COSOP
11. The favorable conditions highlighted above provide an opportunity for the project to
support rural households and communities in identifying and developing value
chains that generate new income opportunities and contribute to rural livelihood
diversification. Both regions offer viable opportunities to increase the
competitiveness, inclusiveness and sustainability of local value chains through
improvements in natural resources management, production, processing, storage,
quality-enhancing technologies and smallholder market access. Preliminary
consultations have identified the following value chains as possible targets for
development: cassava and its main by-products farine and cassava bread; peanuts,
fruit and livestock in region 9; and spices such as ginger, turmeric and black pepper
in region 1.
12. The project strategy will combine decentralized participatory community
development, natural resource management and value chain approaches to
strengthen livelihood resilience by increasing income-generating opportunities,
2
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
access to resilience-building assets and food and nutrition security. This strategy
will also support an inclusive participatory planning process that strengthens the
organizational capacities of communities and producer groups, and enhances
institutional coordination among national and local institutions.
13. The project is aligned with IFAD’s strategy for Guyana as defined in the country
strategy note. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana mainly operated in the coastal
region, focusing on strengthening producers’ capacity and expanding opportunities
to develop small-scale enterprises. The proposed project applies experience gained
in previous projects to remote hinterland areas largely populated by indigenous
peoples. Through this strategy, IFAD supports the Government of Guyana in its
efforts to bridge the coast-hinterland divide and reduce poverty in isolated rural
communities.
II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
14. The project will be carried out in all sub-regions of region 9 and in the Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions of region 1. Beneficiaries will be located in approximately
80 of the 128 communities in regions 1 and 9 (60 communities in region 9 and 20
communities in region 1). Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population
density of region 9, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for this
region. The project will initially focus on North Rupununi in order to capitalize on
government efforts to exploit this sub-region’s significant agricultural potential.
Lessons learned from project implementation in North Rupununi will later be applied
to Central and South Rupununi. The target group will include 6,000 poor
households, equivalent to 94 per cent of all poor households in the project area. At
least 15 per cent of these households (900) will be headed by women, reflecting
the overall proportion of women-headed households in the project area.
15. These 6,000 households represent approximately 30,000 direct and indirect
beneficiaries, comprising men and women of different age groups. At least
75 per cent of project beneficiaries will be from indigenous groups. At least
30 per cent will be between 15 and 44 years old, and at least 50 per cent will be
women. As a result of the project’s phased approach, figures for the target
population may be revised at the midterm review.
B. Project development objective
16. The development objective of the project, responding to the priorities identified in
the country strategy note, is improved livelihood resilience through income
generation, access to assets, improved nutrition and adaptation to climate
variability.
17.
Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by the following activities:
(a)
(b)
Increasing income-generating opportunities through the identification of
commodities drives the inclusion of small farmers in markets, increases local
demand for services and labour, and supports beneficiaries’ inclusive and
informed participation in market opportunities that improve household
income.
Improving access to public goods, knowledge and technologies builds
community resilience and creates an enabling environment for production
through: technology, knowledge and information for better planning and
natural resource management; improved water availability for agriculture and
human consumption; better soil-management practices; diffusion of
information and communications technologies; adoption of renewable energy;
and valuation of agro-biodiversity.
(c)
Enhancing food security and nutrition identifies and promotes
commodities, including crops, fish and forest products that sustainably
3
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
improve household diets and increase nutrition awareness through nutrition
education and behaviour change activities, including food-based dietary
guidelines.
C. Components/outcomes
18. Component 1. This component aims to support village and community councils
(in region 9), value chain roundtables (in region 1) and regional development
councils in planning and prioritizing investments in local value chains1 and resilient
communities. As a result, communities and producer groups will have strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate
change risks. The main instruments to be developed through this component are
community production development plans for region 9 and value chain action plans
for region 1. These medium-term plans will be the basis for developing three types
of investment plans to be implemented with project support: public/collective
investment plans (P/CIPs), community training plans (CTPs) and business plans.
19. Component 2. While component 1 will provide training, studies and
capacity-building needed to develop investment plans, component 2 will support
these plans’ implementation. Under component 2, an investment fund will be
established to finance public and common goods and services, through
non-reimbursable mechanisms, to be included in each type of investment plan.
They will comprise: (i) investments that reduce climate and investment risks
(included in P/CIPs); (ii) training, capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities, and related research that contributes to a reduction in climate, economic
and nutritional risks (included in CTPs); and (iii) technical assistance and services
to support the diffusion of knowledge, technologies and capacities that improve
livelihood resilience by reducing climate, economic and nutritional risks (included in
business plans).
20. Component 3. The third component will establish management and administrative
procedures, including accounting and auditing, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms in accordance with IFAD and national guidelines. Evidence-based
knowledge products will be developed on the basis of project experience in order to
extract lessons and best practices, scale up innovative solutions and achieve better
outcomes and greater impact from development resources.
III. Project implementation
Approach
A.
21. The project strategy aims to improve the target group’s livelihood resilience by
addressing major risks arising from contextual challenges in the project area. Since
natural resources and local governance systems are threatened by these economic
and environmental risks, in order to strengthen the resilience of target
communities, the prioritization of opportunities and the planning of investments and
activities will be carried out through a participatory process, which will include local
actors and governing bodies.
B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency for the implementation of the hinterland project will be the
Ministry of Agriculture through its Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU). For
activities such as consultative village planning, agricultural technology transfer,
technical assistance, natural resource management and regional investment
planning, the Ministry of Agriculture will be assisted by the Ministries of Indigenous
People’s Affairs, Natural Resources, Communities and Business, other government
agencies, NGOs, community-based organizations, academia and individual service
providers.
1 In region 1, there is also significant potential for developing linkages to international markets; this is particularly true for
spices such as ginger and turmeric.
4
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
23. The project management unit will comprise an office at the Ministry of Agriculture in
Georgetown and regional offices in regions 1 and 9. A national steering committee
and regional management committees will be established to provide policy
direction, support implementation, advise on annual workplans and budgets, and
encourage collaboration among stakeholders.
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management
24. The project will provide support to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Agriculture’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit and ensure that project
monitoring is linked to the Ministry’s performance monitoring and Agriculture
Strategy indicators. M&E will be conducted using a participatory approach; data
collection will be kept simple and brief, focusing on the reliability and usefulness of
collected data. Evidence-based knowledge products will be developed to extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize outcomes and impact from development resources, and disseminate
knowledge to support national, regional and local decision-making and policy
processes. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following the approval
of the financing agreement and before implementation.
D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project
will be undertaken by ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate
accounting system and extensive experience in implementing internationally funded
projects, including the IFAD-funded Rural Enterprise and Agricultural Development
Project. A qualified finance officer will be recruited through a competitive process as
a condition of disbursement for the loan and grant. Due to the remoteness of
project areas, an administrative/finance officer will be recruited at each regional
office through a competitive process and will be responsible for performing
administrative and basic accounting functions.
26. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in United States
dollars in the Central Bank of Guyana exclusively for the loan and grant, in which
advance funds will be deposited and from which funds will be transferred to the
project operational account in Guyanese dollars.
27. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii) of the General
Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible expenditures
incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date of entry
into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to the amount of
US$300,000 in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement. These
eligible expenditures will consist of the costs related to: the detailed value chains
study for spices in region 1; a state of food and agriculture study in the Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions of region 1; and the hiring of personnel.
28. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU in
line with national regulations, IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and the
provisions of the financing agreement. A procurement officer, exclusively assigned
to the hinterland project, will be hired by ASDU.
29. Audit. Annual consolidated financial statements for the project will be
independently audited pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance
with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In
line with the 2004 Guyana Audit Act, the Auditor General shall be responsible for
conducting financial, compliance, performance and value-for-money audits of the
accounts of all projects funded by loans or grants from any foreign state or
organization. The Guyana Auditor General Audit Office will audit the project
financial statements. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.
5
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
E. Supervision
30.
IFAD will directly supervise the project, complemented by implementation-support
missions. One supervision mission will be planned each year. The first supervision
mission, undertaken approximately six months after project effectiveness, will
monitor progress against the timeframe defined in the implementation plan, and
will assess fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions of funds and
compliance with the financing agreement. Implementation-support missions will be
planned to cover the issues recommended by supervision missions.
IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
31. The total cost of the project is US$11.14 million over a period of six years. Of this
total, US$10.54 million (95 per cent) are baseline costs and US$610,000 (5 per cent)
are physical and price contingencies.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Component
Amount
%
Amount %
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
IFAD loan
IFAD grant
Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart
Total
1. Strengthening of
community's and
producer groups'
investment planning
2. Implementation of
investment plans
3. Project and
knowledge
management, and
coordination
Total
2 142
4 755
1 055
7 952
71
77
54
71
247
8
637
265
4
1 139
253
500
13
4
265
2
650
2 426
21
18
33
22
3 025
6 159
1 959
11 143
B. Project financing
32. The project will be financed by: (i) the Government, which will provide
US$2.43 million in cash and in-kind – equal to 22 per cent of the total cost;
(ii) IFAD in the amount of US$8.45 million (total performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation 2016-2018), 76 per cent of the total cost, including a loan
of US$7.95 million and a grant of US$500,000; and (iii) beneficiaries, who will
contribute US$270,000 – 2 per cent of the total cost. Some of the categories of
expenditure indicated in table 2 below may be merged in the financing agreement.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD loan
IFAD grant
Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart
Total
Total
Expenditure category
Amount
%
Amount %
Amount % Amount
%
Amount
1. Vehicles and equipment
2. Training
3. Consultancy services
4. Grants (for sub-projects)
5. Salaries
6. Operating expenses
Total
188
614
2 904
3 202
534
510
7 952
84
84
66
78
50
84
71
500
11
265
6
36
117
982
660
534
97
500
4
265
2
2 426
16
16
22
16
50
16
22
6
224
731
4 385
4 128
1 068
607
%
2
7
39
37
10
5
11 143
100
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. To verify the financial viability of project activities, the flow of
annual incremental net benefits was calculated over a period of ten years, both for
rural households’ agricultural production and for producer groups’ enterprises. All
models confirmed increases in benefits, family net income, sales and labour.
Financial viability was positive in all models, with financial internal rates of return
between 23 per cent and 312 per cent.
34. Economic analysis. Economic viability indicators are positive, with an economic
internal rate of return of 21 per cent and an expected net present value of
US$6.97 million. Viability indicators are not highly sensitive to the reduction of
benefits and to delays in obtaining them; these indicators are moderately sensitive
to cost increases.
D. Sustainability
35. Political and institutional sustainability. The project is aligned with the national
policy framework, which: highlights the development of hinterland agriculture;
seeks to reduce the poverty and isolation of indigenous communities; and supports
the adoption of environmentally sustainable development. Coordination between
national government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region
9, and the project will contribute to dialogue and coordination between government
agencies, indigenous communities, international donors and civil society
organizations operating in hinterland areas.
36. Sustainability, upscaling and replication. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana
mostly concentrated on coastal areas and communities. This project builds upon
and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland, and paves
the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the country with
similar conditions. Of particular relevance is the phased implementation approach
adopted for region 1, where a state of food and agriculture study will be conducted
in the first year of the project. The knowledge and lessons learned in Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions can be used to replicate the project in other areas of
region 1. Using a participatory planning approach, the project will build upon the
planning capacity developed in villages that have already established community
development plans, and it will strengthen skills and capacities for climate- and
nutrition-sensitive planning.
37. Food security and nutritional quality. Awareness-raising activities and training
materials on nutritional quality will also be created through the project.
38. Environmental sustainability. The adoption of climate-resilient measures such as
the identification of drought-tolerant and climate-resilient crop varieties, and the
definition of climate-proof agricultural technologies will sustain productivity and
quality improvements. The state of food and agriculture study in region 1 will fill
the knowledge gap on environmental and socio-economic conditions in the region,
thus contributing to better planning.
E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The risks identified during the project design include economic risks,
climate-change risks, social risks and institutional risks.
40. Economic risks include excessive specialization and competition for labour from
other sectors. These risks will be mitigated through training and support activities
that build awareness of specialization risks and help communities and producers’
groups to integrate new income-generating activities into diversified livelihood
strategies. The project will promote the strengthening of local value chains and
increase access to information needed for target households’ equitable participation
in agricultural markets. It will also provide technical assistance and investment
incentives to maximize incomes and employment.
7
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
41. Climate-change risks will be addressed through support for investments in public
and collective goods included in P/CIPs and CTPs that increase access to
knowledge, technology and information for improved water and natural resource
management. The project will promote the adoption of good natural resource
management practices and measures for adapting to climate change within
business plans. Business plans will also include mitigation strategies to reduce the
negative effects of productive specialization on climate change resilience and
nutrition through the use of agro-biodiversity and the diversification of livelihoods.
42. Social risks will be reduced through the adoption of free, prior and informed
consent plans, and by strengthening participatory community planning. The
participation of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, will be promoted
through the targeting strategy, the inclusion of skills development and training for
youth and women in CTPs, and by prioritizing business plans that involve vulnerable
groups.
43. Risks to nutrition and food security will be addressed through training and technical
assistance that strengthens the links between income generation and nutrition
quality in order to: (i) help households to make more informed dietary choices;
(ii) increase the adoption of dietary recommendations; and (iii) increase the
richness, variety and nutritional quality of the local food system.
44.
Institutional risks relate to limited regional coordination among stakeholders and to
the weak organizational capacities of communities and producer groups. The
project will strengthen national and regional coordination through its national
steering committee and regional management committee, facilitating linkages
among ministries, other government agencies and programmes, NGOs and other
projects.
45. Based on Guyana’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 29 and public financial management assessments, the project’s fiduciary
risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D of this
report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.
V. Corporate considerations
A.
Compliance with IFAD policies
IFAD’s target group comprises rural people living in poverty and experiencing food
46.
insecurity; IFAD proactively strives to reach extremely poor people (in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 1) with the potential to benefit from improved
access to agricultural production and rural income generation. In the case of
Guyana, poor people principally live in hinterland areas. Therefore, the geographical
focus of this project is in regions 1 and 9 – hinterland areas where indigenous
peoples constitute the majority of the population. Targeting will be monitored using
participatory monitoring and evaluation, and will be assessed at mid-term review.
47. To meet the requirements of IFAD’s demand–driven and consultative targeting
approach, participatory mapping of resource use and economic activities will be
carried out under component 1. IFAD will work with the Government and other
stakeholders to establish a shared understanding of the causes poverty and
exclusion in hinterland areas.
48. Compliance with IFAD policies for environment and natural resource
management. The project complies with IFAD’s Climate and Natural Resources
Management Policy, specifically principles 3 and 4, and will adopt an integrated
climate-smart approach. Local value chains will be identified through participatory
processes to ensure that their development contributes to increasing community-
and household-level resilience to climate change. Priority will be given to initiatives
that promote climate-related disaster risk reduction and management, and the
establishment of agroecological systems. The project will also provide technical
8
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
assistance for the incorporation of technologies and good practices for better
national resource management and climate-change adaptation into investment
plans.
49. Compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment. The hinterland project is aligned with IFAD’s Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment through a participatory approach designed to
ensure that the voices of different rural population segments are equally heard and
valued. Specific gender actions to ensure gender equity have been included in the
project design and budget. By working with entire households, the project will
leverage the complementary knowledge and skills of women and men (in line with
Strategic Objective 2).
50. Compliance with IFAD’s Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. The project is
nutrition sensitive as defined in the IFAD Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. It
contributes to families’ improved food and nutrition security by linking local food
production with the improved nutritional quality of diets.
Alignment and harmonization
B.
51. The project is aligned with the national policy framework, which highlights the
development of hinterland agriculture; reduction of poverty and isolation in
indigenous communities; and adoption of environmentally sustainable development
strategies to mitigate increased threats from climate change.
52.
In region 9, the project will harness complementarities with the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) Sustainable Agricultural Development Project. This project
aims to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining the
sustainable and climate-resilient use of natural resources in regions 5, 9 and 10.
IDB will support the Ministry of Agriculture in the preparation and implementation
of an extension strategy that includes incentives for small farmers to adopt
technologies for cassava, peanuts, livestock, orchards and pastures. To enhance
synergies and improve national and regional coordination, the two projects will use
the same national steering committee and regional management committee in
region 9. Collaboration will also be sought with IDB to utilize information and
communication technologies in rural areas.
53. The project will be harmonized with the IDB multilateral investment fund project
Leveraging Natural Capital in the Rupununi Region (region 9). This project aims to
create and strengthen environmentally sustainable local-level initiatives, and
enhance market access for community-based enterprises. It will be also
harmonized with Guyana’s Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation Plus Investment Fund, which aims to invest in low-carbon approaches
identified in the Low Carbon Development Strategy. In addition, collaboration will
be sought with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
on the state of food and agriculture study in region 1, and to support
implementation of the Integrated Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy for
region 9 2015-2020 (developed by the Ministry of Agriculture, FAO and
Conservation International).
C.
54.
Innovations and scaling up
Previous IFAD projects in Guyana were concentrated in coastal areas. This project
builds upon and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland,
and paves the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the
country with similar conditions.
Policy engagement
D.
55. The project, which will be mainly implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, is
aligned with government decentralization strategies involving local governments
and indigenous peoples’ institutions through the Ministries of Communities and
9
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs (in partnership with other government agencies,
international donors and international NGOs). Coordination between national
government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region 9; closer
cooperation will be sought throughout the project to strengthen capacities within
the Government and civil society for natural resource management, nutrition- and
climate-sensitive planning.
VI. Legal instruments and authority
56. A project financing agreement between the Cooperative Republic of Guyana and
IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.
57. The Cooperative Republic of Guyana is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.
58.
I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.
VII. Recommendation
59.
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of
the following resolutions:
RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana in the amount of seven million nine hundred
and sixty thousand United States dollars (US$7,960,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.
RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Cooperative
Republic of Guyana in the amount of five hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
10
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Negotiated financing agreement
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project
(Negotiations concluded on 4 November 2016)
Loan Number: _________
Grant Number: ________
Project Title: Hinterland  Environmentally  Sustainable  Agricultural  Development  Project
(the “Hinterland Project” or “the Project”)
The Cooperative Republic of Guyana (the “the Borrower/Recipient”)
and
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)
(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)
HEREBY agree as follows:
Section A
1.
The  following  documents  collectively  form  this  Agreement:  this  document,  the
Project Description  and  Implementation  Arrangements  (Schedule  1)  and  the  Allocation
Table (Schedule 2).
2.
The  Fund’s  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Development  Financing  dated
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from time to
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof
shall  apply  to  this  Agreement.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement  the  terms  defined  in
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.
The  Fund  shall  provide  a Loan  and  Grant
3.
“Financing”),  which the  Borrower/Recipient shall  use  to  implement  the Project
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
to the  Borrower/Recipient
(the
in
Section B
1.
A.
The  amount  of  the  Loan  is  seven  million  nine  hundred  sixty  thousand
US dollars (USD 7.96 million).
B.
The  amount  of 
(USD 0.50 million).
the  Grant 
is 
five  hundred 
thousand  US  dollars
2.
The Loan is granted on blend terms, and shall be subject to interest on the principal
amount  outstanding  at a  fixed  rate  of  1.25  per  cent  and in  addition  a service  charge  of
0.75  per  cent  per  annum  payable  semiannually  in  the  Loan  Service  Payment  Currency
and  shall  have  a  maturity  period  of  twenty  five  (25)  years,  including  a  grace  period  of
five (5) years, starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board.
1
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
3.
4.
The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be the US dollar.
The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.
Payments of principal, interest and service charge shall be payable on each 15 June
5.
and 15 December.
6.
There shall be a designated account denominated in US dollars opened by and held
in  the  name  of  the  Borrower/Recipient  in  the  Central  Bank  of  Guyana.  This  designated
account shall be used exclusively for the deposit of Financing proceeds.
7.
There  shall  be  a  Project  Account  opened  by  and  held  in  the  name  of  the
Borrower/Recipient in a bank selected by the Borrower/Recipient. It shall be in Guyanese
Dollars  and this is  where  resources  from  the  Designated  Account  and counterpart funds
shall be deposited.
8.
The Borrower/Recipient shall  provide  counterpart  financing  for  the Project in  an
amount  equivalent  to  two  million  four  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  US  dollars
(USD 2 430 000) in cash and in kind, including covering of taxes and duties in an amount
equivalent to one million four hundred and eighty USD dollars (USD 1 480 000).
Section C
1.
The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture.
The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into
2.
force of this Agreement.
Section D
1.
The Financing will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.
Section E
The  following  is  designated  as  an  additional  ground  for  suspension  of  the  right  of
1.
the Borrower/Recipient  to request withdrawals from the Loan and the Grant Accounts:
(a)
the  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  referred  to  in  paragraph  10  of
Schedule  1  hereto,  or  any  provision  thereof,  has  been  waived,  suspended,
terminated,  amended  or  otherwise  modified  without  the  prior  consent  of  the
Fund,  and  the  Fund  has  determined  that  such  waiver,  suspension,
termination,  amendment  or  modification  has  had,  or  is  likely  to  have,  a
material adverse effect on the Project.
The  following  are  designated  as  additional  general  conditions  precedent  to
2.
withdrawal:
(a)
The Project Management Unit (PMU) shall have been duly established and the
recruitment  of  key  personnel  such  as  the  Project  Coordinator,  a  Finance
Officer, Procurement Officer and M&E Officer shall have been completed;
(b)
The Borrower/Recipient shall have prepared a draft PIM in form and substance
satisfactory to the Fund; and
(c)
The Baseline study for Region 9 shall have been completed.
2
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
The  following  are  designated  as  additional  specific  conditions  precedent  to
3.
withdrawal for expenditures related to Component 2 in Region 1:
(a)
(b)
The  detailed  value  chains  study  for  spices  in  Region  1  shall  have  been
completed;
The SOFA study in Mabaruma and Moruca sub regions of Region 1 shall have
been completed;
(c)
The Baseline study for Region 1 shall have been completed.
The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
3.
communication related to this Agreement:
For the Borrower/Recipient:
Minister of Finance
Ministry of Finance
49 Main and Urquhart Streets
Georgetown, Guyana
For the Fund:
President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy
This Agreement, dated _________, has been prepared in the English language in two (2)
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the the Borrower/Recipient.
COOPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF GUYANA
____________________
(Authorized Representative)
(name and title)
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
___________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
3
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Schedule 1
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements
I.
Project Description
1.
Project Area. The Project will operate in  Region 9 and in the Mabaruma and Moruca
sub-regions  of  Region  1.  It  will  follow  IFAD’s  geographic  targeting  approach  as  it  will
address the needs of the rural poor living in the Project area. The beneficiaries will come
from approximately 80 of the 128 existing villages and communities in Regions 1 and 9
(60  communities  in  Region  9  and  20  communities  in  Region  1). Phasing-in  of
communities  will  be  used to  ensure  there  is  sufficient  time  to  assist  villages,
communities,  and  producer  groups  with  the  implementation  of  their  Investment  and
Business Plans. Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population density of the
region, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for Region 9. The Project will
initially only focus on North Rupununi, so as to capitalize on current government efforts
to  exploit  the  significant  agricultural  potential  of  this  sub-region.  Lessons  learned  from
Project  implementation  in  North  Rupununi  will  later  be  applied  to  Central  and  South
Rupununi.
Target  Population. The  target  group  includes  poor  indigenous  and  non-indigenous
2.
rural households living in the Project area, whose livelihoods are threatened by economic
and  environmental  risks. The  target  group  will  include  6,000  poor  households  receiving
Project services, which is equivalent to 94 per cent of the existing poor households in the
Project  area.  At  least  15  per  cent  of  these  (900  households)  would  be  female-headed
households  as  this  reflects  the  reality  in  the  Project  area.  The  6,000  households
represent a total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries of approximately 30,000 men
and  women  of  different  age  groups. The  Project  will  ensure  that  the  most  vulnerable
groups  have  access  to  services  and  investment,  empowering  and  facilitating  the
participation  of  indigenous  peoples,  youth,  and  women. At  least  75  per  cent  of  the
Project beneficiaries would be from Amerindian tribes. At least 30 per cent would be from
the  age  group  15-44  years  old  and  at  least  50  per  cent  would  be  women. Due  to  the
adoption  of  a  phased  approach,  figures  for  the  target  population  may  be  revised  at  the
mid-term review.
3.
Objective. The  Development  Objective  of  the  Project  is  “Improved  livelihood
resilience  through  income  generation,  access  to  assets,  improved nutrition  and
adaptation to climate variability”. Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by increasing
income-generating  opportunities;  improving  access  to  public  goods,  knowledge  and
technologies; and enhancing food security and nutrition.
4.
Components. In  order  to  achieve  Project  objectives  and  outcomes,  the  Project
includes  two  main  components:  (a) Strengthening  of  communities  and  producer  groups’
investment  planning;  and  (b) Implementation  of  investments  plans.  A  third  component
will be dedicated to Project and knowledge management and coordination.
4.1.
Component  1: Strengthening  of  community  and  producer  groups  investment
planning. The  objective  of  this  component  is  to  support  Village  and  Community
Councils  (in  Region  9),  value  chain  roundtables (in  Region  1)  and  Regional
Development  Councils 
the
in  planning  and  prioritizing 
development of local value chains2 and resilient communities and livelihoods. The
expected  outcome  is  that  communities  and  producer  groups  have  strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate
investments 
for 
2
In the case of Region 1 there is significant potential for the production and marketing of species where other local and
national market, there is a significant potential on international markets
4
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
change risks. The main instruments that will be developed by this component are
Community  Production  Development  Plans  (CPDP)  for  Region  9  and  Value  Chain
Action  Plans  (VCAP)  for  Region  1.  These  overall  medium-term  plans  will  be  the
basis  for  the  development  of  three  types  of  concrete  investment  plans  to  be
implemented with the project support: Public/Collective Investment Plans (P/CIP),
Community Training Plans (CTP), and Business Plans (BP).
4.1.1. Through the IFAD grant, under Component 1 the Project will finance a SOFA study
for  Region  1  that  builds  on  the  methodology  and  approach  already  adopted  in
Region 9. Likewise, to obtain a better understanding of the spices value chains the
grant  will  also  finance  value  chain  studies.  These  studies  will  include  an
identification  of  key  constraints  and  opportunities  for  the  development  of  the
value  chains  with  the  inclusion  of  Amerindian  and  small  holder  farmers  including
constraints  in  production  and  transport  costs,  produce  volume  and  quality
compared to market demands. In order to avoid delays in project implementation
for  Region  1,  resources  for  the  SOFA  and  the  value  chain  studies  can  be
anticipated by the GOG as soon as the loan agreement has been signed. Expenses
incurred  for  the  SOFA  study  will  be  considered  as  retroactive  expenses,  and  will
therefore  be  reimbursed once  the  conditions 
for  the  effectiveness  and
disbursement of the Financing Agreement are fulfilled.
4.2.
Component  2: Implementation  of  investment  plans. While  Component  1  will
provide  training,  studies  and  capacity  building  needed  to  develop  investment
plans, Component 2 will support their actual implementation. Under Component 2
an  Investment  Fund  will  be  established  to  finance,  through  non-reimbursable
mechanisms, public and common goods and services in the following categories of
investments  that  may  be  included  in  the  different  types  of  investment  plans:
(a) investments  in  public  and  common  goods  and  services  that  contribute  to  the
reduction  of  climate  and  investment  risks,  included  in  P/CIPs;  (b)  services  for
related
training,  capacity-building  and  awareness-raising  activities,  and 
background  studies,  that  contribute  to  the  reduction  of  climate,  economic  and
nutritional  risks,  included  in  CTPs;  (c)  technical  assistance  and  services  to  favor
activities  that  have  positive  spillover  effects  on  the hosting  communities  since
they contribute to the diffusion of models, knowledge, technologies and capacities
that  improve  livelihood  resilience  by  reducing  the  climate,  economic  and
nutritional risks, included in BPs.
4.2.1. The administration and execution of the Investment Fund will be arranged through
an agreement signed between MOA and a Financial Institution(s) with presence in
the  regions.  The  selection  of  the  Financial  Institution(s)  will  be  through  a
competitive  bidding  process.  The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  the
implementation  of  the  Investment  Fund  and  evaluating  the  performance  of  the
Financial Institution as well as the results achieved.
4.3.
Component 3: Project and knowledge management and coordination. The purpose
of the third component is to establish management and administrative procedures
including accounting and auditing as well as setting up monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms 
in  accordance  with  IFAD  and  national  guidelines.  Specific
evidence-based  knowledge  products  will be  developed  on  the  basis  of  Project
experiences  in  order  to  extract  lessons  and  best  practices,  up-scale  innovative
solutions,  and  achieve  better  outcomes  and  greater  impact  from  development
resources.  Also,  coordination  and  activities  to  link  project  and regional  planning
will be supported.
5
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
II.
Implementation Arrangements
5.
The Lead Project Agency.
5.1. The Lead agency for the implementation of the Hinterland Project will be the Ministry
of  Agriculture  through  its  Agriculture’s  Sector  Development  Unit (ASDU).  For
activities  such  as  consultative  village  planning  processes,  agricultural  technologies
and  technical  assistance,  natural  resource  management  and  regional  investment
planning,  the  MOA  would  be  assisted  by  the  MIPA,  MNE,  MOC,  MOB  and  other
government  agencies,  Non-Governmental  Organizations  (NGOs),  Community-Based
Organizations (CBOs) and local educational institutes.
5.2. The  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  will  comprise  the  office  at  the  MOA  in
Georgetown  and  regional  offices  in  Regions  1  and  9. The  PMU  in  Georgetown  will
have  a  Project  Coordinator,  a  Procurement  Officer,  a  Finance  Officer,  and  an  M&E
Officer.  The  latter  will  be  located  at  the  M&E  Unit  of  the  MOA.  In  each  regional
office,  the  Project  will  be  supported  by  a  Regional  Project  Officer (RPO)  and  Field
Facilitators.  The  office  in  Region  9  will  also  have  a  Social  Inclusion  and  Gender
Specialist  who  will  assist  both  Regional  Project  Officers  in  this  particular  area  of
expertise.
5.3. Effective  coordination  with  other  line  ministries,  Regional  Democratic  Councils  and
private  sector  initiatives  in  the  regions  is  essential  to  create  synergies  and  ensure
sustainability  of  Project  results.  To  this  end,  a  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC)
and  Regional  Management  Committees  (RMC)  will  be  established  to  provide  policy
direction  and  support  for  implementation,  advise  on  the  Annual  Workplan  and
Budget, and encourage inter-organizational coordination and linkages.
5.4. The  NSC  is  comprised  of  representatives  from  the:  Ministry  of  Finance  (MOF),
Ministry  of  Agriculture  (MOA),  Ministry  of  Indigenous  People´s  Affairs  (MOIPA),
Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR), Ministry of Business (MOB), Ministry of Public
Health (MOPH), Ministry of Communities (MOC), Ministry of Social Protection (MSP),
Office of Climate Change at the Ministry of the Presidency, and two Representatives
from  the  beneficiaries  (one  from  Region  1  and  one  from  Region  9).  The  roles,
responsibilities and composition of the NSC shall be detailed in the PIM. The RMCs
will include, inter alia, the following representatives: (i) a regional chairman; (ii) a
regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) a regional
representative  of  the  MNR;  (iv)  a  regional  representative  of  each  NAREI  (National
Agricultural  Research  and  Extension  Institute)  or  GLDA  (Guyana  Livestock
Development Authority); and (v) a regional representative of the Program targeted
beneficiaries.  The  roles  and  responsibilities  and  composition  of  the  RMC  shall  be
detailed in the PIM and shall include, inter alia to: (i) support the implementation of
the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the implementation of
the Annual Workplan; and (iii) collaborate in coordinating with local and community
leaders.
5.5. The  Project  will  provide  support  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  MOA  M&E  Unit,
and  ensure  that  Project  implementation  monitoring  is  linked  to  MOA  performance
monitoring  and  feeds  into  existing  Agriculture  Strategy  indicators.  Monitoring  and
evaluation will be conducted using a participatory approach; data collection will be
kept  simple  and  not  time-consuming,  focusing  on  the  reliability  and  usefulness  of
collected  data.  Evidence-based  knowledge  products  will  be  developed  to  extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize  outcomes  and  impact  from  development  resources,  and  disseminate
generated  knowledge  to  support  national,  regional  and  local  decision  making  and
policy  processes. The  Baseline  Study  will  be  carried  out  immediately  after  the
approval  of  the  Financing  Agreement  by  IFAD’s  Executive  Board  and  before
implementation.
6
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Financial management. Financial Management (FM) and Procurement of the Project
6.
will be undertaken by the ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate accounting
system  and  an  extensive  experience  in  implementing  internationally  funded  projects.  A
qualified Finance Officer will be recruited through a competitive process as a condition of
disbursement from the loan and grant accounts.
7.
Procurement. Project procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU
in  accordance to  national  regulation  as  long  as  it  is  compatible  with IFAD  Project
Procurement Guidelines and in accordance with the provisions of the financing agreement.
A procurement officer, exclusively assigned to the Hinterland Project will be hired by ASDU.
8.
Audit.    The  annual  consolidated  financial  statements  of  the  Project will  be
independently audited, pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance with
the International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. In line
with  its  mandate  as  per  the  Guyana  Audit  Act  2004,  the  Auditor  General  shall  be
responsible for conducting financial, compliance,  performance and value-for-money audits
with  respect  to  the  accounts  of  all  projects  funded  by  the  way  of  loans  or  grants  by  any
foreign  state  or  organization.  In  this  regard,  the  Guyana  Auditor General  Audit  Office  will
conduct  the  audit  of  the  Project  financial  statements.  Annual  audit  reports  will  be
submitted to IFAD within the six months of the end of the each fiscal year.
Supervision. IFAD  will  provide  direct  supervision  for  the  Project,  complemented  by
9.
implementation  support  missions.  One  supervision  mission  is  generally  planned  for  each
year. The first supervision mission, undertaken approximately six months after the date of
entry  into  force,  will  monitor  progress  in  relation  to  the  timeframe  defined  in  the
implementation  plan,  and  will  assess advancements in  fiduciary  aspects,  expenditures,
contribution of funds from the counterpart and compliance with the terms of the financing
agreement.  Implementation  support  missions  will  be  planned  to  cover  the  themes  and
areas recommended by supervision missions.
10.
Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM).    The  PIM  shall  be  prepared  by  the  PMU  and
approved by the Permanent Secretary, who will have the responsibility to send to IFAD for
its non-objection. The PIM may be amended or otherwise modified from time to time only
with the prior consent of the Fund. The PIM provides the basis for the implementation of
Hinterland  Environmentally  Sustainable  Agriculture  Development  Project  (Hinterland
Project).  It  will  establish  the  Strategic  and  Institutional  Framework  and  provide  guidance
for  the  overall  planning  and  implementation  of  activities.  It  will  detail  the  collaborative
framework  for  project  implementation,  the  institutional  and  management  arrangements;
the  administrative,  fiduciary  and  contractual  procedures;  monitoring,  evaluation  and
reporting. The Manual will establish effective implementation procedures and mechanisms,
which  will  ensure  the  achievement  of  the  overall  objectives  as  outlines  in  the  Project’s
design document and log-frame.
7
Appendix I
EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1
Schedule 2
Allocation Table
1.
Allocation  of  Proceeds. The  Table  below  sets  forth  the  Categories  of  Eligible
Expenditures  to  be  financed  by  the Loan  and  Grant and  the  allocation  of  the
amounts  of  the Loan  and  Grant to  each  Category  and  the  percentages  of
expenditures for items to be financed in each Category:
Category
IFAD Loan
Amount Allocated
(expressed
in USD)
IFAD Grant
Amount Allocated
(expressed
in USD)
Percentage
I. Vehicles and equipment
170 000
II. Training
550 000
-
-
100% net of taxes
100% net of taxes
III. Consultancy services
2 620 000
450 000
100% net of taxes
IV. Grants (for Sub-projects)
2 880 000
V. Salaries and operating
940 000
-
-
100% net of taxes
100% net of taxes
expenses
Unallocated
800 000
50 000
TOTAL
7 960 000
500 000
2.
Retroactive  Financing.  As  an  exception  to  section  4.08(a)(ii)  of  the  General
Conditions,  specific  eligible  expenditures  incurred  from  the  date  of  approval  by  the
Executive Board until the date of  entry into force  of this Agreement  shall be considered
eligible up to an amount equivalent to three hundred thousand US dollars (USD 300 000)
for activities relating to: (i) recruitment of key personnel, (ii) baseline study for Region 9
and Region 1, (iii) detailed value chains study for spices in Region 1, (iv) SOFA study in
Mabaruma and  Moruca  sub  regions  of  Region  1. Activities  to  be  financed  by  retroactive
financing  and  their  respective  category  of  expenditures  and  source  of  financing  will
require  prior  no  objection  from  IFAD  to  be  considered  eligible.  These  amounts  may  be
reimbursed after the general conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met
3.
Start-up  Costs.  Withdrawals  in  respect  of  expenditures  for  start-up  costs  for  the
same  activities  indicated  in  the  previous  paragraph  can  be  made  before  the  satisfaction
of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.  Start-up costs shall not exceed an aggregate
amount equivalent to three hundred thousand US dollars (USD 300 000). Activities to be
financed by start-up costs and their respective categories of expenditures and source of
financing will require prior no objection from IFAD to be considered eligible.
8
Logical framework
Results Hierarchy
Development Objective:
Improved livelihood resilience
through income generation,
access to assets, improved
nutrition, and adaptation to
climate variability.
Indicators
Name
Baseline
End Target
Source
Frequency
 80% of targeted households
have increased their score on
the resilience scorecard by at
least 2 points.
 Baseline
resilience
TBD
 4,800 hh
(15% female
headed hh)
Baseline studies
Impact study
Verification  in  the
field
Before
Effectiveness
Mid Term
Before Closing
Respons
ibility
PMU
MOA
Means of Verification
Risks
Component 1: Strengthening of community and producer groups investment planning
Outcome 1
Communities and producer
groups have identified
investment opportunities
manage economic and climate
change risk.
 80% of households in targeted

0
communities participate in
development of public /
collective investments plans.
 People in targeted communities
participating in producer groups
with approved business plans.

0
9
Component 2: Implementation of investment plans
Reports M&E
Supervision
reports
Progress reports
Semi-annually
Annually
Mid Term
Before Closing
PMU
MOA
 4,500 hh
(15% female
headed hh)
 2,500 people
(50%
women; 30%
youth)

2,000 hh
(15%  female
headed hh)
 At least 80% of the households
that invested in business plans
have increased their income from
agriculture and related activities
by 50%.
 Private
assets
baseline
TBD
Outcome 2.1
Increased investments in
business plans that increase
agriculture and related
income-generating
opportunities and increase
market access.
Outcome 2.2
Increased access to assets
that build community
resilience and create an
enabling productive
environment (water, energy,
ITC).
 Additional volume of water stored
 Baseline
 TBD
in targeted communities.
TBD
 Number of households in targeted
 Baseline
 TBD
communities with access to
renewable energy sources.
TBD
 Number of Internet Access Points
 Baseline
 TBD
available to households in
targeted communities.
TBD
Baseline studies
Impact study
Progress reports
Verification  in  the
field
Before
effectiveness
Annually
Mid Term
Before Closing
PMU
MOA
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
6
/
L
O
T
/
P
.
1
2
/
R
e
v
.
1
Economic risks:
 Productive
specialization (vs
traditional
diversification
strategy):
vulnerability to
market shocks;
increased
seasonality effects
on income and
labour cycles
 Competition for
labour from other
sectors (e.g.,
mining)
Climate change
risks:
 Productive
transformation
without access to
adequate
technology and
information for
water and soil
management
 Shift to less
diversified farming
systems
Social risks:
 Weakening of
social capital and
organization
capacity at
community level
Outcome 2.3
Improved diet of adequate
quality and appropriate
quantity, referring to context-
appropriate food-based
dietary guidelines and drawing
insofar as possible on own-
production and local markets
in a context of effective
behaviour change and
nutrition education activities.
 Number of households in target
 Baseline
 TBD
communities that adopt
technologies for integrated soil
fertility management, integrated
pest management, and technology
for increasing efficient water use
that improved adaptability to
climate change
 60% of households have food
consumption patterns that
substantially reflect appropriate
“best option food basket”.
TBD
 Baseline
TBD
 3,600 hh
(15% female
headed hh)
 Number of reference “best option
 Baseline
TBD
food baskets,” reflecting
nutritionally adequate, low-cost
options, developed and
communicated (based on food-
based dietary guidelines and
giving preference to foods
available from local production).
 Number of crops and animal
varieties and wild species used as
food or income generating source
at community level.
TBD
 Baseline
TBD
 Same or
more
1
0
Component 3: Project and Knowledge management and Coordination
Outcome 3
Efficient and adequate
management and
implementation of planned
activities and effective
coordination and planning
between institutions at the
national, regional and local
level.
 At least 90 per cent of the AWPB
is implemented each year.
 Number of evidence based
knowledge products developed
(written, video or oral/radio).
 Number of MOUs signed with
public institutions to provide
services to the project.
 The project’s global investment
plan and AWPBs are reflected in
the regional budgets and plans for
two regions.



0
0
0
 90 per cent
annual
 At least four
 At least four

0
 Two regions
Baseline studies
Impact study
Progress 
reports
Verification  in  the
field
Before
effectiveness
Annually
Mid Term
Before Closing
PMU
MOA
AWPB
Supervision
reports
Progress reports
Annually
Mid Term
Before Closing
PMU
MOA
and 
NSC 
Minutes
Progress reports
RM
 Exclusion of
vulnerable groups
including women
and youth
 Risks for nutrition
and food security:
 Increased
complexity of
nutritional
problems (e.g.,
transition to
unhealthy diets)
 Decrease of food
security
 Loss of traditional
knowledge, food
culture and agro-
biodiversity
Institutional
risks:
 Limited inter-
institutional
coordination for
actions at the
regional level
 Incipient
managerial and
organizational
capacity to
implement
investments at the
local level
(communities and
producers’
organizations)
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
6
/
L
O
T
/
P
.
1
2
/
R
e
v
.
1
