Document:
Agenda:
Date:
Distribution:
Original:
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
9(b)(i)
17 December 2015
Public
English
E
President’s report
Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Malawi for the
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development
Note to Executive Board representatives
Focal points:
Technical questions:
Dispatch of documentation:
Thomas Rath
Country Programme Manager
East and Southern Africa Division
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2069
e-mail: t.rath@ifad.org
Alessandra Zusi Bergés
Officer-in-Charge
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org
Executive Board — 116th Session
Rome, 16-17 December 2015
For: Approval
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
ii
iii
iv
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
10
Contents
Abbreviations and acronyms
Map of programme area
Financing summary
Recommendation for approval
I.
Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP
II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
B. Programme development objective
C. Components/outcomes
III. Programme implementation
Approach
A.
B. Organizational framework
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management
D. Financial management, procurement and governance
E. Supervision
IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
B. Programme financing
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
D. Sustainability
E. Risk identification and mitigation
V.
Corporate considerations
A.
B.
C.
D.
Compliance with IFAD policies
Alignment and harmonization
Innovations and scaling up
Policy engagement
VI. Legal instruments and authority
VII. Recommendation
Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework
i
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Abbreviations and acronyms
ASAP
ASWAp
AWP/B
COSOP
DFID
DSF
GAP
IMPIF
IRLADP
M&E
MGDS
MOAIWD
MOFEPD
PCO
PRIDE
PSC
RIMS
RLEEP
SAPP
SECAP
UNDP
WUA
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
agriculture sector-wide approach programme
annual workplan and budget
country strategic opportunities programme
Department for International Development (United Kingdom)
Debt Sustainability Framework
good agricultural practice
Irrigation Master Plan and Investment Framework
Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development Project
monitoring and evaluation
Malawi Growth and Development Strategy
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development
Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development
programme coordination office
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development
programme steering committee
Results and Impact Management System
Rural Livelihoods and Economic Enhancement Programme
Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
United Nations Development Programme
water users’ association
ii
Map of programme area
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
iii
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Republic of Malawi
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development
Financing summary
Initiating institution:
IFAD
Borrower:
Executing agency:
Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water
Development
Total programme cost:
US$83.95 million
Amount of IFAD loan:
SDR 19.30 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.48 million)
Amount of IFAD
Debt Sustainability Framework grant:
SDR 19.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.54 million)
Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:
Terms of IFAD loan:
Cofinancier(s):
Amount of cofinancing:
SDR 5.15 million (equivalent to approximately
US$7.06 million)
40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum
Department for International Development (DFID);
private sector
DFID: US$0.5 million
Private sector: US$3.0 million
Terms of cofinancing:
Grant
Contribution of borrower:
US$13.08 million
Contribution of beneficiaries:
US$7.28 million (in kind)
Appraising institution:
IFAD
Cooperating institution:
Directly supervised by IFAD
iv
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
x
I
I
[
C
l
i
c
k
h
e
r
e
a
n
d
i
n
s
e
r
t
E
B
.
.
/
.
.
/
R
.
.
]
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Malawi for the Programme for Rural Irrigation
Development, as contained in paragraph 56.
Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Malawi for
the Programme for Rural Irrigation Development
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1.
Malawi is a densely populated landlocked country of some 15 million people in an
area of 118,484 km2, of which 24,000 km2 is covered by freshwater lakes and
mangroves. Population growth is almost 3 per cent per annum and the country has
one of the lowest per capita GDPs in the world. With a Human Development Index
of 0.414, Malawi is ranked 174th out of 187 countries (2014), while for its gender
development index it ranked 116th out of 208 countries (2013). Education levels are
low. Chronic food insecurity and malnutrition, combined with HIV/AIDS prevalence
of 11.9 per cent, add to the challenge.
2.
Poverty is mainly rural. Approximately 51 per cent of the Malawian population lives
below the poverty line of a dollar a day (Millennium Development Goals [MDGs]
Report 2013), while in rural areas over 85 per cent of the people are poor.1 Rural
areas also have a higher occurrence of both stunted and underweight children than
do urban areas. In 2005, the Government of Malawi set up the Fertilizer Input
Supply Scheme, which increased maize production and enabled the country to
become self-sufficient in years with normal weather conditions. However, Malawi’s
progress against the MDGs remains mixed. Hunger has decreased, but persists.
Targets for poverty reduction and primary education are deemed unlikely to be
achieved by 2015.
3. Women have remained disadvantaged in many aspects of life, despite their large
share in the food-production labour force. They have little control over produce,
and benefit less from the income earned. Young people also face considerable
challenges, mainly in terms of few employment opportunities outside agriculture in
rural areas and the ongoing fragmentation of landholdings. Farming, predominantly
rainfed, is associated with low cash-income generation, hard labour and low status.
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
4.
5.
RB-COSOP
Most smallholder families in Malawi live at the subsistence level, with cash or food
insecurity for several months of the year. Adverse climate effects exacerbate the
already precarious situation of many smallholders. In 2015, for example, floods
destroyed a large part of the maize harvest in southern Malawi, while other areas
suffered under prolonged drought, with severe consequences for crop yields, food
security and nutrition.
Land productivity has been declining for decades, mainly due to existing
inappropriate land and water management practices that do not support sustainable
crop production and erosion control measures. Moreover, farmers do not possess
sufficient financing to purchase fertilizer to restore soil fertility. Irrigation is scarce
and this curbs agricultural production to only one harvest per year.
1 National Statistical Office of Malawi, Statistical Yearbook 2008.
1
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
6.
7.
8.
9.
Access to land under customary procedures is increasingly under threat due to the
high demand for arable land. Seasonal sublets of land have become frequent and
benefit those who can afford to pay, while the poor may lose their land.
Several government- and donor-funded programmes aim to reverse current trends
in the loss of soil fertility and declining yields. The Government invests in the
Fertilizer Input Supply Scheme to enhance soil fertility and increase yields of maize,
the main staple crop, and to boost national food security. Unfortunately, it faces
difficulties in sustaining the scheme due to its high costs.
The proposed Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (PRIDE) has been
designed to address the above issues through investments in irrigation and in
improved rainfed agriculture adapted to smallholders. It seeks to enable: higher
land and labour productivity; application of sustainable, climate-smart land and
water management practices; and a focus on agricultural markets to generate cash
income for smallholders.
The Government is committed to addressing rural poverty through agricultural
growth. The second Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS II) defines
water development as a key strategic area. In 2015, the Irrigation Master Plan and
Investment Framework (IMPIF) was formulated to expand access of smallholders to
irrigation in order to boost crop production and enhance resilience to adverse
climate events. The Government asked IFAD to invest in the IMPIF and in the
development of water management for smallholder agriculture.
10.
PRIDE is fully compatible with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) 2010-2015 and complements services provided by the existing IFAD
portfolio. Synergies will be developed with both the Rural Livelihoods and Economic
Enhancement Programme (RLEEP – value chain development) and the Sustainable
Agriculture Production Programme (SAPP – good agricultural practices in rainfed
systems).
II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The programme will be implemented over a seven-year period in two regional
clusters in the northern and southern regions of Malawi. The programme will target
poor smallholder farmers of the villages associated with each irrigation scheme. The
primary target group comprises food insecure households. Smallholder farmers will
be supported in: (i) being allocated secure land in the programme irrigation
schemes; (ii) joining water users’ associations (WUAs) and obtaining representation
on catchment management committees; and (iii) becoming business entities
(individually and as groups) to respond to market opportunities.
B. Programme development objective
12. The programme’s goal is to enhance the resilience of rural communities to food
insecurity, the effects of climate change and economic shocks. Its development
objective is that smallholder farmer households increase their income and nutrition
through sustainable agricultural production. The programme’s two major outcomes
are that smallholders: (i) operate climate-smart land and water management
systems; and (ii) adopt environmentally and economically sustainable agricultural
production systems on both rainfed and irrigated land.
C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Irrigation development and catchment management. The
objective of this component is to develop climate-smart land and water
management systems for smallholder households on rainfed and irrigated land. The
objective will be achieved through preparation and management of about 15
irrigation schemes, together with establishment and strengthening of WUAs to
manage, operate and maintain irrigation schemes for appropriate land and water
2
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
governance. Agricultural productivity will be increased through irrigation, using
water storage for a second or third crop, while PRIDE will address environmental
degradation risks by investing in soil and water conservation measures. The latter
will be funded entirely by a grant from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP). The measures aim to restore soil cover on
vulnerable grounds, control erosion, and carry out reforestation of slopes and
protection of river buffer zones, as a contribution to national greenhouse gas
reduced-emission targets.
14. Component 2: Agriculture and market linkages. The objective of this
component is to promote adoption of environmentally and economically sustainable
agricultural production systems by smallholder households on both rainfed and
irrigated land. The programme will support efficient knowledge transfer to
smallholder farmers through trials and demonstrations, combined with better
information from the private sector on market potential and opportunities. The
component will promote climate-smart good agricultural practices (GAPs), including
the use of weather and climate information services, irrigation optimization,
application of integrated pest management and reduction of post-harvest losses.
15. Market linkages will be promoted through: value chain analyses to identify suitable
crops; training, mainly through farmer business schools; and commodity platforms
to bring together all actors in a value chain. A dedicated irrigation technology
window – under the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund – will be piloted with the
private sector and cofunded by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
(DFID). The private sector will provide farmers with modern irrigation equipment
such as drip irrigation and will facilitate marketing of their produce.
16.
PRIDE will mainstream nutrition in most of its activities, such as the choice of crops
or value chain commodities, and support this through the following measures:
(i) integrating a nutrition perspective in all GAPs promoted; (ii) promoting
diversified and improved nutritional production and consumption (integrated
homestead food production); and (iii) supporting the introduction of improved
cooking stoves, which reduce the need for fuelwood by as much as 60 per cent,
combined with nutrition education.
III. Programme implementation
Approach
A.
17. During the implementation phase, PRIDE will actively mobilize partners and
resources for communities in scheme cluster areas so that these communities can
sustainably harness natural resources for agriculture, build competence in
production, and profit from better market linkages. The implementation approach
comprises a phased development process: identification, preparation,
implementation and review. Programme management will be tasked with
monitoring and reporting regularly to safeguard positive environmental and social
outcomes. With an average design-to-commissioning time of three years, irrigation
investments will be phased in three lots, with one or two schemes per irrigation
service division in each lot. Progress and lessons learned in the first three years of
irrigation projects developed under the programme will be carefully documented
and will inform the schemes to be developed in the second phase.
18.
PRIDE builds on lessons learned in various projects in Malawi, such as the World
Bank/IFAD-funded Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development
Project (IRLADP), and links with other projects in the water sector promoted by
various donor agencies.
3
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
B. Organizational framework
19. The lead programme agency will be the Department of Irrigation (DOI) within the
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MOAIWD). The DOI will
establish a dedicated programme coordination office (PCO) which will be staffed
with highly qualified personnel, either from the government's roster or from the
labour market. Separate facilitation offices staffed by one coordinator each will be
established in the northern and southern regions. A programme steering committee
(PSC) will provide strategic oversight and is composed of senior representatives of
the ministries concerned, chaired by the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development (MOFEPD). The PCO will be assisted by a technical advisory team
representing the departments concerned with programme implementation: Land
Resources, Extension, Research (under MOAIWD), Land (under the Ministry of
Lands, Housing and Urban Development), Environmental Affairs (under the Ministry
of Natural Resources, Environment and Mining), Debt and Aid (under MOFEPD), and
others as needed. The programme will coordinate fully with the agriculture sector-
wide approach programme (ASWAp) to ensure full alignment with government
investments and policies.
20.
In the village and scheme cluster areas, the programme will coordinate its entry
with the existing village-level leadership (traditional authorities) and structures,
organized in village development committees. These will convene a combined
village committee to provide oversight for programme and community activities.
Detailed preparations for land consolidation and irrigation scheme preparation will
be delegated to a WUA formation committee. Implementation of more
straightforward activities (soil and water conservation, GAPs and market linkages)
will be handed over to beneficiary groups and lead farmers.
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management
21. The programme’s approach to planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
knowledge management will be in line with the 2001 National Irrigation Policy and
Development Strategy, the MOAIWD M&E framework and IFAD requirements, based
on emerging best practices of the IRLADP and other IFAD-funded projects.
22. The main planning tools for PRIDE comprise the logical framework, overall
programme budget and annual workplan and budget (AWP/B). Every year, a
decentralized, inclusive and demand-driven planning process will be undertaken.
The consolidated AWP/B will be presented to the PSC for approval and to IFAD for
concurrence. Implementation of the AWP/B will be monitored through the
programme’s M&E system, which will produce semi-annual reports.
23.
24.
Programme M&E will be based on IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The programme will conduct baseline and follow-up surveys combining
collection of basic demographic and socio-economic data with application of a
multidimensional poverty assessment tool. The latter will assist in tracking changes
in resilience to climate change. The baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index, which measures changes in women’s
empowerment levels as a result of an intervention.
Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s M&E system,
and particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons learned during
implementation. These will translate into factsheets that will contribute to the wider
policy debate in the smallholder agriculture sector. Dissemination will take place
through programme and MOAIWD websites, or relevant institutions such as
research agencies, and will be presented at national workshops on key programme
themes.
4
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Financial management, procurement and governance
D.
25. Financial management. A financial management assessment was carried out
during design and concluded that the proposed financial management
arrangements for PRIDE are at medium risk. Transparency International's Global
Corruption Perceptions Index scored Malawi at 34 per cent in 2014.2 IFAD’s Rural-
Sector Performance score regarding accountability and corruption in rural areas
scored Malawi at 3.75 in 2014, which translates into medium risk.
26. Mitigation measures aim to enhance the country’s financial management systems
through: use of computerized accounting software, specifically recruited
programme finance staff, accounting linked to M&E, and the use of dedicated bank
accounts. Processing of PRIDE’s day-to-day transactions will be handled outside the
government Integrated Financial Management System. However, the programme
will provide periodic returns to the Accountant General to enable the updating of
government accounts. Accounting will be linked to the M&E system, requiring that
the terms of reference of the financial management team and the M&E expert be
linked on these aspects. The proposed arrangement will be managed by the PCO
under the oversight and guidance of MOAIWD.
27. Flow of funds. IFAD and ASAP funds will flow into one designated account, from
which they pass to the programme operational accounts. The MOFEPD Treasury will
manage the designated account and the PCO the operational bank accounts. All
accounts will be opened at a commercial bank satisfactory to IFAD. Any
government agencies participating in PRIDE will be required to open a PRIDE-
specific bank account to receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved
AWP/Bs, to be retired before subsequent releases.
28. Procurement. All procurement funded under the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent they are consistent
with IFAD’s 2010 Project Procurement Guidelines. Malawi’s legal and institutional
framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently robust.
29. A procurement assessment of IRLADP operations was undertaken as part of the
design of PRIDE and, as a result, a number of mitigation measures will be
incorporated concerning bid registers, contract administration, engagement of the
MOAIWD Internal Procurement Committee, and so forth. A procurement specialist
in the PCO will ensure compliance with IFAD requirements and that procurement
processes in practice are fully compliant with the legislative and regulatory
framework.
30. Governance. A governance and anti-corruption framework will be elaborated as
part of the programme implementation manual during the first year of
implementation. This will ensure transparency, accountability in the use of
resources, and participation, i.e. that people have a voice in decisions that may
affect them. Key features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of
women and disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community
representatives in local-level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring
of programme activities; (iv) both internal and external audit of programme
accounts and processes; (v) IFAD supervision and implementation support;
(vi) reporting of results to the PSC and IFAD, with key information published on a
programme website; and (vii) a grievance system.
E.
31.
Supervision
PRIDE will be directly supervised by IFAD jointly with the Government, with a focus
on: (i) fiduciary aspects; (ii) achievements and the quality of programme
implementation; and (iii) implementation support emphasizing environmental and
climate assessment procedures. Supervision missions will normally be carried out
2 Transparency International: 0 per cent means not corrupt and 100 per cent highly corrupt.
5
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
twice a year. Timing of the missions will be coordinated with production of the six-
monthly progress report, so that missions can gauge the situation at the same cut-
off dates and thus provide an additional perspective on progress at PSC meetings.
During the start-up phase, implementation support will be provided to assist in
setting up adequate systems and to enhance technical capacities. Supervision will
focus on the quality of institutional arrangements, including timely installation of a
high-quality M&E system and creation of baselines.
IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs are estimated at US$84 million, including price and physical
contingencies, duties and taxes. The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) a
seven-year programme period, starting in 2016; (ii) price contingencies of 6 per
cent, and physical contingencies of 3 per cent; (iii) local inflation set at 10 per cent,
and foreign inflation set at 2 per cent; (iv) an exchange rate fixed at US$1 =
440 Malawi kwacha (MK); and (v) the Government will waive duties, excises and
taxes or will finance the cost of all taxes on goods procured under the programme.
Taxes and duties are estimated at US$13 million of total programme costs.
Component estimates are summarized in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD
loan
IFAD grant ASAP
DFID
Private
sector
Beneficiaries
(in kind)
Government
Total
Component
Amount
Amount
Amount Amount Amount
Amount
Amount
Amount
I. Irrigation development and
catchment management
II. Agriculture and market
linkages
III. Programme management
and coordination
16 294
17 736
1 878
-
-
7 283
10 527
53 718
2 979
7516
4 984
498
3 000
7210
1 288
201
-
-
-
-
1 940
20 918
616
9 314
Total
26 483
26 540
7 063
498
3 000
7 283
13 083
83 950
B. Programme financing
33. The programme will be financed by a total IFAD contribution equivalent to some
US$53 million in the form of 50 per cent loan and 50 per cent grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF); ASAP grant financing in an amount equivalent to
about US$7.0 million; DFID financing of about US$0.5 million; private-sector
financing of about US$3.0 million; a Government contribution of about
US$13 million; and a contribution by beneficiaries of about US$7.3 million (in kind).
The IFAD loan will be provided on highly concessional terms, including a 40-year
maturity period, a 10-year grace period, and a 0.75 per cent annual service charge.
34.
IFAD will provide start-up funds from loan and DSF proceeds in the amount of
US$560,000 to cover specified expenditures aimed at enhancing capacity for a
quick start-up.
6
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Expenditure category
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
Amount
IFAD loan
IFAD grant
ASAP
DFID
Private sector
Beneficiaries
(in kind)
Government
Total
1. Works
2. Vehicles
3. Equipment and materials
4. Studies and consultancies
5. Training
6. Cofinancing
7. Operations and
maintenance
8. Salaries and allowances
Total
-
91
13 906 31.1 13 906 31.1
-
4.0
3 338 38.1
5 685 58.4
2 502 41.7
565 70.0
8.5
195
1 613 18.4
1 031 10.6
-
-
1 084 87.1
8 087 77.6
-
9.8
26 483 31.5 26 540 31.6
-
1 017
2.3
1 034
-
-
1 397 61.2
2 302 26.3
1 405 14.4
-
-
-
925
7 063
-
8.9
8.4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
498 8.3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 000 50.0
-
6.9
6 953 15.6 8 896 19.9
242 30.0
443 19.4
- 1 506 17.2
1.8 1 439 14.8
-
-
157
-
172
-
-0
-
-
-
-
-
498 0.6
-
-
3 000
-
-
3.6
-
-
7 283
-
-
161 12.9
3.8
395
8.7 13 083 15.6
44 696
808
2 284
8 760
9 732
6 000
1 245
10 425
83 950
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is estimated at
20 per cent (base case), which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Malawi,
estimated at 12 per cent.3 The EIRR is based on the assumption that 80 per cent of
targeted farmers will adopt the GAP technology packages promoted by the
programme and 90 per cent will be engaged in farming of irrigated land.
36.
PRIDE will generate financial benefits in the form of increased financial returns (net
incomes) to about 17,500 smallholder households as direct beneficiaries of the
programme. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the
programme area owing to expected increased financial returns (about 10-fold) from
irrigated and improved rainfed agriculture, post-harvest technologies and improved
employment opportunities.
37. Other social benefits include improved nutrition and increased food security through
diversification of crop production. PRIDE will strengthen the status of women
through their economic and social empowerment. The main approach includes
promotion of gender-balanced access to irrigated land, representation in WUAs and
other farmers’ institutions, access to GAPs and cash-crop value chains.
38. Better access to and use of weather information, irrigation and community-based
approaches are expected to lead to sustainable land and water management. In
conjunction with a higher degree of commercialization among farmers, PRIDE is
expected to render smallholder farming systems more resilient and better-adapted
to the effects of climate change.
D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability of the benefits generated and approaches will be ensured through a
number of mechanisms. PRIDE embraces a clear strategy for horizontal and vertical
scaling up, with identified pathways, key drivers and institutional space.
40. Knowledge management will be central to information-gathering and learning. Key
results and information will be communicated to the wider public for participation
and to the Government for action in policy development. The focus on linking
smallholders to market will be key, as irrigation investments will only remain
profitable if commercialization of smallholder farming takes place. Farmers will
manage the irrigation schemes through a proven institutional set-up involving
WUAs and consultative planning. These institutions are expected to remain and
become the main development engine, as is the commercialization approach. Land
consolidation will be practised using existing procedures and involving community
3 World Bank: Average deposit interest rate paid by commercial or similar banks in Malawi.
7
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
organizations and the Government. The dynamics will be analysed in annual
studies.
41. Environmental and social sustainability will be achieved through implementation of
specific environmental and social management plans and necessitates resettlement
plans based on the assessments and frameworks adopted by the Government.
These frameworks will ensure that potential environmental and social impacts or
required resettlement actions be identified and addressed accordingly, before the
related irrigation schemes are constructed.
E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. Risk management will include adoption of mitigation measures and their
monitoring. Delayed programme start-up has been a common feature in the past.
Preparation of the implementation manual and a start-up plan aim to counteract
potential delays. By programme start-up, the action plan will be agreed and
earmarked funding will enable staff training and the purchase of equipment.
Another key risk is slow registration of WUAs. The registration process has been
placed in the start-up phase to complete the process before construction begins.
43.
PRIDE will recruit from both the public and private sector to avoid gaps in staffing
and to obtain the best skill levels. A critical risk involves follow-up on environmental
safeguards. In line with IFAD’s 2015 Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP), a full assessment was carried out during design, leading to the
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework. These frameworks will guide the impact assessments, to be executed
during implementation, but prior to construction of the irrigation schemes. The PCO
will host an environmental coordinator to monitor needed actions in line with
Environment and Social Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans.
44. The establishment of irrigated command areas will require a redistribution of land.
PRIDE will benefit from the processes and experience of IRLADP. At scheme
development, farmers will be provided equitable access to land. Any agreements
will be subject to free, prior and informed consent by the affected parties, and will
include compensation for any loss of land and assets due to irrigation development.
A grievance mechanism will ensure the possibility of recourse following decisions.
45. Risks related to financial management include: (i) flow of funds is delayed due to
poor management of the designated account located within the Reserve Bank of
Malawi; (ii) MOAIWD capacity for internal audit is limited; and (iii) submission of
audit reports is delayed. The following mitigation measures will be established:
(i) the designated account will be located at a commercial bank; (ii) internal audit
will be outsourced; and (iii) the Auditor General has agreed to ensure timely
submission of audit reports.
V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policies
A.
Programme design is compliant with the main IFAD policies and strategies. SECAP
46.
has classified PRIDE as category A. In line with SECAP, as mentioned above, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework were developed during design and adopted by the Government. They
specify the next steps in terms of environmental and social impact assessments and
follow-up actions. PRIDE is compliant with IFAD’s Natural Resources Management
Policy and Climate Change Strategy. Climate-change adaptation measures are
integrated into programme activities to address climate risks and the potential
multiplication of effects, such as damage to landscapes and infrastructure.
47. Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated into programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. PRIDE will be
8
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
implemented respecting IFAD’s Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security, the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests and the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in
Africa. Before supporting any intervention that might affect land access and use
rights of communities, the programme will ensure that their free, prior and
informed consent has been solicited through inclusive consultations based on full
disclosure of the intent and scope of the activities planned and their implications.
Alignment and harmonization
PRIDE is fully in harmony with MGDS II, which defines water development as a key
strategic area. Under this strategy, the IMPIF plans and coordinates interventions in
irrigation funded by IFAD and other donor agencies. PRIDE is also aligned with the
Government's Climate Change Investment Plan and will contribute to two
adaptation programmes: (i) strengthening catchment area and soil and water
conservation management; and (ii) improving community resilience through
agricultural production. PRIDE will coordinate fully with the ASWAp to ensure full
alignment with government investments and policies. The programme is fully
supported by the donor group on food agriculture and food security in Malawi.
Innovations and scaling up
PRIDE complements RLEEP and SAPP in the current IFAD country programme in
Malawi. It will build on and scale-up the successes of IRLADP and other irrigation
projects in terms of adopting innovative approaches that ensure full community
participation and promote equitable land access.
PRIDE, itself, aims to serve as a model to be scaled up in Malawi and elsewhere.
The potential for scaling up seems good, as pathways are in place – such as policy
engagement. For example, an integrated natural resources management policy
framework has been established, and the government policy on WUAs is conducive
to participatory planning. Key drivers for scaling up include financial and fiscal
space. The Government is committed to funding operations and maintenance for
larger rehabilitation works, and it will be the responsibility of WUAs to carry out
regular maintenance of the schemes. WUAs and other grass-roots organizations
represent the institutional space, an approach that has been successful in IRLADP.
PRIDE will be equipped with a strong M&E and knowledge management system to
deliver the information needed for successful scaling up of its approach and to
render it a sustainable investment.
In terms of innovation, PRIDE will support the newly established irrigation window
of the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund, funded by DFID and UNDP. It is expected
that the private sector will form a consortium to provide modern irrigation
technologies and marketing channels to smallholder farmers.
Policy engagement
Policy engagement is expected for compliance with environmental and social
safeguards, impact assessments, land tenure and the building of climate resilience.
The registration and full recognition of WUAs as key institutions is critical to the
success of PRIDE. The same applies to policies regarding GAPs and extension. The
mainstreaming of improved nutrition has become a key issue for IFAD. Dialogue on
these topics will take place at all levels – from community to national – to review
compliance, gather lessons learned and refine existing regulations.
B.
48.
C.
49.
50.
51.
D.
52.
VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Malawi and IFAD will
constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included in
appendix I.
54. The Republic of Malawi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.
9
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
55.
I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.
VII. Recommendation
56.
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of
the following resolutions:
RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,300,000) (approximately
US$26.48 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.
RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the Republic
of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,350,000) (approximately US$26.54
million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in
accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.
RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to five million one hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,150,000) (approximately
US$7.06 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
10
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Negotiated financing agreement:
"Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (PRIDE)"
(Negotiations concluded on 2 December 2015
IFAD Loan Number: [click and insert number]
IFAD DSF Grant Number:[click and insert number])
ASAP Trust Grant Number: [click and insert number]
Programme Title: Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (“the Programme”)
The Republic of Malawi (the “Borrower/Recipient”)
and
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)
and
The Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund (”the ASAP Trust”)
(each a “Party” and the three of them collectively the “Parties”)
hereby agree as follows:
Section A
The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
1.
Programme Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2), and the Special Covenants (Schedule 3).
The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
2.
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended from time to time (the
“General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof shall
apply to this Agreement and all references to "Project" in the General Conditions shall
apply to the Programme. For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in the
General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.
The Fund shall provide a Loan and a DSF Grant and the ASAP Trust shall provide an
3.
ASAP Trust Grant to the Borrower/Recipient (collectively referred to as “the Financing”),
which the Borrower/Recipient shall use to implement the Programme in accordance with
the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
Section B
1
A.
B.
C.
The amount of the IFAD Loan is SDR 19.30 million (USD 26.5 million).
The amount of the IFAD DSF Grant is SDR 19.35 million (USD 26.5 million).
The amount of the ASAP Trust Grant is SDR 5.15 million (USD 7 million).
1
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
The Loan shall be free of interest but bear a service charge of three fourths of one
2.
percent (0.75 per cent) per annum and have a maturity period of forty (40) years
including a grace period of ten (10) years starting from the date of approval of the Loan
by the Fund’s Executive Board.
3.
4.
The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be US dollars.
The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be the first of July.
Payments of principal and service charge shall be payable on each first of May and
5.
first of November.
There shall be one Designated Account (DA) operated by the Ministry of Finance,
6.
Economic Planning and Development (MoFEPD) for all of the Financing opened in a
commercial bank acceptable to the Fund and the Government.
The Borrower/Recipient shall provide counterpart financing for the Programme in an
7.
amount equivalent to approximately thirteen million United States Dollars
(USD 13 million), mainly in the form of exemption of duties and taxes in accordance with
the approved Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). The beneficiaries will contribute, in
kind, to the Programme in an amount equivalent to approximately seven million two
hundred thousand United States Dollars (USD 7.2 million).
Section C
1.
The MoFEPD will formally represent the Borrower/Recipient.
The Lead Programme Agency (LPA) shall be the Department of Irrigation (DoI)
2.
within the MoAIWD.
The Programme Completion Date shall be the seventh anniversary (7th) of the date
3.
of entry into force of this Agreement.
Section D
The Financing will be administered and the Programme supervised by the Fund.
Section E
The following are designated as additional grounds for suspension of this
1.
Agreement:
(a)
(b)
key Programme staff have been appointed, transferred or removed from the
Programme without the prior consent of the Fund as referred to schedule 1
section II paragraph A 5.1;
the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) referred to under schedule 1
section II paragraph D hereof, or any provision thereof, has been waived,
suspended, terminated, amended or modified without the prior consent of the
Fund, and the Fund has determined such waiver, suspension, termination
amendment or modification has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse
effect on the Programme.
2
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to
2.
withdrawal:
(a) The Programme Coordination Office (PCO) shall have been duly established
and key Programme management positions shall have been filled by
personnel acceptable to IFAD, in accordance with schedule 1 section II
paragraph A (5) to this Agreement,
(b) The Borrower/Recipient shall have established a Programme Steering
Committee (PSC) as referred to under schedule 1 section II paragraph A(3) to
this Agreement,
(c) An off-the-shelf accounting software shall have been duly procured, installed
and implemented in accordance with a comprehensive chart of accounts
satisfactory to the Fund;
(d) The Borrower/Recipient shall have prepared a draft PIM in form and substance
satisfactory to the Fund.
3
The following is designated as additional general condition precedent to withdrawal
for category 5 “Grants and Subsidies” schedule 2, only: a subsidiary agreement between
the Borrower/Recipient and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) shall
have been established, satisfactory to the Fund, to finance the Malawi Innovation
Challenge Fund (MICF) as referred to in schedule 1 component 2.2.
In accordance with the Borrower/Recipient's legislation, the Financing Agreement
4
will be signed by a representative of the Borrower/Recipient upon authorization by the
Parliament of the Republic of Malawi.
The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
5
communication related to this Agreement:
For the Fund:
President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy
For the Borrower/Recipient:
Secretary to the Treasury
Ministry of Finance, Economic
Planning and Development
P.O. Box 30049
Capital City, Lilongwe 3
Malawi
For the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund
President of the International Fund
for Agricultural Development in its capacity as Trustee
of the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy
3
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
This agreement, dated [click and type], has been prepared in the English language in two
(2) original copies, one (1) for the Fund and the ASAP Trust and one (1) for the
Borrower/Recipient.
REPUBLIC OF MALAWI
(Authorized Representative)
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
ADAPTATION FOR SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE
PROGRAMME TRUST FUND
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President of the International Fund
for Agricultural Development in its capacity as Trustee
of the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
Trust Fund
4
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Schedule 1
Programme Description and Implementation Arrangements
Section I. Programme Description
Target Population. The Programme will be implemented in two regional clusters in
1.
the Northern and Southern regions of Malawi (the “Programme Area”). The selected areas
would include approximately 5,200 hectares of irrigated land, and approximately
12,300 hectares of rain-fed land. The Programme will target the poor smallholder farmers
of the villages associated with each irrigation scheme, and within this group a specific
focus will be placed on women and female-headed households and youth.
An estimated 19,500 smallholder households live in the Programme area, of which a total
of 17,500 households representing 87,500 persons are assumed to directly benefit from
the Programme’s interventions.
Goal. The Programme’s goal is to enhance the resilience of rural communities to
2.
food insecurity, the effects of climate change and economic shocks.
Objective. The Programme’s objective is that smallholder farmer households
3.
increase their income and improve their nutrition through sustainable agricultural
production.
4.
Components. The Programme shall consist of the two following Components:
Component 1: Irrigation development and catchment management. The
objective of this component is to develop climate-resilient land and water management
systems for smallholder households on both rain-fed and irrigated land.
Sub-component 1.1: Land and Water Governance
The Programme will support the preparation for and management of about
15 irrigation schemes, through (i) preparation of investment agreements with the
targeted communities, and (ii) the establishment and strengthening of Water user
associations (WUAs) for the management, operation and maintenance of the
irrigation schemes for appropriate land and water governance. These measures will
be co-funded by the ASAP Trust Grant.
Sub-component 1.2: Irrigation System Development
The Programme will support the establishment of irrigation schemes, including the
use of water storage for the cultivation of a second and third annual crop, and to
enhance agricultural productivity in smallholder farms.
Sub-component 1.3: Soil and Water Conservation
The Programme will support the restoration of soil cover on vulnerable grounds,
erosion control, reforestation of slopes and protection of river buffer zones. These
measures will be co-funded by the ASAP Trust Grant.
Component 2: Agriculture and market linkages. The objective of this component is
to promote environmentally and economically sustainable agricultural production systems
to be adopted by smallholder households on both rain-fed and irrigated lands.
5
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Sub-Component 2.1: Good Agricultural Practices
The Programme will support the efficient knowledge transfer to smallholder farmers
through trials and demonstrations, combined with better information from the
private sector on market potential and opportunities. The component will promote
climate-smart good agricultural practices (GAPs), including the use of weather and
climate information services, irrigation optimization, application of integrated pest
management, and reduction of post-harvest losses. The Programme will also
support adaptive research on GAPs and adaptive mechanisation in smallholder
farms. These measures will be co-funded by the ASAP Trust Grant.
Sub-Component 2.2: Market Linkages
The Programme will promote market linkages through value chain analyses to
identify the suitable crops, provide farmer training mainly through farmer business
schools, promote farmer groups and commodity platforms to gather all actors in a
value chain. A value chain start-up facility will promote specific investments that
help improve the value chain.
The Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund (MICF) is currently managed by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Department for International
Development (DFID). The Programme will pilot a dedicated irrigation window under
the MICF with the private sector, where the latter will provide farmers with modern
irrigation equipment such as drip irrigation and facilitate marketing of their
produce.
Sub-Component 2.3: Mainstreaming Nutrition
The Programme will mainstream nutrition in most of its activities such as the choice
of crops or value chain commodities and support with the following measures: (i)
integrating a nutrition perspective in all GAPs promoted; (ii) promoting diversified
and improved nutritional production and consumption (integrated homestead food
production); and (iii) supporting the introduction of improved cooking stoves
combined with nutrition education. The Programme will support extension and
training on nutrition and may engage other service providers to complement the
capacity of the government system. These measures will be co-funded by the ASAP
Trust Grant.
Section II. Implementation Arrangements
A.
Programme management
1.
The Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development (MoFEPD)
The MoFEPD will be responsible for the financing and the monitoring and evaluation of the
Programme, more specifically for the (i) receipt and disbursement of funds from IFAD;
and (ii) monitoring budget performance.
2.
The Lead Programme Agency (LPA)
The LPA shall be the DoI within the MoAIWD, which shall have to coordinate the
Programme activities. The DoI shall oversee the day to day coordination of programme
activities.
6
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
3.
Programme Steering Committee (PSC)
3.1 Composition. The PSC shall be composed of senior representatives of concerned
Ministries, including the MoAIWD and the Agriculture Sector Wide Approach, the Ministry
of Local Government and Rural Development (MoLGRD), the Ministry of Lands, Housing
and Urban Development, the Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and Mining; and
chaired by the MoFEPD.
3.2 Responsibilities. The PSC shall provide the strategic oversight of the Programme
ensure alignment of the Programme with ongoing programmes and activities, as detailed
in the PIM, including (i) provide strategic guidance to the Programme management;
(ii) have a fiduciary responsibility to ensure the eligibility of Programme expenditures;
(iii) approve the AWPB and Procurement Plan, financial and technical progress reports;
(iv) initiate follow-up actions on lessons and findings from the Programme; and
(v) establish an audit and oversight committee that will review and report to the PSC any
matter raised by the auditors/or other reviews.
4.
Technical Advisory Team
4.1 Composition. The Technical Advisory Team will represent the departments
concerned with the programme implementation, including the Department of Land
Resources, Extension, Research (under MoAIWD), as well as the Department of Land
(under Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development), the Environmental Affairs
Department (under Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and Mining), the Debt
and Aid Department (under MoFEPD), and others as needed. The Technical Advisory
Team shall be chaired by a senior representative of the LPA.
4.2 Responsibilities. The Technical Advisory Team will assist the PCO through technical
guidance and oversight of the Programme.
The Technical Advisory Team will report regularly to the PSC and PCO and will meet at
least twice a year before the PSC meeting.
5.
Programme Coordination Office (PCO)
5.1 Composition. The PCO is staffed by highly qualified personnel recruited from
government or from the labour market. Recruitment of key staff shall require prior
consent from the Fund. The PCO key staff shall include a Programme Coordinator, a
Procurement specialist, a Financial Management specialist, an Environmental Coordinator,
and a specialist for Planning, Monitoring, Evaluation and Knowledge Management.
Additional staff in the PCO shall include a Water User Association specialist, a Gender and
Targeting specialist, an Irrigation Engineer, an Agricultural Extension specialist and a
Value Chain specialist. Separate facilitation offices staffed by one coordinator each will be
established in the northern and southern regions.
5.2 Responsibilities. The PCO is responsible for overall Programme implementation and
coordination, including, inter alia: (i) preparation of AWPB; (ii) financial management;
(iii) procurement; (iv) Programme monitoring and evaluation; (v) knowledge
management; (vi) preparation and consolidation of Statement of Expenditures, financial
statements and withdrawal application; (vii) Programme reporting; (viii) coordination of
all Programme implementation partners; and (ix) ensure the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and, the Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) are
adhered to in the development of each Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the irrigation schemes including obtaining
the free, prior and informed consent of the target beneficiaries.
7
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
B.
Programme coordination
57. At scheme cluster and village level. The Programme will coordinate its entry in an
area with traditional authorities and with existing structures such as the Village
Development Committees (VDC). The traditional authorities and VDCs, shall provide
oversight for the activities under the Programme and involving communities. A Combined
Village Committee (CVC) shall engage at the initiation stage and in reviewing Programme
progress. The CVC shall interact with WUAs, representing all households benefitting from
the irrigation system. The WUA supervision committee will liaise with the contractor to
maintain irrigation activities during the construction period and expediting completion of
the works. The WUAs will participate in construction supervision and final certification,
and be trained to monitor the construction activities, identify and resolve problems which
may arise.
58. All plans developed at the village level will be submitted through the Area
Development Committee (ADC) to the District Executive Committee for approval and will
provide the basis for preparing the annual work plan and budget.
59. At regional level. The scheme cluster areas are concentrated in a northern and a
southern hub. The Programme will facilitate the services of agencies represented there;
and may engage additional service providers as needed. The PCO will closely collaborate
with local offices of MoAIWD and district coordination structures of MoLGRD.
C.
Programme planning, monitoring and evaluation, supervision
1.
Planning. The main planning tools for the Programme comprise the logical
framework combined with the overall programme budget, and the AWPB. Every year, a
decentralised, inclusive and demand-driven planning process will be undertaken to
develop the AWPB. The consolidated AWPB will be presented to the PSC for approval and
submitted to IFAD for concurrence. Implementation of the AWPB will be monitored
through the Programme’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system along semi-annual
reports.
Monitoring and Evaluation. The Programme M&E will be built around IFAD’s results
2.
and impact management system (RIMS). The Programme will conduct baseline and
follow-up surveys combining the collection of basic demographic and socio-economic data
with application of multidimensional poverty assessment tool. The latter will assist
tracking changes in resilience to climate change. The baseline and follow-up surveys will
employ the women empowerment in agriculture index, which measures the changes in
women’s empowerment levels as a result of an intervention. In addition, the PCO will be
responsible for the monitoring of the Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP)/RAP implementation for each irrigation scheme.
Learning and sharing knowledge. Will be based on the Programme’s M&E system
3.
and supported by the Knowledge Management specialist particularly on reviews and
participatory assessments of lessons learned during implementation. These will translate
into factsheets that will contribute to the wider policy debate in the smallholder
agriculture sector. Dissemination will take place through the Programme’s and MoAIWD
websites or relevant institutions such as research agencies, and results will be presented
at national workshops on key programme themes.
Supervision. Supervision and implementation support missions shall normally be
4.
carried out twice a year. The Borrower/Recipient shall conduct mid-term review towards
the third year of Programme implementation period in accordance with the Terms of
Reference to be agreed by the Fund and the Borrower/Recipient.
8
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
D.
Programme Implementation Manual (PIM)
The Programme shall be implemented in accordance with the approved AWPB and
Procurement Plan and the PIM, the terms of which shall be adopted by the LPA subject to
the Fund's prior approval. The PIM shall include, among other things: (i) terms of
reference, implementation responsibilities and appointment modalities of all Programme
staff and consultants; (ii) Programme operating manuals and procedures; (iii) monitoring
and evaluation systems and procedures; (iv) a detailed description of implementation
arrangements for each Programme component with special reference to the ESMF/ RAF
and the ESIAs/RAPs that will be required; (v) modalities for the selection of service
providers to be based on transparent and competitive processes; (vi) financial
management and reporting arrangements including accounting, approval of payments,
financial reporting, internal controls, fixed asset management, as well as internal and
external audit; and (vii) the good governance and anti-corruption framework.
9
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Schedule 2
Allocation Table
Allocation of IFAD Loan and DSF Grant and ASAP Trust grant Proceeds. (a) The Table
1.
below sets forth the Categories of Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the IFAD Loan
and DSF Grant and the ASAP Trust Grant and the allocation of the amounts of the IFAD
Loan, and DSF Grant and the ASAP Trust Grant to each Category and the percentages of
expenditures for items to be financed in each Category:
Category
IFAD Loan
Amount
Allocated
(expressed in
SDR)
IFAD DSF Grant
Amount Allocated
(expressed in
SDR)
ASAP Trust Grant
Amount Allocated
(expressed in
SDR)
Percentage
1. Works
9 120 000
9 120 000
680 000
100%
2. Equipment and
Materials
500 000
60 000
920 000
100%
3. Consultancies
1 060 000
2 190 000
1 510 000
100%
4. Trainings
680 000
3 730 000
920 000
100%
5. Grants and
Subsidies
6. Salaries and
Allowances
-
1 640 000
-
100%
6 010 000
670 000
610 000
100%
Unallocated
1 930 000
1 940 000
510 000
TOTAL
19 300 000
19 350 000
5 150 000
(b)
The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:
(i)
All the above amounts are net of taxes, and Borrower/Recipient and
beneficiaries contributions;
(ii)
“Equipment and Materials” includes Vehicles;
(iii)
“Consultancies” includes Studies;
(iv)
“Salaries and Allowances” includes Operations and Maintenance;
(v)
“Grants and Subsidies” includes contributions for the Malawi Innovation
Challenge Fund with DFID/UNDP.
Start-up Costs. Withdrawals in respect of expenditures for start-up costs incurred
2.
in accordance with the provisions of the Programme Design Report before the satisfaction
of the General Conditions precedent to withdrawal but after the date of entry into force
shall not exceed an aggregate amount of SDR 408 113 (equivalent to USD 560 000).
10
Appendix I
EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1
Schedule 3
Special Covenants
In  accordance  with  Section  12.01(a)(xxiii)  of  the  General  Conditions,  the  Fund  may
suspend, in whole or in part, the right of the Borrower/Recipient to request withdrawals
from the Financing Accounts if the Borrower/Recipient has defaulted in the performance
of any covenant set forth below, and the Fund has determined that such default has had,
or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the Programme:
1.
Gender. The Borrower/Recipient shall develop a gender strategy for the
Programme to ensure that gender concerns shall be mainstreamed in all Programme
activities throughout the implementation period, in order to offer equal opportunities
under the Programme to men, women, women headed households, youth and other
disadvantaged groups.
Counterpart Funds. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that counterpart funds
2.
are clearly identifiable in the financial management system and all financial statements.
Land and Water Access. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that smallholder
3.
farmers have full access to land and water as per Land and Water Agreements agreed
upon under the Programme. A prerequisite to the signature of such agreements shall be
the prior formal establishment of the WUAs.
Environmental and Social Due Diligence. The Borrower/Recipient assures that the
4.
ESMF and RAF as required by IFAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) have been adopted and that the Programme will be carried out in
accordance with the aforementioned documents.
The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that prior to carrying out any construction of
irrigation facilities and related items, a full ESIA/ESMP and a RAP, will be duly completed,
where it is required, with adequate budget for their implementation, so that to confirm
the full social and environmental sustainability of the construction foreseen.
Implementation. The Programme will be implemented in compliance with the main
5.
IFAD policies, strategies and procedures, inter alia, with (i) IFAD's Natural Resources
Management Policy, Climate Change Strategy and SECAP, (ii) IFAD’s Policy on Improving
Access to Land and Tenure Security, and other policy tools such as (i) the Voluntary
Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests; and
(ii) the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in Africa. Before supporting any
intervention that might affect the land access and use rights of communities, the
Programme will ensure that their free, prior and informed consent has been solicited
through inclusive consultations based on full disclosure of the intent and scope of the
activities planned and their implications.
Environmental Audit. The development of measures to mitigate social and
6.
environment impacts and the implementation will be reported upon annually and the
report will be subject to an independent annual audit that will be submitted to IFAD and
the PSC.
Transparency. The Terms of Reference of the external audit shall include a specific
7.
review of IT control system financial reporting.
To be tabled at the session.
11
Logical framework
Results Hierarchy
Key Performance Indicators
Goal
Rural communities are
resilient to food
insecurity-, climate
change4 and economic
risks
Baseline
tbd
Name
 Reduction in child malnutrition,
measured by the incidence of
wasting (RIMS level III)
Improvement in household assets
ownership index (RIMS Level III)*
 Smallholder households supported
in coping with the effects of
climate change (RIMS 1.8.5)
measured by the number of
households applying climate-smart
agricultural practices*
End Target
 20% reduction
 15,000
households with
a 20%
improvement
 17,5000
smallholder
households
Source
 Baseline surveys
and RIMS
surveys, MPAT
surveys
 Same
 Programme
records
Assumptions
Responsibility
 PCO/DOI
Means of
Verification
Frequency
 Project start,
mid-term and
completion
same
 Semi -annually
Project Development
Objective:
Smallholder farmer
households enhance
income and nutrition
through sustainable
agricultural production
 Smallholder farmer households
receiving project services (RIMS
1.8.1), differentiated by gender of
the household and wealth class
 Smallholder farmers with
 Nil
tbd
 Nil
increased income of at 3 fold
(rainfed only) and 8 fold
(irrigation/rainfed)*
 Smallholder households reporting
decreased incidence of hunger
periods, measured by number of
meals per day and by increased
dietary diversity *
 Effectiveness: farmers with
secured access to land and water
(RIMS 2.1.2)
Incremental hectares of crops in
irrigated land throughout seasons.
1
2
Outcome 1:
Smallholder households
sustainably operate
climate-resilient land and
water management
systems on both rainfed
and irrigated lands
(refers to ASAP outcome
#1)
Outputs:
 17,5000
smallholder
farmer
households
 11,000
smallholder
farmers
 17,5000
smallholder
households
 Programme
 Semi-annual
 PCO/DOI
progress reports
 Baseline surveys
 Every 2 years
and RIMS
surveys, MPAT
surveys
 same
 same
No major impact of
climate shocks ;
Policies remain
conducive to
agriculture;
Market prices remain
favourable or at least
stable
 Nil
 Nil
 15,700 farmers
 5,200 ha
 Tracer studies
on land and
water access
land use survey
year 3, 5, 7
 PCO/DOI
Allocation of land and
water to smallholder
farmers is secured and
reliable over longer
periods
 WUA managing infrastructure
 nil
 15 WUA
 WUA records /
annually
PCO/DOI
Registration of 15
4 In PRIDE, resilience to effects of climate change will be measured by households having access to irrigated land, cultivate at least 3 different crops (diversification) and apply good agriculture
practise including soil improvement techniques.
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
5
/
1
1
6
/
R
.
1
6
/
R
e
v
.
1






Communities
1.1
effectively manage their
land and water
management systems
formed or strengthened (RIMS
1.1.2)
tracer study
land tenure
Medium-sized
1.2
irrigation systems (50-
1000 ha) established
 Land under irrigation from
rehabilitated or newly constructed
schemes (RIMS 1.1.5)
 Land consolidation and tenure
arrangements completed
 Nil
 Nil
 5,200 ha
 5,200 ha
 Annual land use
survey
 WUA records /
tracer study
land tenure
Upon hand over of
complete scheme
 PCO/DOI
1.3
Erosion-affected
and vulnerable rainfed
land recovered
Outcome 2:
Environmentally and
economically sustainable
agricultural production
systems adopted by
smallholder households
on both rainfed and
irrigated lands
Outputs:
1
3
 Extent of land with rehabilitated or
 Nil
 1,000 ha
 Annual land use
restored ecosystem services
(RIMS 1.1.17)
survey
Upon hand over of
complete scheme
 PCO/DOI
 Baseline
 Baseline
 17,5000 farmers
 17,5000 farmers
 HH sample
surveys
 Every 2 years
 PCO/DOI
 Farmers report yield increase (>
20% above baseline) from
improved rainfed agricultural
production (RIMS 2.2.2)*
 Farmers report adoption of
recommended climate smart Good
Agricultural Practices
2.1
Smallholder
farmers trained on good
agricultural practices on
rainfed and irrigated land
 People trained in crop production
practices and technologies (RIMS
1.2.2) specified for lead farmers
and FSS attendants*
Smallholder
2.2
farmers linked to
improved markets
Smallholder
2.3
households improve
nutritional intake
 Smallholder farmers trained in
production, post –production,
processing and marketing (RIMS
1.4.1) *
 Women trained in preparation of
nutritious meals in 2 seasons*
 Nil
 780 lead farmers
and 15,000 FFS
members
 Programme
 Semi-annually
 PCO/
reports
MOAIWD
 Nil
 17,500 farmers
 Programme
Semi-annually
 PCO/DOI
reports
 MICF reports
 Nil
 15,000 women
 Programme
Semi-annually
PCIO/DOI
reports
Water Users’
Associations is
facilitated by the
concerned agency
Government is able to
assist WUAs affected
by extreme events in
recovering their
system’s functionality
No major delays /
implementation
bottlenecks;
Unit costs are kept
within USD 7,800 per
hectare
GOM policies re
catchment natural
resources benefit the
scheme cluster areas
Access to financial
services and revenues
from /services of
markets enable
intensification of
smallholder agriculture
GOM capacity can be
complemented by
mobilisation of private
sector service providers
PRIDE successfully
engages all target
group segments in
programme activities
PRIDE successfully
includes women and
youth in leading roles
in WUAs, FFS, etc.
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
5
/
1
1
6
/
R
.
1
6
/
R
e
v
.
1
