Document:
EB 2016/117/R.13
Agenda item:
9(b)
Date:
9 March 2016
Distribution:
Original:
Public
Spanish
E
President's report
Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the
Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene
and Mantaro River Basins Project (Sustainable
Territorial Development Project)
Note to Executive Board representatives
Focal points:
Technical questions:
Dispatch of documentation:
Jesús Quintana
Country Programme Manager
Latin America and the Caribbean Division
Tel.: +51 1 625 90 28
e-mail: j.quintana@ifad.org
Alessandra Zusi Bergés
Officer-in-Charge
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org
Executive Board — 117th Session
Rome, 13-14 April 2016
For: APPROVAL
EB 2016/117/R.13
ii
iii
iv
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
6
6
6
6
7
7
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
Contents
Abbreviations and acronyms
Map of the project area
Financing summary
Recommendation for approval
I.
Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP
II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
B. Development objective of the project
C. Components/results
III. Project implementation
A. Approach
B. Organizational framework
C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
D. Financial management, procurement and governance
E. Supervision
IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
B. Project financing
C. Economic analysis and benefit summary
D. Sustainability
E. Risk determination and mitigation
V.
Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
B. Harmonization and alignment
C. Innovation and scaling up
D. Policy engagement
VI. Legal instruments and authority
VII. Recommendation
Appendices
I.
Negotiated financing agreement
II.
Logical framework
i
EB 2016/117/R.13
Abbreviations and acronyms
COSOP
CEU
AOP
SNIP
PCU
country strategic opportunities programme
central executing unit
annual operating plan
National Public Investment System
project coordination unit
ii
Map of the project area
EB 2016/117/R.13
iii
EB 2016/117/R.13
Republic of Peru
Public Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)
Financing summary
Initiating institution:
IFAD
Borrower:
Executing agency:
Republic of Peru
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, through the
Agro Rural Programme
Total project cost:
US$74.512 million
Amount of IFAD loan:
Terms of IFAD loan:
SDR 20.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$28.5 million)
Ordinary: repayment term of 18 years, including a grace
period of six years, with an annual interest rate
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference rate
Contribution of the borrower:
US$38.764 million
Contribution of beneficiaries:
US$7.248 million
Appraising institution:
IFAD
Cooperating institution:
Directly supervised by IFAD
iv
EB 2016/117/R.13
Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River Basins Project
(Sustainable Territorial Development Project), as contained in paragraph 44.
Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public
Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1.
The Republic of Peru, with GDP per capita in 2014 of US$6,541, is currently
classified among the middle-income countries. The Peruvian economy has been one
of the best performing in Latin America, and visible progress has been made on
poverty reduction in recent years according to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). However, Peru faced a challenging external context in 2014, together with
problems in domestic supply and declining public subnational investment –
aggravating the external shocks and leading to a marked deceleration in growth.
Although real GDP growth declined to 2.4 per cent in 2014 compared to 5.8 per
cent the previous year, Peru still posted double the regional average of about 1.2
per cent. Estimates place real GDP growth in 2015 at 3.26 per cent.
2.
3.
Peru continued to reduce poverty and extreme poverty levels in 2014, although at
a slower pace than in previous years. According to the National Statistics and
Informatics Institute (, poverty in 2014 stood at an estimated 22.7 per cent, 1.2
percentage points lower than in 2013 – meaning that over a quarter of a million
(289,000) people exited poverty. Overall figures for 2014 show that there were
6,995,000 Peruvians living in poverty. Average monthly income per capita for the
poorest rose by 2.2 per cent, mainly as a result of cash transfers under the Juntos,
Pension 65 and Beca 18 programmes. The incidence of poverty was higher in rural
areas at 46.0 per cent, three times the urban rate. Among the major causes of
rural poverty, the fact that communities are poorly integrated with the market
economy has been identified as one of the greatest obstacles to local development,
particularly in the Sierra region, causing the population to emigrate towards urban
centres.
A World Bank study done in 2013 indicates that 4.3 per cent of Peru's surface area
is occupied by agricultural activities. The main crops are coffee, potato, rice,
cotton, asparagus, sugar and maize. A modern and competitive agro-export sector
along the coast coexists with more traditional or subsistence farming in the Sierra
and Selva regions. Primary agriculture accounts for 9 per cent of GDP. Over the
last 12 years, Peruvian agriculture has grown at an average rate of 4.3. An
estimated 2.35 million families – close to 10 million people – depend on
agriculture, most of them concentrated in the Sierra. Agriculture in the Sierra
poses major challenges: low yields; small and fragmented plots with high
transaction costs; fragile soil with drainage, salinity and erosion problems; limited
availability of water; a lack of connectivity and an unpredictable climate.
1
EB 2016/117/R.13
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
4.
COSOP
The project is based on IFAD's past and current interventions in Peru, is consistent
with the strategic objectives set forth in the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) and takes into account the recommendations of the midterm
review that took place in November 2011. The project complies with both IFAD's
own requirements and those of the National Public Investment System (SNIP), and
contributes to: (i) strengthening territorial planning and citizen management
processes; (ii) promoting strategic partnerships on public-private platforms for
access to markets; (iii) promoting the organization of productive linkages between
rural small enterprises; (iv) providing greater support for financial inclusion
through savings, insurance and financial education; (v) including initiatives that
favour sustainable natural resource management, with actions to mitigate and
prevent the effects of climate change; and (vi) promoting actions to increase water
availability and equal access to water, to help prevent social conflicts within the
territory.
II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5.
The project area covers the area of influence of the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro
River Valley (VRAEM), corresponding to the periphery in contrast to the central part
or direct intervention area. Both of these areas are considered priorities by country
authorities in view of their high incidence of poverty and extreme poverty and their
exclusion from the country's development.
6.
The selected area encompasses 27 municipal districts in seven provinces in the
departments of Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín, Apurímac and Cusco. Included are
a highland or Sierra area at between 3,000 and 4,500 metres, a number of inter-
Andean valleys at between 1,500 and 3,000 metres, a foothills or Ceja de Selva
area at between 300 and 1,500 metres and part of the Amazon plain or Selva at
less than 300 metres.
7. Within this area, 76.5 per cent of the population is rural, using the strict definition
of a disperse rural population. That percentage rises to 87 per cent if villages with
less than 2,000 inhabitants are included. In addition, 74 per cent of the population
in the area are living below the monetary poverty line. Of these, 39 per cent are
extremely poor and 33 are poor but not extremely poor – values that place these
districts among the country's most vulnerable. Among those living in the project
area, 73 per cent are under 29 years of age and 66 per cent are indigenous.
8.
9.
The 27 districts located in the project area have a combined population of 58,681
families. Of these, the project will serve 50,936 rural families who are living in
conditions of rural poverty according to the 2014 national household survey.
Among the around 50,000 poor rural families making up the project's target
population, 27,000 families will benefit from the development services to be
provided under components 1 (governance and investments in territorial natural
resources) and 2 (local economic initiatives), and 23,000 poor rural families will
benefit from activities under component 3 (connectivity and territorial
infrastructure). The remaining 7,745 families (13 per cent of the population in the
intervention area), who reside in areas considered urban in Peru, will not be
included in the project's target population.
B. Development objective of the project
10. The goal of the project is to contribute to reducing poverty among rural families
through social and productive inclusion. The development objective is to increase
the human, social, natural, physical and financial assets of the project
beneficiaries.
2
C. Components/results
11. The project will be implemented over six years and will include the implementation
of three major components, in addition to project management and administration:
EB 2016/117/R.13
(a) Component 1. Governance and investments in territorial natural
resources. This component will focus on communities and families and will
build institutional capacities in the territory, including in local and provincial
governments, supporting initiatives to improve communal goods and
properties. The component activities will contribute to improving the
endowment and quality of natural resources in territories owned by the
beneficiaries and their community and indigenous associations – including
adapting to and mitigating climate change, and building capacities and
competencies for sustainable natural resource management and
development.
(b) Component 2. Local economic initiatives. The objective of this
component is to build a sustainable network of associations among potential
project beneficiaries to promote and expand opportunities for economic
development and social inclusion, providing support for economic activities by
interest groups such as farmers organizations together with financial inclusion
of families and associations. In a fragile and diverse associational context, the
component will support the creation, development and consolidation of
economic associations of beneficiaries that are oriented towards improving
their livelihood strategies and achieving greater and better participation in
markets for goods and services. To this end, the component will implement a
flexible and cumulative strategy with specific arrangements to support rural
producers organizations, based on the different types and levels of
associative development among rural people.
(c) Component 3. Connectivity and territorial infrastructure. The objective
of this component is to maintain physical conditions in the area of influence
where the project beneficiaries are located, in order to generate synergies
with interventions under the other components. In a context of relative
isolation caused by deteriorating rural roads, scarce communication services
and limited development of water and natural resources as a result of low
levels of investment in irrigation, the project will, inter alia, facilitate market
access in the intervention area for rural people, create jobs with start-ups or
contracting of communal or associational microenterprises for routine
maintenance of roads, provide for irrigation infrastructure at community
level, and promote water harvesting and collection.
(d) Component 4. Project management and administration. Under this
component, support will be provided on a cross-cutting basis to the three
preceding components to achieve the results and meet the targets set by the
project. This component includes project administration, knowledge
management and M&E.
III. Project implementation
A. Approach
12. The project will employ the following five main approaches:
(a) Territorial development: This approach combines two main aspects:
(i) institutional development to promote consultations among local and
external agents and include poor people in production transformation
processes and benefits; and (ii) production transformation to link the
territory's economy with dynamic markets.
(b) Community-driven development: Implies a degree of delegation of
accountability to communities to manage their own development, including
the design and implementation of subprojects. This approach facilitates
3
EB 2016/117/R.13
access to social, human, financial and physical capital and assets by rural
poor people, by transforming development agents from top-down planners to
bottom-up providers of client-oriented services.
(c) Geographical targeting: Takes into account government priorities defining
the VRAEM area of influence as a priority area in view of the high incidence of
poverty.
(d) Scaling up: The project is consistent with the scaling up approach adopted
by IFAD, encompassing the various dimensions of scaling up: (i) fiscal and
financial; (ii) political; (iii) policy-based; (iv) organizational; (v) cultural; and
(vi) learning-based.
(e) Social inclusion as cross-cutting intervention: The project benefits rural
women, men and young people in situations of poverty and recognizes the
tangible and intangible assets of campesino and indigenous populations. This
approach promotes the empowerment of the target groups and rural
associational development.
B. Organizational framework
13. The agency responsible for the project will be the Ministry of Agriculture and
Irrigation, through the Agro Rural programme acting as a central executing unit
(CEU) with the legal authority to administer the project, in close coordination with
three of its branches located in the regions of Huancavelica, Ayacucho and Cusco,
and with close coordination and collaboration from municipal and provincial
administrations.
14.
Project implementation will be the responsibility of a project coordination unit
(PCU) reporting to Agro Rural through its agrarian development director and in
charge of coordinating physical and financial activities and monitoring progress on
meeting the targets set. The PCU will be composed of a project coordinator and
eight specialists in the following areas: (i) M&E; (ii) financial inclusion;
(iii) entrepreneurship; (iv) infrastructure; (v) natural resource management and
climate change; (vi) social inclusion; (vii) administration; and (viii) accounting and
support staff. Each local agency will have a team made up of a coordinator, an
administrative assistant and various specialists.
C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
15. The project will employ a system of planning, M&E, learning and knowledge
management that is in line with national regulations and with IFAD guidelines.
16. Planning. The project will be implemented on the basis of annual operating plans
(AOP) and procurement  plans subject to IFAD no objection. Progress made on
implementing the plans will be recorded in semi-annual progress reports.
17. M&E. The responsible agency, through the PCU, will conduct the baseline study
during the first 12 months of implementation, and will set up the M&E system and
an M&E plan that will be an integral part of the AOP. The system will report on
progress made in the process of strengthening associational social capital
throughout project implementation using participatory instruments. Agro Rural will
provide information to the SNIP monitoring operating system (SOSEM), which will
allow for verification of progress made on implementing public investment projects.
18. Knowledge management and learning. The main objective of learning and
knowledge management activities will be to enhance existing knowledge assets in
the project intervention area and disseminate content in an appropriate and timely
way to inform users.
D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The financial management of the project will be the
responsibility of Agro Rural under the CEU procedure, as follows: (i) include project
resource requirements in its annual budget and arrange for approval by the
4
EB 2016/117/R.13
Ministry of Economy and Finance; (ii) implement and supervise implementation of
the project; (iii) perform financial and accounting administration and disbursement
functions; (iv) conduct tenders and contracting processes; and (v) hire external
auditors. Project accounting will comply with the provisions of the integrated
financial information system that is mandatory for all public sector entities
including budget and administrative modules.
20. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Finance will open a sub-account in
United States dollars within the single Treasury account as a designated account to
receive IFAD loan proceeds. These funds will then be transferred to a project
operating account in local currency, to be opened at Banco de la Nación and
administered by Agro Rural. The borrower will open an account in local currency to
hold the counterpart funds. Agro Rural will transfer the project proceeds to the
CEU, which will make payments for procurement and allocate resources to fund
initiatives by the project users.
21. Procurement. The procurement of works, goods and services will take place in
accordance with IFAD guidelines on procurement of goods and services. The PCU,
together with the administrative office and procurement unit of Agro Rural, will
prepare a procurement plan as part of the AOP specifying the procurement method
and determining the goods and services required, in addition to timelines,
estimated costs, procedures and sources of financing. Procurement will be done
generally by the producers organizations benefiting from the project and hence
receiving specific technical training in areas such as procurement of minor works
and procurement of production equipment, information technology equipment and
others needed for management.
22. Audit. The audit arrangements will include internal processes and will adhere to
IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In accordance with national regulations, Agro
Rural is subject to internal audit by its internal control office, which reports to the
Office of the Comptroller General (CGR). The annual consolidated financial
statements of the project will be audited independently in accordance with terms of
reference acceptable to IFAD, in accordance with international auditing standards
and IFAD guidelines on project audits. An external auditor acceptable to both IFAD
and CGR will be employed. All project accounts will be audited, including both IFAD
financing and counterpart funds. The audit report will be submitted to IFAD within
six months after the close of each fiscal year. For audit purposes the fiscal year will
coincide with the calendar year.
E. Supervision
23. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD in accordance with the prevailing
guidelines on direct supervision.
24. Approximately six months after the start-up workshop, IFAD will organize a first
supervision mission with the following objectives: (i) detect possible problems or
difficulties encountered in the initial implementation; (ii) review progress made
against the targets set; (iii) review the AOP being implemented and proposals for
the subsequent AOP; (iv) consult with project users on their perceptions of the
project and their participation levels; (v) review expenses incurred and
procurement carried out to date; (vi) verify compliance with the financing
agreement; (vii) prepare the project status report; and (viii) perform the financial
management evaluation. Commencing in year two of project implementation, and
in accordance with the guidelines on direct supervision, IFAD will, together with
Agro Rural, organize monitoring activities, provide support for implementation and
supervision and, in addition to meeting the objectives outlined above, analyse the
process of social mobilization and formation of groups of possible beneficiaries,
paying special attention to rural women and young people and indigenous peoples.
5
EB 2016/117/R.13
IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The project will have a total cost of approximately US$74.512 million. The first
component calls for spending of US$6.046 million (equivalent to 8.1 per cent), and
the second for spending of US$51.011 million, representing 68.5 per cent of the
total. The third component will involve spending of US$8.849 million (11.9 per
cent) and the fourth component US$8.606 million (11.5 per cent).
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Component
Amount %
Amount %
Amount
%
Amount
%
IFAD
Beneficiaries
Borrower/  counterpart
Total
1. Governance and
investments in territorial
natural resources
2. Local economic
initiatives
3. Connectivity and
territorial infrastructure
4. Project management
and administration
Total
5 627
93.1
419
6.9
6 046
8.1
21 507
42.2
7 248
14.2
22 256
43.6
51 011
68.5
8 849
100
8 849
11.9
1 365
28 500
15.9
38.2
7 240
7 248
9.7
38 764
84.1
52.0
8 606
74 512
11.5
100
B. Project financing
26.
Financing for the different project components includes: IFAD’s contribution, valued
at US$28.5 million, or 32.2 per cent of the total; the Government of Peru’s
contribution of ordinary resources in the amount of US$38.764 million, or 52.0 per
cent; and contributions by beneficiaries in the amount of US$7.248 million or 9.7
per cent of the total.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Expenditure
category
1. Works
2. Vehicles
3. Equipment and
supplies
4. Consultancies
5. Grants and
subsidies
6. Training
7. Salaries and
benefits
8. Operating costs
Total
IFAD loan
Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart
Amount
%
Amount
%
Amount
%
1 568
8.8
168.5
2 965.5
21 360
2438
45.3
63.5
51.2
72.2
16 242
91.2
338
100.0
203.5
1 707.5
7 248
17.4
13 087
937
54.7
36.5
31.4
27.8
4 699.5
1 549.5
100.0
100.0
28 500
38.2
7 248
9.7
38 764
52.0
Total
Amount
17 810
419
372
4 673
41 695
3 375
4 699.5
1 549.5
74 512
%
23.9
0.5
0.5
6.3
56.0
4.5
6.3
2.1
100.0
C. Economic analysis and benefit summary
27.
Project implementation calls for obtaining the following benefits for participating
families and communities: an increase in physical assets for communities,
improved agricultural productivity, sustainable natural resource management, and
increased social capital promoting start-up and development of economic
associations to improve their access to value chains and promote their participation
in the benefits of territorial development. Over the long term, this will result in
6
EB 2016/117/R.13
higher incomes, greater employment, higher yields and better quality agricultural
products and by-products.
28.
Financial analysis shows internal rates of return (IRR) for the activities funded by
the project at above the interbank rate of 13.19 per cent, ranging between 26 per
cent and 137 per cent. Net present values (NPV) range between US$45 and
US$12,456, showing that the project is financially feasible. Both models indicate
that family labour will be freed up, so that additional off-farm income and a
reduced workload for women can be expected.
29. An economic analysis indicates that the project is economically feasible, with the
following results: (i) an economic rate of return (EIRR) of 32.5 per cent; and (ii) an
economic NPV of US$214 million at a discount rate of 9 per cent, indicating a
profitable investment.
D. Sustainability
30. The project will ensure that its interventions are sustainable by increasing and
strengthening the social fabric and generating confidence by promoting
associational development processes. At the same time, it will build confidence and
open up opportunities for the development of individuals, families and
communities. Once conditions have been created for groups of individuals or
families to associate and carry out shared activities, the sustainability of such
groups will depend upon the social cohesion established and on external factors.
Political sustainability will be ensured by commitment on the part of national
authorities to address problems in the project area, promoting solid technical and
financial linkages with sector institutions and subnational governments.
31. Social sustainability will be based on already existing community organizations,
such as the campesino and indigenous communities present in the intervention
area, which will ensure social sustainability. At the same time, the sustainability of
the interest groups associating to undertake economic initiatives will be realized by
means of ongoing support to strengthen associative principles and consolidate
them.
32.
Local governments will be strengthened and trained to improve the administration
of resources and respond to the population's needs, which will contribute to
institutional sustainability. The economic and financial sustainability of the
economic initiatives undertaken by associated groups is expected to be brought
about by providing specific advisory assistance in market analysis, support from
mentoring institutions and relationships with potential clients for the products or
services cofinanced by the project.
33. Technical sustainability will be ensured by promoting local talents to operate the
initiatives identified by the project clients. Environmental sustainability will be
ensured by promoting and adopting best practices in natural resource
management.
34.
Finally, the sustainability of investments in road maintenance will be the
responsibility of the municipalities under the conditional programme transfers
managed by MTC with resources provided by the Ministry of Economy and Finance.
To ensure that the roads covered by scheduled and emergency maintenance are
included in regular maintenance plans, specific clauses will be included in the
agreements to be signed with provincial road authorities and municipalities in the
implementation area to ensure compliance with current Ministry of Economy and
Finance policy.
E. Risk determination and mitigation
35.
Implementation of the project will involve moderate risks, and the measures
planned to mitigate them are outlined in table 3:
7
EB 2016/117/R.13
Table 3
Risks and mitigation measures
Risk
Level
Mitigation measures
Administrative and bureaucratic
constraints on implementation
Moderate
Participation by all stakeholders
Limited institutional capacity at regional
and local levels
Moderate
Training for provincial and local
governments
Restricted coverage by agency
responsible for implementation
Moderate
Budget support
Limitations on the use of local talents
Limitations on process of empowerment
of communities and groups
Moderate
Moderate
Possibility of benefits capture
Moderate
Creation of a mechanism to recognize
local talents
Strengthening of community
representation and agreements with
local governments
Setting amounts of incentives or rewards
that do not incentivize capture and
filtration
Climate phenomena, including collapse
and landslide
Moderate
Active participation in road upgrading by
community enterprises
V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The proposed project is aligned with the overarching goal of the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2016-2025 and contributes to all three strategic objectives: increase
rural people’s productive capacities, increase rural people’s benefits from market
participation, and strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resistance of rural people’s economic activities. Moreover, the project approach and
implementation strategies are in compliance with the policies and strategies on
targeting rural poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment,
engagement with indigenous peoples (including free, prior and informed consent),
natural resources and environmental management, climate change, social,
environmental and climate procedures (SECAP note, category B), rural finance, and
knowledge management and innovation.
B. Harmonization and alignment
37. The project is consistent with the national policy environment promoting rural and
territorial development, decentralization and development of production. The
proposed project, to be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
through Agro Rural, will be consistent with the Medium-term Plan 2013-2016 and
its objective to reduce poverty and extreme poverty, improve local institutions and
management, generate competitiveness in agricultural production, and improve the
inclusion of producers by facilitating the sustainability of natural resources. The
proposed project will also be harmonized with the Ministry of Economy and Finance
programme Strengthening the Competitiveness of Rural Associative Enterprises
(PROCOMPITE) and its objective to achieve sustainability in production value chains
through development, adaptation and technology transfer. In addition, the use of
technical teams of local governments will build capacity to mobilize resources from
the Rural Economic Inclusion Fund (FONIE) to rehabilitate rural roads.
Furthermore, the project is fully justified and responsive to the decision by country
authorities to address problems in the intervention area under the VRAEM
Comprehensive Territorial Plan, which pursues the overall objective of shaping an
environment of security, legality and social peace that will improve the quality of
life and social inclusion of the inhabitants by making production activities more
profitable in the area.
C.
38.
Innovation and scaling up
Implementing the project will involve the use of new mechanisms in addition to
those already used and proven effective in previous IFAD-funded projects in Peru –
8
EB 2016/117/R.13
39.
such as allocating financial resources competitively and transferring them to hire
technical assistance, processing and commercialization services, following a
participatory approach to identify, formulate, implement and monitor subprojects
using local resource allocation committees, with financial inclusion and the creation
of collaboration mechanisms with local governments to invest in business
facilitation.
In this project, the innovations in implementation will include strong support for
local and provincial governments in defining territorial assets, and shared financing
by administrative agencies within those governments to improve planning and
implementation of territorial investment projects, including: investing in road
network maintenance to mitigate barriers of connectivity to market access; using
mobile banking as a way of facilitating financial inclusion on a massive basis; and
creating incentives for the development of new financial products and services. The
inclusion of indigenous communities will mean adopting new mechanisms for
managing natural resources and financing community initiatives, with technical and
financial assistance. A systematic strategy will also be followed to build associative
capacities among beneficiary people, supporting organizational development
processes with results-based incentives. Finally, in addition to reinforcing gender
equity, the project calls for strategies, actions and financial resources to diversify
economic opportunities, including access to employment and decent employment.
D. Policy engagement
40. The project calls for actions and resources to promote and facilitate policy dialogue
using lessons learned and recommendations arising from the project
implementation process – to remove barriers that prevent poor rural people from
sharing in the benefits of territorial development. To this end, policy dialogue will
seek to have an influence on the actors involved in decision-making processes at
the local, regional and national levels. Generally speaking, the project will seek to
build an enabling environment from a policy, institutional and regulatory point of
view to advance the interests of poor rural people. Special attention will be paid to
constructing platforms for dialogue between and by indigenous communities,
seeking to open up a space whereby they can have an influence and improve their
participation and their social and economic inclusion.
VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Peru and IFAD will constitute the
legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.
42. The Republic of Peru is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.
43.
I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.
VII. Recommendation
44.
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of
the following resolution:
RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary conditions to the
Republic of Peru in an amount equivalent to twenty million six hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 20,650,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
9
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
Negotiated financing agreement
Convenio de financiación negociado: "Proyecto de
Mejoramiento de los Servicios Públicos para el Desarrollo
Territorial Sostenible en el Área de Influencia de los Ríos
Apurímac, Ene y Mantaro: Proyecto de Desarrollo
Territorial Sostenible"
(Negociaciones concluidas el 29 de febrero de 2016)
Número del Préstamo: __________
Proyecto de Mejoramiento de los Servicios Públicos para el Desarrollo Territorial Sostenible
en  el  Área  de  Influencia  de  los  Ríos  Apurímac,  Ene  y  Mantaro:  Proyecto  de  Desarrollo
Territorial Sostenible (el “Proyecto”)
El Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo Agrícola (el “Fondo” o el “FIDA”)
y
La República del Perú (el “Prestatario”)
(cada uno de ellos por separado la “Parte” y los dos colectivamente las “Partes”)
ACUERDAN lo siguiente:
Por  cuanto  el  Prestatario  ha  solicitado  al  Fondo  financiar  el  Proyecto  y  el  Fondo  acepta
proporcionar un préstamo para apoyar en la financiación del mismo.
Sección A
Los  siguientes  documentos  conforman  colectivamente  el  Convenio:  el  presente
1.
documento,  la  Descripción  del  Proyecto  y  las  Disposiciones  de  ejecución  del  Proyecto
(Anexo 1), el Cuadro de asignaciones (Anexo 2), Disposiciones Especiales (Anexo 3)y las
Condiciones  Generales  para  la  Financiación  del  Desarrollo  Agrícola de  abril  de  2014  (las
“Condiciones Generales”) en sus sucesivas versiones enmendadas.
2.
Las Condiciones Generales y cualquiera de las disposiciones en ellas contempladas
serán aplicables al presente Convenio. A los efectos del presente Convenio, los términos
definidos en las Condiciones Generales tendrán el significado en ellas indicado.
3.
El  Fondo  proporcionará  un  Préstamo  al  Prestatario  (la  “Financiación”),  que  el
Prestatario, a través del Programa de Desarrollo Productivo Agrario Rural (AGRO RURAL),
utilizará  para  ejecutar el  Proyecto  de  conformidad  con  los  términos  y  condiciones  del
presente Convenio.
Sección B
El monto del Préstamo es de DEG 20 650 000 (veinte millones seis ciento cincuenta
1.
mil Derechos Especiales de Giro).
1
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
La Financiación se concede en condiciones ordinarias con un plazo de reembolso de
2.
dieciocho (18) años, incluido un período de gracia de seis (6) años a partir de la fecha en
que el Fondo haya determinado que se han cumplido todas las condiciones previas para
el  retiro  de  fondos.  La  tasa  de  interés  del  Préstamo  será  equivalente  al  cien  por  ciento
(100%)  del  tipo  de  interés  anual  variable  de  referencia  que  determine  el  FIDA  cada
semestre.
La Moneda de Pago del Servicio del Préstamo será el dólar de los Estados Unidos de
3.
América (USD).
4.
El primer día del Ejercicio Financiero aplicable será el 1º de enero.
Los  pagos  del  capital  y  los  intereses  serán  pagaderos  cada  1º  de  febrero  y  1º  de
5.
agosto.  Sujeto  a  la  sección 5.02(a)  de  las  condiciones  generales,  y  siempre  que  el
préstamo  sea  desembolsado  en  su  totalidad,  el  capital  será  pagadero  en  24  cuotas
semestrales comenzando 6 años después de la fecha de cumplimiento de las condiciones
generales  y  adicionales  previas  para  el  retiro  de  los  fondos  de  la  siguiente  manera:
10 cuotas  de  DEG 1 395 595,  en  lo  posible  iguales,  y  14  cuotas  de  DEG 478 150,  en  lo
posible iguales.  En la fecha de cumplimiento de las condiciones generales y adicionales
previas  para  el  retiro  de  los  fondos,  el  FIDA  comunicará  al  Prestatario  el  calendario  de
amortización final.
6.
El  Prestatario,  a  través  del  Ministerio  de  Agricultura  y  Riego  (MINAGRI),
proporcionará  los  recursos  que  corresponden  a  la  contrapartida  para  el  Proyecto  por  el
monto  equivalente  a  USD 38 764 000  (treinta  y  ocho  millones  setecientos  sesenta  y
cuatro mil dólares de los Estados Unidos de América).
Sección C
El  Organismo  Responsable  del  Proyecto  será  el  Ministerio  de  Agricultura  y  Riego  a
1.
través del Programa de Desarrollo Productivo Agrario Rural (AGRO RURAL).
2.
El MINAGRI por sí mismo o a través de las instancias que determine y en acuerdo
con  el  Fondo,  llevará  a  cabo  la  Revisión  de  Medio  Término  como  se  especifica  en  la
Sección 8.03 b) y c) de las Condiciones Generales, pudiendo las Partes acordar otra fecha
para llevar a cabo la Revisión de Medio Término de la ejecución del Proyecto.
La  Fecha  de  Terminación  del  Proyecto  será  el  sexto  aniversario  de  la  fecha  de
3.
entrada en vigor del presente Convenio.
Sección D
El  Fondo  gestionará  la  contabilidad  interna  de  las  cuentas  del  Préstamo  y  los
desembolsos de los mismos, y supervisará directamente el Proyecto.
Sección E
1.
Se  considera  que  son  motivos  adicionales  a  los  previstos  en  las  Condiciones
Generales, para la suspensión del derecho del Prestatario a solicitar desembolsos: i) que
cualquiera de las disposiciones del Manual de Operaciones del Proyecto hayan sido objeto
de cesión, renuncia, suspensión, revocación, enmienda u otra modificación sin el acuerdo
previo  del  Fondo,  y  éste  haya  determinado,  previa  consulta  con  el  Prestatario,  que  tal
cesión,  renuncia,  suspensión,  revocación,  enmienda  o  modificación  ha  tenido,  o  es
probable  que  tenga,  consecuencias  adversas  sustanciales  para  el  Proyecto,  y  ii)  que  se
hayan tomado medidas para la disolución, suspensión del Núcleo Ejecutor Central (NEC)
u otras que impidan la ejecución del mismo, del modo previsto en este Convenio, y tales
medidas, a juicio del Fondo, puedan tener consecuencias adversas para el Proyecto.
2
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
2.
Son  condiciones  generales  adicionales,  previas  para  el  retiro  de  fondos:  a)  la  no
objeción por parte del FIDA al Manual de Operaciones del Proyecto, b) la apertura de la
Cuenta Designada y de la Cuenta del Proyecto, c) el nombramiento del Coordinador y del
Administrador del Proyecto, y d) evidencia de la implementación de un sistema contable
informatizado y de gestión.
3.
Se indican a continuación los representantes designados:
Por el FIDA:
Por el Prestatario:
Presidente
Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo
Agrícola
Ministro de Economía y Finanzas
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas
de la República del Perú
Se  indican  a  continuación  las  direcciones  que  han  de  utilizarse  para  cualquier
4.
intercambio de comunicaciones relacionadas con el presente Convenio:
Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo Agrícola
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Roma, Italia
Fax (3906) 5043463
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas
Jr Junin 319
Lima 1, Perú
Fax (51-1) 626-9921
Ministerio de Agricultura y Riego
Av. Alameda del Corregidor 155
Lima 41, Perú
Fax (51-1) 349-3744
El presente Convenio, se ha preparado en español, en dos (2) ejemplares, uno (1) de los
cuales es para el FIDA y uno (1) para el Prestatario.
REPÚBLICA DEL PERÚ
_____________________
(Nombre y título del
Representante Autorizado)
FONDO INTERNACIONAL DE DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLA
___________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
Presidente
3
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
Anexo 1
Descripción del Proyecto y disposiciones de ejecución
I.
Descripción del Proyecto
1.
Población-objetivo. La población objetivo del Proyecto incluirá alrededor de 50,000
familias  rurales  residentes  en  el  área  de  actuación  del  Proyecto  (86,8%  de  la  población
total)  que  se  encuentran  en  situación  de  pobreza,  y  que  comprende  tres  grupos:
(i) pobres crónicos, (ii) pobres recientes y, (iii) pobres inerciales.
2.
Meta y área del Proyecto. La meta es contribuir a la reducción de la pobreza de las
familias rurales a través de la inclusión social y productiva. El área del Proyecto abarcará
27 distritos en siete provincias en los departamentos de Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín,
Apurímac y Cusco,  en  el área de influencia del territorio del Valle de los Ríos Apurímac,
Ene y Mantaro (VRAEM).
Objetivos  Específicos. Los  objetivos  específicos  incluirán:  a)  recuperación  en  la
3.
dotación de activos naturales para ampliar y diversificar las oportunidades de desarrollo
económico  sostenible  en  los  territorios  rurales  y  promover  un  manejo  de  los  recursos
naturales  alineado  con  los  desafíos  que  derivan  del  cambio  climático;  b)  incremento  de
los  ingresos  de  los  beneficiarios  a  través  del  acompañamiento  de  las  iniciativas
económicas  de  la  población  rural  pobre  y  la  generación  de  oportunidades  de  empleo,
promoviendo  una  creciente inclusión  financiera;  c)  construir  un  tejido  asociativo
sostenible que amplíe la capacidad de las organizaciones comunitarias y económicas para
mejorar su inclusión en el desarrollo territorial; d) mantener  el acondicionamiento físico
de  la  zona  de  influencia  en  donde  están  localizados  los  beneficiarios  del  proyecto y
ampliar  la  infraestructura  productiva  y  comercial  funcionales  a  las  potencialidades
económicas de la población beneficiaria; e) establecer un sistema territorial de servicios
técnicos  rurales que  faciliten  el  acceso  de  los  beneficiarios  a  servicios  de  asistencia
productiva,  financiera  y  empresarial,  movilizando  talentos  locales  y  favoreciendo  el
retorno  de  jóvenes  técnicos  y  profesionales,  y  f)  reforzar  y  ampliar  la  capacidad  de  los
gobiernos locales  y  provinciales  para  diseñar  y  gestionar  estrategias  de  desarrollo
territorial integrales.
Componentes. El  Proyecto  se  estructura  en tres  componentes  principales,  además
4.
de la gestión y administración del mismo:
4.1 Componente  1. Gobernanza  e Inversiones  en  Recursos  Naturales  del
Territorio.  Este  componente  estará  focalizado  a  nivel  comunitario  y  familiar  y
fortalecerá  las  capacidades  institucionales  del  territorio,  incluidos  los  gobiernos
locales  y  provinciales,  apoyando  las  iniciativas  de  mejora  de  bienes  comunales  y
prediales. Sus objetivos contribuirán a mejorar la dotación y calidad de los recursos
naturales  en  territorios  propiedad  de  los  beneficiarios  y  sus  asociaciones
comunitarias y nativas, incluyendo entre otras acciones de adaptación y mitigación
del cambio climático y ampliando las capacidades y competencias para una gestión
y explotación sostenible de los recursos naturales.
4.2 Componente  2.
Iniciativas  Económicas  Locales.  El  objetivo  de  este
componente  es  construir  un  tejido  asociativo  sostenible  entre  los  beneficiarios
potenciales  del  proyecto  para  impulsar  y  ampliar  sus  oportunidades  de  desarrollo
económico  e  inclusión  social,  proporcionando  apoyo  a  actividades  económicas  que
emanen  de  grupos  de  interés,  tales  como  las  organizaciones  de  agricultores,
complementada  con  la  inclusión  financiera  de  familias  y  asociaciones.  En  un
contexto  asociativo  frágil  y  diverso,  el  componente  apoyará  la  constitución,
desarrollo  y  consolidación  de  asociaciones  económicas  de  los  beneficiarios
orientadas  a  mejorar  sus  estrategias  de  vida  y  lograr  una  mayor  y  mejor
4
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
participación  en  los  mercados  de  bienes  y  servicios.  Para  esto  el  componente
implementará  una  estrategia  flexible  y  acumulativa  con  dispositivos  específicos  de
apoyo a las organizaciones de productores rurales en virtud de los variados tipos y
niveles de desarrollo asociativo entre la población rural.
4.3 Componente 3. Conectividad e infraestructura territorial. El objetivo de este
componente  es  mantener  el  acondicionamiento  físico  de  la  zona  de  influencia  en
donde  están  localizados  los  beneficiarios  del  proyecto,  apuntando  a  generar  las
sinergias  con  las  intervenciones  de  los  demás  componentes.  En  un  contexto  de
relativo  aislamiento,  tanto  por  el  deterioro  de  los  caminos  vecinales  como  por  la
mínima  presencia  de  servicios  de  internet  y  de  bajo  aprovechamiento  de  los
recursos  hídricos  y  naturales,  causado  por  la  baja  dotación  inversión  en  riego,  el
proyecto    apoyará    la  facilitación  del  acceso  a  los  mercados  en  el  área  de
intervención  para  la  población  rural,  la  generación  de  empleo  impulsado  por  la
creación  y  contratación  de  microempresas  comunales  o  asociativas  para  el
mantenimiento  rutinario  de  vías,  la  provisión  de  infraestructura  de  riego  a  nivel
comunitario incluyendo  y  acciones  relacionadas  a  cosecha  y  acumulación  de  agua,
entre otras.
4.4 Componente 4. Gestión y Administración del Proyecto. Bajo este componente
se apoyará en  forma transversal a los tres  componentes anteriores para lograr los
resultados y la consecución de las metas del proyecto.  El componente incluye a la
administración del proyecto, gestión del conocimiento y seguimiento y evaluación.
II. Disposiciones de ejecución
1.
Organismo Responsable  del  Proyecto. El  Ministerio  de  Agricultura  y  Riego
(MINAGRI),  a  través  de    AGRO RURAL, en  su  condición  de  Organismo  Responsable  del
Proyecto,  asumirá  la  responsabilidad  general  de  la  ejecución  del  mismo.  Este  último
constituirá un NEC con las atribuciones legales para administrar el Proyecto, en estrecha
coordinación con tres de sus Agencias Zonales ubicadas en las regiones de Huancavelica,
Ayacucho  y  Cusco  además  de  una  fuerte  coordinación  y  colaboración  de  las
administraciones municipales y provinciales.
Unidad  Coordinadora  del  Proyecto  (UCP).  La  implementación  del  Proyecto  será
2.
responsabilidad de una Unidad Coordinadora del Proyecto (UCP) dependiendo del Director
Ejecutivo de AGRO RURAL siendo responsable de la coordinación de las actividades físico-
financieras del Proyecto y seguimiento del avance de las metas establecidas.
La Unidad Coordinadora del Proyecto, se establecerá en la Sede de Agro Rural en Lima y
operará bajo la modalidad de  NEC,  con las  siguientes atribuciones: i) capacidad jurídica
para  contratar  los  servicios  externos,  con  la  no  objeción  del  FIDA;    ii)  autonomía
administrativa  y  financiera,  incluida  el  manejo  de  los  fondos  del  proyecto;  iii)
implementación de los planes a su cargo mediante transferencia de recursos, según sea
el  caso;  iv)  operación  del  sistema  de  seguimiento  y  evaluación  del  Proyecto,  y  v)  otras
funciones a ser indicadas en el Manual de Operaciones.
La UCP estará compuesta por un(a) Coordinador(a) del Proyecto y, ocho especialistas en:
a)  Seguimiento  y  Evaluación,  b)  Inclusión  financiera,  c)  Desarrollo  empresarial,  d)
Infraestructura,  e)  Manejo  de  recursos  naturales  y  cambio  climático  y  aplicación  de  la
normativa social y ambiental, f) Inclusión Social, g) Administración, y h) Contabilidad.
El/La  Coordinador(a)  del  Proyecto.  La  selección  del/la  Coordinador(a)  del  Proyecto
3.
se  realizará  a  través  de  una  convocatoria  pública  utilizando  mecanismos  de  selección
abiertos  y  transparentes.  El/la  Coordinador(a)  del  Proyecto  será  responsable inter  alia
de: a) elaborar los planes operativos y presupuestos anuales del Proyecto, b) promover e
impulsar  el  desarrollo  de  los  componentes  del  proyecto,  c)  proponer  las  prioridades  de
financiamiento  del  Proyecto,  d)  efectuar  las  coordinaciones  necesarias  para  cumplir  con
las metas de Proyecto, e) coordinar con las Agencias Zonales, los Gobiernos Locales, las
5
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
operaciones  del Proyecto  y  el  uso  de  mecanismos  competitivos  para  la  gestión  de  los
recursos naturales y el desarrollo territorial, f) coordinar estrechamente con la Oficina de
Administración  de  Agro  Rural  todos  los  aspectos  administrativos  financieros  y  contables
del  proyecto,  (g)  elaborar  términos  de  referencia,  especificaciones  y  otros  documentos
requeridos para solicitar a la Oficina de Administración las contrataciones y adquisiciones
necesarias para la implementación del Proyecto.
4.
Implementación  descentralizada - Agencias  Zonales. La  implementación  del
Proyecto  incluirá  a  tres    Agencias  Zonales  de  Agro  Rural    ubicadas  en  el  distrito  de
Pampas en Tayacaja en la región Huancavelica, en el distrito de Andahuaylas de la región
Ayacucho  y  en  el  distrito  de  Echarate  en  la  región  Cusco.  Estas  instancias  serán
fortalecidas  mediante  la  contratación  de  personal  especializado  a  fin  de  que  apoyen
directamente  en  su  ejecución.  Dentro  de  cada  Agencia  Zonal  donde  se  implementará  el
Proyecto, se contratará a un(a) Coordinador(a) Zonal, un(a) Asistente Administrativo(a),
y otros(as) especialistas que se especificarán en el Manual de Operaciones.
5.
Grupo de trabajo denominado Comité de Coordinación del Proyecto (CCP).  A fin de
proporcionar orientaciones durante la implementación se constituirá, mediante resolución
ministerial, un grupo de trabajo denominado Comité de Coordinación del Proyecto (CCP)
compuesto  por:  i)  El  Director  Ejecutivo  de  AGRO  RURAL  quien  presidirá  el  comité
Directivo,  ii) El Director Ejecutivo de PROVRAEM, iii) un representante de los gobiernos
regionales  del  ámbito  de  intervención  del  Proyecto,  iv)  una  representante  de  los
gobiernos locales del ámbito de intervención del Proyecto, v) un representante de Provías
Descentralizado del MTC, vi) un representante de OPI MINAGRI, vii) un representante del
MEF, y viii) el Coordinador Ejecutivo del Proyecto quien actuará como secretario técnico.
El  Grupo  de  Trabajo,  denominado  CCP,  tendrá  como  responsabilidades  entre  otras:
a) aprobar el reglamento interno, b) aprobar el Manual de Operaciones del Proyecto y sus
modificaciones,  c)  establecer  los  procedimientos  para  la  convocatoria,  selección  y
designación del Coordinador del Proyecto y profesionales de UCP, d) hacer el seguimiento
al desempeño de la gestión de la UCP proponiendo los ajustes para su mejora, de ser el
caso, e) manifestar conformidad a la estructura organizacional y organigrama de la UCP
la que debería incluir la cantidad de personal profesional contratado para las acciones  y
actividades  del  Proyecto,  f)  recibir  los  informes  de  auditoría  y  g)  proponer  mejoras  y/o
acciones de parte de los representantes de CCP a efectos de ser implementados.
6
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
Anexo 2
Cuadro de asignaciones
Asignación de los recursos del Préstamo. a) En el cuadro que figura a continuación
1.
se  presentan  las  Categorías  de  Gastos  Admisibles  que  se  financiarán  con  cargo  al
Préstamo  y  la  asignación  de  los  montos  del  Préstamo  a  cada  Categoría,  así  como  los
porcentajes  de  los  gastos  correspondientes  a  los  rubros  que  se  financiarán  en  cada
Categoría:
Categoría
I. Obras
II. Equipos y Materiales
III. Consultorías
IV. Donaciones y Subsidios
V. Capacitación
TOTAL
Cantidad
asignada del
Préstamo
(en DEG)
% de gastos admisibles que
han de financiarse sin
impuestos
1 136 000
122 000
2 149 000
15 477 000
1 766 000
20 650 000
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
b)
Algunos  de  los  términos  que  se  emplean  en  el  cuadro  de  asignaciones  se
definen a continuación:
Obras:  Incluye  gastos  con  relación  a  mantenimiento  de  caminos;  infraestructura
productiva  para modernización  y  rehabilitación  de  los  sistemas  de  riego  y  para
cosecha de agua.
Equipos y Materiales: Incluye gastos para comunicaciones y publicaciones.
Consultorías:  Incluye  gastos  con  relación  a:  Formación  de  Unidades  de  Desarrollo
Territorial  en  Gobiernos  Distritales;  Apoyo  a  la  preparación,  revisión/actualización
de  Planes  de  Desarrollo  económico  territorial,  incluyendo  el  mapeo  de  activos;
Preparación  de  planes  de  inversión  asociativa;  Movilización  de  oportunidades  de
servicios 
financieras;  Estudios  de
evaluación;  Diseño  e  implementación  del  sistema  de  S&E,  incluido  plataforma
informática; Sistematizaciones y estudios específicos.
financieros;  Activación  de 
innovaciones 
Donaciones y Subsidios: Incluye gastos con relación a: preparación, cofinanciación
y  apoyo  a  la  implementación  de  los  planes  de  gestión  de  recursos  naturales  en  la
Sierra  y  en  la  Ceja  de  Selva,  y  de  los  planes  de  inversión  asociativa  en  la  Sierra;
Apoyo  a  la  implementación  de  proyectos  específicos  en  la  Ceja  de  Selva;
Establecimiento de  un  fondo  de  aprendizaje  empresarial;  Promoción  de  servicios
financieros asociativos.
Capacitación:  Incluye  gastos  con  relación  a:  Desarrollo  de  capacidades  e
intercambio  de  experiencias  (incluyendo  los  equipos  técnicos  de  las  ODET);
7
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
Preparación  de  planes  de  gestión  de  recursos  naturales  en  Comunidades
campesinas;  Incremento  de  capacidades  e  intercambio  de  experiencias  para
identificar nuevas oportunidades y servicios del bosque; Apoyo a la preparación y la
formulación  de  planes  de  vida  en  comunidades  nativas  interesadas;  Catastro  y
mapeo  de  asociaciones  económicas  en  los  territorios,  y  de  talentos  locales;
Convocatorias  territoriales  para  promover  la  constitución  de  asociaciones  de
pequeños  productores  y  apoyar  las  existentes;  Creación  y  fomento  de  gremios  y
redes  empresariales  locales;  Desarrollo  de  Alianzas  Comerciales;  Talleres  de
difusión  del  Proyecto;  Talleres  de  incidencia  Política;  Inversiones  para  ampliar  la
oferta de talentos.
El detalle de estas definiciones se incluirá en el Manual de Operaciones del Proyecto.
8
Appendix I
EB 2016/117/R.13
Anexo 3
Disposiciones Especiales
Manual  de  Operaciones  del  Proyecto. Podrán  hacerse  modificaciones  al  Manual  de
1.
Operaciones del Proyecto, las cuales deberán contar con la previa no objeción del Fondo.
9
Marco Lógico
Results
Hierarchy
Name
Means of Verification
Meta
Contribuir a la reducción de la
pobreza de las familias rurales
bajo un enfoque de  inclusión
social y productiva.
Objetivo de Desarrollo
Incrementar los activos
humanos, sociales, naturales,
físicos y financieros de los /las
beneficiario(a) s del proyecto en
27 distritos Municipales  de
Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín,
Apurímac y Cusco
1
0
(1) El valor de los activos de las
familias rurales ha aumentado en un
20%. (RIMS 3er nivel)
(2) El índice de desnutrición infantil se
ha reducido en 20% (RIMS 3er nivel).
(3) El índice de reducción de la
pobreza monetaria se ha reducido de
XX%
(4). 50 000 familias reciben servicios
del Proyecto. (RIMS 1.8.2).
(5). Al menos el 80 % de 27 000
familias rurales incrementan en
promedio en 37% sus rendimientos
agrícolas.
(6). Al menos el 80% de 27 000
familias rurales incrementan en
promedio en 57% su productividad
pecuaria.
(7).  Al menos 23 000 familias
incrementa sus ingresos en un 11,5%
por el mejoramiento y mantenimiento
de caminos que dan condiciones a
mayor acceso a mercados y
oportunidades de empleo.
Baseline
*
Xx%
Xx%
Xx%
0
0
0
0
Component 1: Gobernanza e Inversiones en Recursos Naturales del Territorio
Efecto directo 1:
Los recursos naturales son
manejados sosteniblemente
incorporando  medidas de
adaptación al cambio climático.
(8).80% de 240  Planes de gestión de
recursos naturales implementados en
Sierra y Selva son manejados
sosteniblemente al término del
Proyecto (RIMS 2.1.4)
(9). 10 000 personas (8500
provenientes de sierra y 1500 nativos)
capacitadas en gestión de recursos
naturales(RIMS  1.1.9)
0
0
Assumptions
Freque
ncy
1er. año
3er año
6to. año
Responsi
bility
Equipo del
Proyecto
Supuestos
Target
Source
Eval. Línea de Base
Eval. Medio Término
Eval. Impacto Final
Encuesta Nacional de
Hogares
ENAHO Rural
Provincial
50 000
21 600
21 600
23 000
Informes de avance
anual
Cada
año
Equipo del
Proyecto
Línea Base
Eval. Impacto Final
Línea base de cada
iniciativa comunal y
económica.
1er. año
3er año
6to. año
Eval. Línea de Base
Eval. Medio Término
Eval. Impacto Final
1er. año
3er año
6to. año
La capacidad de AGRO RURAL
para llevar adelante una
ejecución descentralizada
dentro de la zona de
amortiguamiento del VRAE,
susceptible de la influencia de
acontecimientos derivados de
la economía ilegal.
192
Planes
Informes de avance
anuales de los Planes
de gestión de recursos
naturales.
3er y
6to.
Año
Equipo del
Proyecto
10 000
(6000
hombre
s y
4000
mujeres
)
Evaluaciones
participativas de
género, comunitarias
y de los niveles
asociativos.
Cada
año
Informes de las
capacitaciones,
desagregadas por
género.
Escenarios climáticos
adversos, sobre todo en los
distritos de la sierra, puede
poner en riesgo los impactos
que se espera desencadenar.
Fenómenos climáticos
estables en el período del
Proyecto.
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
6
/
1
1
7
/
R
.
1
3
Component 2. Iniciativas Económicas Locales
Efecto directo 2:
Familias asociadas desarrollan
iniciativas de negocios, acceden a
las diferentes cadenas de valor
en mejores condiciones y
comercializan la producción en
diferentes tipos de mercado en
forma sostenible.
Efecto directo 3:
Los beneficiarios inmersos en las
iniciativas económicas acceden a
servicios financieros,
innovaciones financieras y
fortalecen sus capacidades.
1
1
(10). El 70% de 27 000 familias
asociadas que han desarrollado Planes
de Negocio incrementan sus ventas en
un 30%.
(11). El 70% (57)  de 81
emprendimientos de jóvenes rurales
que han desarrollado planes de
negocio siguen en funcionamiento sin
apoyo del proyecto después de tres
años.
(12). El 65% de mujeres de 27 000
familias (1 por familia), acceden a
cuentas de ahorro y a otros servicios
financieros.
(13). Al término del proyecto, 3000
jóvenes agrupados en grupos de
ahorro juvenil (GAJ) creados hacen
uso de los servicios financieros.
(14).  Al menos 1 miembro de las
27 000 familias (hombre o mujer)
accede a coberturas del seguro de
vida.
Component 3  Conectividad e Infraestructura Territorial
(15).  257 Km de caminos  mejorados,
rehabilitados y con mantenimiento
rutinario y periódico por el Proyecto.
0
0
0
0
0
0
Efecto directo 4:
Red Vial Vecinal de los distritos
beneficiarios rehabilitada y
mejorada de forma sostenible,
mejoran la interconexión entre
las comunidades.
Efecto directo 5:
Infraestructura productiva
(sistemas de riego e
infraestructura para cosecha de
agua) genera mayores
rendimientos de la producción
agropecuaria de las 27 000
familias usuarias.
21  600
Registro de ventas de
los grupos.
Línea Base de cada PN
1er. año
3er año
6to. año
Equipo del
Proyecto.
Línea Base de cada PN
Línea de base,
Informes de progreso,
evaluaciones a medio
término y final
1er. año
3er año
6to. año
Equipo del
Proyecto
57
emprendi
mientos
17520
mujeres.
3000
jóvenes.
Informes de las
instituciones bancarias
y aseguradoras.
27000
con
pólizas
257 km
de
caminos
con
manteni
miento
Informes de las
instituciones bancarias
y aseguradoras.
Informes de los
Institutos Viales
Provinciales
Informes de progreso
semestrales y anuales
1 al 6to
Año.
1 al 6to
Año.
1 al 6to
Año.
Equipo del
Proyecto
en
coordinació
n con los
Institutos
Viales
Provinciale
s (IVP's)
Equipo del
Proyecto.
Fluctuación de precios en los
mercados y pérdidas, que
pueden provocar un
decremento de beneficios.
Diversificación y
transformación de productos y
efectuar ventas en épocas de
menor oferta, ampliación del
acceso a los mercados.
Poco interés en la ampliación
de cobertura de servicios
financieros por parte de las
entidades financieras en el
área.
Firma de convenios con
entidades financieras, para
garantizar cantidad de
cuentas de ahorro y
microseguros, que sean de
interés para las entidades
financieras.
Ecosistemas con climas
inestables y suelos con fuerte
tendencia a los
deslizamientos, encarece
excesivamente mantenimiento
de la infraestructura.
Previsión de inversiones que
eviten deslizamientos por
lluvias.
Falta de gestión de
mantenimiento por parte de
las comunidades, una vez
concluida las obras.
Organizaciones fortalecidas en
gestión y administración de
las infraestructuras.
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
6
/
1
1
7
/
R
.
1
3
(16). 3000 hectáreas de tierras con
servicios ecosistémicos rehabilitados o
restaurados (RIMS 1.117) de las
familias usuarias (ver indicador 4).
0
3000 has.
Evaluación de Medio
Término
Evaluación de Impacto
3er. año
y 6to.
año.
