Document: 
Agenda: 
Date: 
Distribution: 
Original: 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
19(b)(iv)(c) 
30 December 2021 
Public 
English 
E 
President’s report 
Republic of Senegal 
Agriculture and Livestock Competitiveness 
Programme for Results 
Project ID: 2000002666 
Note to Executive Board representatives 
Focal points: 
Dispatch of documentation: 
Deirdre Mc Grenra 
Chief 
Institutional  Governance  and 
Member Relations 
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2374 
e-mail: gb@ifad.org 
Technical questions: 
Sana F.K. Jatta 
Regional Director ad interim 
West and Central Africa Division  
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2333 
e-mail: s.jatta@ifad.org 
Benoit Thierry 
Head of Hub/Country Director 
Tel.: +221 77 450 9458 
e-mail: b.thierry@ifad.org 
Executive Board — 134th Session 
Rome, 13-16 December 2021 
For: Approval 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
ii 
iii 
iv 
1 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 
7 
8 
8 
8 
8 
9 
9 
10 
10 
Contents 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the programme area 
Financing summary 
I. 
Context 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
B.  Lessons learned 
II.  Programme description 
A.  Government programme 
B.  World Bank PforR scope 
C.  Objectives, geographical area of intervention and target groups 
D. Result areas and disbursement-linked indicators 
E.  Theory of change 
F.  Alignment, ownership and partnerships 
G. Costs, benefits and financing 
III.  Risks 
A.  Risks and mitigation measures 
B.  Environment and social category 
C.  Climate risk classification 
D. Debt sustainability 
IV.  Implementation 
A.  Organizational framework 
B.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning, knowledge 
management and communications 
C.  Implementation plans 
Legal instruments and authority 
V. 
VI.  Recommendation 
Appendices 
I.  Negotiated financing agreement 
II.  Logical framework 
III.  Integrated programme risk matrix 
IV.  Disbursement-linked indicators 
Programme delivery team 
Regional Director: 
Country Director: 
Technical Lead: 
Finance Officer: 
Climate and Environment Specialist: 
Legal Officer: 
Nadine Gbossa/Sana F.K. Jatta 
Benoit Thierry 
Jean Philippe Audinet 
Radu Damianov 
Pathe Amath Sene 
Aspasia Tsekeri 
i 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
COSOP 
country strategic opportunities programme 
CPM 
CSA 
DLI 
ESSA 
IDA 
IPL 
KM 
M&E 
MAER 
MEPA 
PADAER 
PAFA 
PAFA-E 
country programme manager 
climate-smart agriculture 
disbursement-linked indicator 
Environment and Social Systems Assessment 
International Development Association 
investment project lending 
knowledge management 
monitoring and evaluation 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Equipment 
Ministry of Livestock and Animal Production 
Support to Agricultural Development and Rural Entrepreneurship 
Programme 
Agricultural Value Chains Support Project 
Agricultural Value Chains Support Project – Extension 
PCAE-PforR 
Agriculture and Livestock Competitiveness Programme for Results 
PDO 
PforR 
PNDE 
PPA 
programme development objective 
programme for results 
National Livestock Development Plan 
programme preparation advance 
PRACAS 
Programme for Accelerated Pace of Agriculture 
PSE 
RBL 
SDG 
TCT 
WBG 
Emerging Senegal Plan 
results-based lending 
Sustainable Development Goal 
technical coordination team 
World Bank Group 
ii 
Map of the programme area 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Agriculture and Livestock Competitiveness Programme for 
Results (PCAE-PforR) 
Agropastoral areas 
Extended groundnut basin 
iii 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Financing summary 
Initiating institution: 
World Bank 
Borrower/recipient: 
Ministry of Finance and Budget 
Executing agency: 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Equipment 
Ministry of Livestock and Animal Production 
Total programme cost: 
US$233 million 
Amount of IFAD loans: 
EUR 17.32 million (equivalent to approximately 
US$20 million) under the programme for results 
modality 
EUR 2.50 million (equivalent to approximately 
US$3 million) as additional financing for the ongoing 
Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme – Phase II 
Terms of IFAD loan:  
Highly concessional loans 
Cofinancier[s]:  
International Development Association 
Amount of cofinancing: 
International Development Association: US$150 million 
Contribution of borrower/recipient: 
US$60 million 
Cooperating institution: 
World Bank 
iv 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Recommendation for approval 
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation contained in 
paragraph 58. 
I.  Context 
A.  National context and rationale for IFAD involvement 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
National context 
Senegal’s structural reforms and favourable exogenous conditions have enabled 
the country to achieve one of the world’s highest rates of economic growth in 
2015–2019 – more than 6 per cent. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, this rate fell 
sharply to 0.7 per cent in 2020 and to 3.0 per cent in 2021, but is expected to gain 
momentum from 2022 onwards. Offshore oil and gas discoveries will come into 
production in 2022–2023, easing the country’s fiscal and development challenges, 
and laying the foundation for broad-based economic growth. The share of people 
living in poverty (on less than US$1.90 per day) fell from 47 per cent in 2011 to 
38 per cent in 2018, with agriculture as the main driver. 
The Government of Senegal aims to achieve middle-income status by 2035. The 
Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE) 2035 details how this vision is to be achieved 
through strategies such as: (i) the Programme for Accelerated Pace of Agriculture, 
phase II (PRACAS-II); and (ii) and the National Livestock Development Plan 
(PNDE). The proposed modality of programme for results (PforR), to be financed by 
the World Bank and IFAD, supports the PSE through its focus on promoting 
competitive agriculture and livestock value chains for resilient and inclusive growth. 
Agriculture has grown at the robust rate of 3.2 per cent in the past two decades. 
Under PRACAS-I and PNDE,1 crop and livestock production have grown strongly in 
recent years. The development of sedentary, mixed crop/livestock farming systems 
has diversified revenues and provided a critical asset and safety net for farmers. 
This progress occurred through a combination of financial and pricing incentives 
(subsidized inputs – seeds, fertilizer and farm equipment – as well as crop  
price-setting) and production enhancement measures (technology transfer). 
Expanded agricultural credit also contributed, as did subsidies to agricultural 
insurance. Rural people, who account for 62 per cent of Senegal’s population, have 
benefited significantly from this progress given that agriculture employs 69 per 
cent of rural dwellers and 36 per cent of the national labour force.2 However, rural 
poverty remains high in the groundnut basin and agropastoral areas. 
Rationale for IFAD involvement and choice of instrument 
Given IFAD’s comparative advantage in diversifying smallholder farming and 
introducing climate-smart agriculture (CSA) in Senegal’s groundnut basin and 
agropastoral areas, the Government asked IFAD on 12 February 2019 to cofinance 
its flagship Agriculture and Livestock Competitiveness Programme for Results 
(PCAE-PforR), which is also being funded by the World Bank. For the Senegalese 
agriculture and livestock sectors, it marks the first results-based lending (RBL) 
operation, making it a significant milestone for the Government, IFAD and the 
World Bank Group (WBG).  
Participating in the PCAE-PforR with the WBG will help work towards the strategic 
objectives of IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP)  
2019-2024 in Senegal. Given the size and outreach of the programme, joining 
forces with the WBG in supporting sustainable rural livelihoods, food security and 
1 PRACAS concluded its first phase (2014–2017) and a second is underway (2018–2023); PNDE (2014–2017) will be 
extended to 2023. 
2 International Labour Organization Labour Force Survey (2015) and https://gfc.ucdavis.edu/profiles/rst/sen.html. 
1 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
nutrition in the Sahel is a strategic investment for IFAD at a time when the country 
is moving from classic project implementation towards national programmes. Since 
January 2020, all ministries involved have used a budget programme approach. In 
addition, participating in an innovative undertaking like PforR makes it possible to 
scale up IFAD’s experience in the region, where it has helped strengthen the 
resilience of smallholder farmers by diversifying their production systems and 
promoted increased rural employment and revenues. These expected outcomes are 
key at a time when climate change and the COVID-19 pandemic are threatening 
the livelihoods of the rural poor in the Sahel.  
The PCAE-PforR will address all IFAD’s core commitments, with a strong focus on 
climate change and food and nutrition security, while building on good practices 
identified in the Agricultural Value Chains Support Project (PAFA) and the 
Agricultural Value Chains Support Project – Extension (PAFA-E). CSA is at the core 
of the strategies of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Equipment (MAER) and the 
Ministry of Livestock and Animal Production (MEPA), as climate poses the main 
risks to livelihoods in the targeted areas. CSA practices for sustainable productivity 
growth, together with adaptation strategies for resilient production and livelihoods, 
as well as climate change mitigation strategies were integrated into the PCAE-PforR 
design.  
As MAER and MEPA will implement the PCAE-PforR, focus will also be on the 
availability of healthy and varied food. Rural households will benefit from better 
food security and greater access to nutritious foods, leading to improved overall 
health. The focus on nutrition will be reinforced in the programme through: 
(i) diversification of farming systems to promote increased consumption of fruit, 
dairy products, meat and pulses; and (ii) reduction of risks that contribute to food 
insecurity and seasonal hunger (e.g. storage, warehouse receipt systems, 
agricultural insurance). Improving food security through more nutrition-sensitive 
food production systems lies at the heart of IFAD’s work. The Fund can contribute 
to improving rural households’ diets by using its experience with past programmes 
(PAFA, PAFA-E and the Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme [PADAER]) and ongoing ones (PADAER-II and the 
Rural Youth Agripreneur Support Project [Agrijeunes Tekki Ndawñi]) in Senegal. 
IFAD’s financial contribution to the operation is also an opportunity to improve 
further IFAD’s visibility through policy dialogue in partnership with the WBG. 
IFAD's participation in the design of the PCAE-PforR also enabled a reframing of the 
targeting strategy to enhance inclusion of poor rural people and ensure gender and 
youth sensitivity. These are also among the Government’s priorities, as reflected in 
PRACAS-II and PNDE. Given the marginalization of women and youth in agriculture 
and livestock systems, the programme will pay close attention to the inclusion of 
these two groups through a specific strategy that is being developed with technical 
assistance provided by PADAER-II. Thanks to its extensive experience and 
expertise in women’s economic empowerment and in the inclusion of youth in 
agrifood value chains, IFAD will make a valuable contribution to involving more 
women and youth during programme implementation. 
B.  Lessons learned 
10.  The 2019-2024 COSOP highlighted that IFAD project outcomes are not sufficiently 
scaled up or used to inform government policy reforms. Participating in the  
PCAE-PforR allows IFAD to join forces with the WBG and provide the required 
leverage to scale up innovations developed through IFAD initiatives.  
11.  The IFAD country programme has contributed to increasing the incomes of the 
rural poor, reducing gender inequality and empowering rural women and youth. In 
addition, the programme has contributed to increasing crop yields and agricultural 
production, as well as marketing surpluses, through agribusiness linkages. As a 
partner in the design and financing of the PCAE-PforR, IFAD drew on its experience 
2 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
with projects and programmes including: (i) PAFA (2010–2016, US$37.51 million); 
(ii) PADAER (2011-2019, US$59.12 million); (iii) PAFA-E (2014-2020, US$47.48 
million); and (iv) PADAER-II (2018–2024, US$84.7 million). These investments 
contributed to transforming traditional subsistence agriculture into market-oriented 
agropastoral farming systems with significant help from the private sector. 
Important too was the promotion of a structured dialogue between all value chain 
stakeholders (so-called interprofessional organizations).  
12.  Finally, experience gained in the following partnerships helped inform the design 
stage. IFAD has established a transparent and graduation grant mechanism with 
emphasis on building relationships between farmers’ organizations and financial 
service providers. In response to environmental and climate challenges, and in 
partnership with the Global Environment Facility, IFAD established the Agricultural 
Value Chains Resilience Support Project grant (2017–2021) to strengthen the 
resilience of vulnerable households. Furthermore, IFAD in partnership with the 
World Food Programme and the National Agricultural Insurance Company of 
Senegal developed agricultural insurance programmes for rainfed crops and small 
ruminants. 
II.  Programme description 
A.  Government programme 
13.  The PCAE-PforR supports investments and policy reforms embedded in two national 
programmes, namely the PRACAS-II under MAER, and the PNDE under MEPA. Both 
programmes are promoting sustainable, resilient and inclusive growth as set out in 
the PSE.  
B.  World Bank PforR scope 
14.  The PCAE-PforR was designed by the WBG, IFAD and the Government to reduce 
rural poverty and improve food and nutrition security for smallholder farmers, 
women and young people alike in the poorest regions of Senegal. At the design 
stage, an expenditure framework review of PRACAS-II and PNDE helped select 
those budget lines that contribute to achieving the programme development 
objective (PDO) and the outcomes/outputs of the PCAE-PforR. Consequently,  
10 disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were defined to capture the required 
investments and policy reforms. 
C.  Objectives, geographical area of intervention and target 
groups 
15.  The PDO is to enhance productivity and market access of priority commodity value 
chains and livestock in the extended groundnut basin and agropastoral areas.  
16.  The beneficiaries are a broad range of stakeholders (smallholders, cooperatives, 
research and development agencies, traders, processors and exporters) involved in 
priority crop and livestock value chains. This target group is essentially the same 
as that of IFAD-supported projects like PAFA, PAFA-E and PADAER. 
17.  The targeting strategy of the programme, in line with IFAD guidelines, is based on 
geographical and self-targeting mechanisms. It is estimated that approximately 
950,000 farmers will benefit from one or more activities, with women and youth 
respectively accounting for 50 per cent and 30 per cent of total beneficiaries.  
18. 
IFAD’s cofinancing will enhance the focus on diversifying smallholder farming 
systems and on women and young farmers. An additional 50,000 farmers will be 
provided with more assets, 50,000 more will adopt improved agricultural 
technology and a further 450,000 will benefit from the vaccination of their horses 
and small ruminants. IFAD funding will also give 72,000 more farmers access to 
agricultural insurance. The indicators in the results framework will be 
3 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
disaggregated by gender and age in the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, 
while the capacity of MAER and MEPA to monitor these indicators will be improved.  
D.  Result areas and disbursement-linked indicators 
19.  The PCAE-PforR has three results areas, or components, namely: (i) improved crop 
and livestock productivity and resilience; (ii) improved business environment and 
market integration; and (iii) improved sector governance, coordination and 
programme management. Table 1 below presents the 10 DLIs. 
20.  Contribution to the disbursement-linked indicators. US$20 million of IFAD’s 
contribution to the PCAE-PforR will be allocated strategically to further enhance 
sustainable diversification of farming and livestock systems, and inclusiveness in 
line with the IFAD core commitments and the 2019-2024 COSOP. The core 
investments (DLIs 2, 3, 7 and 10) were identified in the expenditure framework of 
PRACAS-II and PNDE as follows: 
(i)  Under results area 1, DLI 2 and DLI 4 will be cofinanced, with a focus on 
diversification and productivity increases in crop and livestock systems. Under 
DLI 2, IFAD will contribute to the multiplication of quality seeds for crop 
diversification (millet, sorghum, maize, cowpea, Irish potato, vegetables, 
sweet potato and fonio). Under DLI 4, vaccination for small ruminants and 
horses will be promoted.  
(ii)  Under results area 2, DLI 7 was prioritized. IFAD support will help provide 
insurance coverage for smallholder farmers. This DLI is under the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and Budget.  
(iii)  Under results area 3, DLI 10 will be cofinanced. IFAD support will be used to 
further digitalize and decentralize the MAER and MEPA M&E system, and 
promote policy dialogue and knowledge management (KM), in particular the 
consolidation of the crop diversification measures established under PAFA and 
PAFA-E.  
21.  As part of IFAD’s contribution to the PCAE-PforR, US$3 million will be earmarked 
for institutional support and capacity-building, using an investment project lending 
(IPL) approach. As this institutional capacity-building support is considered 
essential, the Government and the WBG strongly insisted on including an 
“Institutional support and capacity-building component” to mitigate implementation 
risks. This support will build on the initial US$3.5 million already provided by 
PADAER, a sum that proved fundamental in starting up the programme. This 
support contributes to the Programme Action Plan (PAP),3 defining the 
accompanying measures undertaken by the Government to mitigate 
implementation risks. The plan includes actions aimed at strengthening 
implementing agencies (mainly MAER and MEPA at national and local levels) in four 
areas: (i) technical implementation capacity; (ii) programme management, M&E 
and KM; (iii) fiduciary systems; and (iv) environmental and social management. 
Furthermore, this support will help improve the core IFAD mandate with respect to 
farmers’ organizations, gender and youth empowerment. 
22.  Despite its relatively small financial contribution to the operation, IFAD will gain in 
overall visibility and weight in policy dialogue due to its partnership with the WBG. 
The ambitious policy conversation under the PCAE-PforR is designed to address the 
needs of small- and medium-scale farms. This dialogue is essential to IFAD’s core 
target group and consists of the following elements:  
(i)  DLIs 1, 2, 3 and 5 aim to fundamentally change MAER and MEPA’s budget 
allocation so as to ensure that smallholders have more equitable access to 
3 World Bank. PCAE. Programme Appraisal Report. Annex 6. 
4 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
certified seeds (groundnuts, diversification crops) and quality CSA inputs and 
vaccination.  
(ii)  DLIs 6 and 10 include policy measures to support multi-stakeholder 
platforms, including the recognition and organization of interprofessional 
bodies for groundnuts and diversification crops (maize, sorghum/millet, 
cowpea). 
(iii)  DLIs 5 and 10 support preparation of laws, regulations, policies and 
strategies, including a strategy to control Newcastle disease and fowlpox, a 
national genetic improvement strategy and plan, an animal health and 
veterinary public health code, and a livestock masterplan. 
Table 1 
Disbursement-linked indicators and allocation of International Development Association (IDA) and 
IFAD financing 
(Millions of United States dollars) 
DLI4 
IDA 
IFAD  
Results area 1. Improved crop and livestock productivity and resilience 
1  Quantity of certified groundnut seeds acquired annually (tons) 
2  Cumulative quantity of certified seeds acquired for diversification crops 
(tons) 
3 
Percentage of subsidy targeted to smallholder producers and climate -
smart technologies (% of subsidy amount)  
4 
Vaccination coverage rates for small ruminant plague (% coverage) 
5  Cumulative quantity of certified fodder seeds acquired by the producers 
(tons) 
Results area 2. Improved business environment and market integration 
6  National Interprofessional Committee for Groundnut restructured  
7  Number of producers with access to agricultural insurance for crops and 
livestock (per year) 
8  Operationalization of the warehouse receipt system in the extended 
groundnut basin  
9  Number of milk collection centres supported and/or equipped and 
operational  
Results area 3. Improved sector governance, coordination and programme management 
10   M&E system at both MAER and MEPA for agriculture and livestock 
performance in place and functioning 
Total allocation – DLIs 
Programme preparation advance (PPA) (not DLI) 
Institutional support and capacity-building (IPL, not DLI) 
Total 
35.0 
15.0 
20.0 
30.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
4.01 
5.0 
10.0 
149.01 
0.99 
- 
150.0 
- 
6.0 
7.0 
- 
- 
5.0 
- 
- 
2.0 
20.0 
- 
3.0 
23.0 
E.  Theory of change 
23.  The PCAE-PforR is positioned as a rural transformation initiative aimed at 
enhancing food security, rural incomes, equity and economic growth. In order to 
achieve this long-term outcome, the programme is structured around twin 
complementary areas: (i) increased productivity, agriculture resilience and 
livestock productivity (results area 1); and (ii) improved business environment and 
market integration for groundnuts, diversification crops and dairy products (results 
area 2). In parallel, the institutional capacity of the main implementing entities 
(MAER and MEPA) will be enhanced (results area 3). 
24.  At the outcome and output levels, the DLIs will monitor the required changes 
(access to inputs, technologies, investments and policy measures) to achieve the 
PDO. 
4 All DLIs except DLI 10 are scalable; in other words, funds will be disbursed annually in line with progress made. 
5 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
F.  Alignment, ownership and partnerships 
25.  The PCAE-PforR will contribute to the achievement of Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG) 1 through a sustainable increase in the incomes of poor family farmers 
and young rural entrepreneurs. It will also help achieve SDG 2 (zero hunger) as it 
addresses the food and nutrition of beneficiary families. The programme will 
further contribute to SDG 5 (gender equality) and 10 (reduced inequalities) as well 
as SDG 13 on climate change.  
26.  Within the United Nations system, IFAD has the sole mandate for investing in 
agriculture development. The Fund has a unique approach to supporting 
smallholders, organizing their value chains and making them more competitive and 
resilient. As indicated in its 2019-2024 COSOP, IFAD’s comparative advantage in 
Senegal and the subregion is its expertise in: (i) agriculture value chain 
development; (ii) support for rural entrepreneurship, especially for women and 
young people; and (iii) empowerment of farmers’ organizations. IFAD will use this 
expertise to make sure those activities are reflected and scaled up in the  
PCAE-PforR. 
G.  Costs, benefits and financing 
Programme costs 
27.  The RBL approach calls for all activities to be prefinanced by the Government under 
its annual sector budgets and reimbursed by WBG and IFAD up to an agreed 
amount once the DLIs are achieved. The total programme cost is estimated at 
US$233 million. The WBG has allocated US$150 million to the PCAE-PforR, of which 
US$149.01 million as RBL and US$0.99 million as a PPA. IFAD will contribute 
US$23 million (reallocation of the Eleventh Replenishment of IFAD's Resources), of 
which US$20 million will be in the form of RBL and US$3 million in the form of IPL 
through PADAER-II. The Government will contribute US$60 million. 
Table 2 
Programme cost by financier and by type of lending 
(Millions of United States dollars) 
Type of lending 
Financing source 
Amount 
Percentage 
PPA 
RBL 
IPL 
Total 
IDA 
IDA 
IFAD 
Government 
IFAD 
0.99 
149.01 
20.00 
60.00 
3.00 
233.00 
0.4 
64.0 
8.6 
25.8 
1.3 
100.0 
Disbursement arrangements 
28.  The table below presents IFAD disbursements by DLI and by year. 
Table 3  
Programme costs by DLI and by year 
(Millions of United States dollars) 
DLI 2 
DLI 4 
DLI 7 
DLI 10 
Institutional support and capacity-building 
Total 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Total 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.10 
2.10 
1.58 
1.76 
1.16 
1.00 
0.51 
6.01 
1.58 
1.76 
1.16 
1.00 
0.35 
5.85 
1.58 
1.76 
1.16 
0.00 
0.04 
4.54 
1.58 
1.76 
1.16 
0.00 
0.00 
4.50 
6.35 
7.00 
4.64 
2.00 
3.00 
23.00 
Summary of benefits and economic analysis 
29.  An ex ante economic and financial analysis was prepared to demonstrate the 
financial and economic soundness of the PCAE-PforR. The economic net present 
6 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
value of the programme is estimated at US$374 million, and the economic rate of 
return at 24.2 per cent. Sensitivity analysis shows that the results are robust under 
most scenarios.  
30.  A greenhouse gas analysis was performed using the EX-Ante Carbon Balance Tool. 
Results show that the PCAE-PforR can constitute a sizeable net carbon sink of  
-3.3 million tCO2eq over 20 years, thus -167,000 tCO2eq annually, due to the 
introduction of improved crop and grassland management practices and 
technologies. The cropping activities constitute a carbon balance of  
-266,864 tCO2eq per annum in the with-programme scenario, which would largely 
compensate the increase in the livestock sector (81,436 tCO2eq per annum). 
Increased transportation, processing and use of fertilizer and agrochemicals would 
lead to an annual increase of 18,493 tCO2eq.  
31. 
Exit strategy and sustainability 
In a PforR, initial funding comes from national-sector budgets, which ensures the 
availability of funds. Regular missions and a system of checks and balances are 
being put in place to ensure that public budget allocations and incurred 
expenditures are in line with the ambition of the PCAE-PforR.  
III.  Risks 
A.  Risks and mitigation measures 
32.  As per IFAD’s design policy of January 2020, risk for type C projects is addressed 
by the programme initiator, the WBG in this case.  
33.  The overall risk of the PCAE-PforR is considered substantial when assessed with the 
World Bank’s Systematic Operations Risk-rating Tool, driven mostly by political and 
governance issues, sector policies, weak institutional capacity for implementation, 
and sustainability and fiduciary aspects. This is exacerbated by the uncertainty 
surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.  
34.  Fiduciary risk is considered high by the WBG and many mitigation measures have 
been put in place, including: (i) agreement on the multi-year programme 
expenditures framework with the Government,; (ii) limiting the programme 
expenditures framework annual budget variation to +/-3 per cent: (iii) formal 
approval of the PRACAS-II and Livestock Sector Development Policy; 
(iv) appointment of programme managers and filling a vacant internal inspection 
position; (v) opening a separate and dedicated account with the National Treasury 
to receive funds that will flow from the World Bank; (vi) National Treasury to 
appoint dedicated accountants to handle and report on payments made at the 
request of the line ministries on the dedicated account; (vii) roll-out of an 
integrated financial management information system and procurement system; 
and (viii) development of a multi-year contract framework. 
35.  The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risk is substantial, 
reflecting the need for close collaboration between the entities involved in 
implementation. This risk will be mitigated by establishing dedicated technical 
coordination teams (TCTs) at MAER and MEPA to ensure coordination, and through 
capacity-building incorporated into programme design, DLIs and PAP. 
36.  Regarding the Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures, the 
World Bank procedures were followed and an IFAD integrated programme risk 
matrix was prepared. 
B.  Environment and social category 
37.  An Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was prepared to gauge 
Senegal’s authority and organizational capacity to achieve environmental and social 
objectives against the environmental and social impacts that may be associated 
with the programme. Although the investments are unlikely to have substantial 
7 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
adverse impacts, the cumulative effect of the intensification of groundnuts, 
livestock and horticultural production, paired with weak environment and social 
management systems at national and regional levels, raises the risk classification 
to substantial. The programme design and PAP mitigate many of these risks. 
C.  Climate risk classification 
38.  The IFAD climate risk classification does not apply as the Fund will align with ESSA 
procedures. The climate risk is assessed by the World Bank as high. 
D.  Debt sustainability  
39.  The debt sustainability analysis from January 2021 indicates that Senegal’s debt 
remains sustainable with a moderate risk, but with limited scope to absorb shocks 
in the near term. This is in line with the previous debt sustainability analysis  
update of April 2020, which accompanied Senegal’s rapid credit facility/rapid 
financial instrument request. The moderate risk of debt distress is predicated on a 
gradual recovery from the pandemic-induced shock, continued adherence to a 
prudent fiscal path (in line with regional convergence criteria) and sound debt 
management. The outlook for Senegal remains highly uncertain and subject to 
significant downside risks, primarily a reflection of broader global risks related to 
COVID-19. A prudent borrowing strategy that prioritizes concessional external 
borrowing and domestic regional financing in line with programmed financing 
needs, combined with continued efforts to strengthen debt management and 
contain fiscal risks, will be the anchor for continued debt sustainability. The public 
debt-to-GDP ratio stood at 65.81 per cent in 2020 and is projected to peak at 
around 68 per cent in 2021–2022 before gradually declining over the medium term 
as oil and gas investments come online. Debt service is projected to be about 
21 per cent of total revenues and grants in 2020, before gradually rising to about 
24 per cent on average over the medium term due to borrowing related to the 
hydrocarbon sector. 
IV.  Implementation 
A.  Organizational framework 
Programme management and coordination 
40.  The programme has a three-tiered governance structure with a steering 
committee, two technical committees and two TCTs as well as two technical focal 
points, within MAER and MEPA. The teams are operational already. The steering 
committee held its first meeting in March 2021, when it approved the first annual 
workplan and budget. In March 2021, the first supervision mission, held with IFAD 
participation, assessed progress realized thus far. 
41.  Achievement of the DLIs will be verified by the independent verification agent 
(IVA). The demand for non-objection for the recruitment of the IFAD IVA is 
expected soon. A DLI verification protocol has been defined. 
42.  The PCAE-PforR is a PforR operation, which means that no COSTAB cost analysis or 
expenditure categories were prepared. The PCAE-PforR will be implemented 
through the national systems and no programme implementation manual was 
prepared. 
Financial management, procurement and governance  
43.  The RBL approach calls for all activities to be prefinanced by the Government under 
its annual budgets for agriculture and livestock programmes, and reimbursed by 
the World Bank and IFAD up to an agreed amount once the DLIs are achieved.  
44.  Under a letter of appointment negotiated between the parties, the World Bank will 
be appointed as a cooperating institution within the meaning of article III of the 
General Conditions of Agricultural Development Financing dated 29 April 2009, and 
last amended in December 2020. 
8 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
45.  Financial reporting and auditing will be the responsibility of the programme 
management unit and the public expenditure authorization directorate at the 
Ministry of Finance and Budget. The PADAER-II project implementation financial 
and administrative manual will be updated to include specific procedures applicable 
for the PCAE-PforR. A designated account will be opened at the National Treasury 
to receive funds from IFAD. A separate designated account will be opened by 
PADAER-II for PCAE-related funds once the first disbursement criteria are met. 
46.  An assessment of the national fiduciary systems was undertaken by the World 
Bank during design and concluded that the fiduciary risk is “substantial”, as 
detailed in the fiduciary summary. The PADAER-II’s inherent financial management 
risk is thus substantial also. As per the aide-memoire5 of the midterm review, the 
financial management quality rating is 3, or moderately unsatisfactory. The funds 
will be made available to PADAER-II only once the financial management quality is 
rated 4, or satisfactory as a disbursement condition. Given the RBL approach, the 
Government will be responsible for procurement, using its own mechanisms and no 
classic procurement plan was prepared. However, the World Bank has specific 
guidelines for procurement in RBL projects.  
Project/programme target group engagement and feedback, and 
grievance redress6 
47.  A preparatory study to establish a grievances mechanism has been made. 
Comments from the WBG are being taken into account. 
48. 
Grievance redress 
In line with its procedures, the World Bank supported the establishment of a 
grievance redress service. The service ensures that complaints received from 
communities and individuals are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent 
concerns.7  
B.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning, knowledge 
management and communications 
49.  The results framework (appendix II), developed by MAER, MEPA, the WBG and 
IFAD, will be used for M&E purposes. To monitor IFAD’s cofinancing, six indicators 
were added, while for other indicators the quantitative targets (DLIs 2, 4, 7) were 
increased.  
50.  The programme has a strong focus on M&E and KM. IFAD will be at the forefront of 
M&E and KM activities through the provision of capacity-building and technical 
assistance (mainly mobilized by the IPL through PADAER-II). To encourage the 
Government to invest in digitalization and decentralize the MAER and MEPA M&E 
system, the PCAE-PforR includes DLI 10, associated with a disbursement of 
US$10 million from IDA and US$2 million from IFAD, conditional to the setting up 
of M&E systems able not only to track performance and results, but also to develop 
related policy documents and knowledge products. IFAD will further contribute to 
this area through the use of global capacity-building grants, while the IFAD 
Regional Hub in Dakar will ensure the quality of KM, a key element for IFAD. 
C.  Implementation plans 
Implementation readiness and start-up plans 
51.  The WBG provided a PPA to ensure implementation readiness, while the 
Government and IFAD mobilized technical assistance through PADAER-II.  
Supervision, midterm review and completion plans 
5 World Bank. PCAE virtual implementation support mission. 8-15 March 2021. Aide-memoire. 
6 See Framework for Operational Feedback from Stakeholders https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/128/docs/EB-
2019-128-R-13.pdf?attach=1. 
7 For details: http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. 
9 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
52. 
In light of the letter of agreement, the World Bank will be formally responsible for 
supervising the PCAE-PforR, administering the loan and authorizing payments. In 
practice, supervision will be carried out jointly by the WBG, IFAD and the 
Government. In conformity with IFAD’s policy on supervision and implementation 
support, at least one supervision mission will be held annually, with regular  
follow-up on progress and results. The presence of the World Bank office and IFAD 
Regional Hub in Dakar will facilitate close monitoring of progress and provide 
implementation support. IFAD’s long-standing strategic partnership with MAER and 
MEPA will ensure efficient targeting of women and youth. In addition, all partners 
will work together to strengthen M&E systems. 
53.  The midterm review will be organized at the beginning of year 3 of programme 
implementation. It will be led by MAER and MEPA through their TCTs and will be 
conducted jointly with IFAD and the WBG. 
54.  The programme completion review will be initiated by the Government according to 
guidelines issued by IFAD and the WBG, and reviewed by the three parties. It will 
document the achievement of the overall targets and PDO as well as lessons 
learned during implementation and possibilities for scaling up. 
V.  Legal instruments and authority 
55.  A project financing agreement between the Government of Senegal and IFAD will 
constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the 
borrower/recipient, under the new PforR modality (EUR 17.3 million). The second 
loan (EUR 2.5 million) will be incorporated as additional financing to the PADAER-II 
and for which an amendment to the already existing financing agreement between 
the Government of Senegal and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for 
extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A copy of the 
negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I. 
56.  The Government of Senegal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 
IFAD. 
57. 
I am satisfied that the proposed financings will comply with the Agreement 
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing. 
VI.  Recommendation 
58. 
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 
the following resolution:  
RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms 
to the Republic of Senegal in an amount of seventeen million three hundred 
twenty thousand euros (EUR 17.32 million) in order to finance the 
programme for results modality and upon such terms and conditions as shall 
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented 
herein. 
RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly 
concessional terms to the Republic of Senegal in an amount of two million 
five hundred thousand euros (EUR 2.5 million) as additional financing to the 
already existing Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme – Phase II and upon such terms and conditions 
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions 
presented herein. 
Gilbert F. Houngbo 
President 
10 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Accord de financement négocié: 
Programme de compétitivité pour l’agriculture et 
l’élevage au Sénégal (PCAE-PforR) 
(Négociations conclues le 17 novembre 2021) 
Prêt No.: __________ 
Nom  du  Projet:  Programme  de  compétitivité  pour  l'agriculture  et  l'élevage  au  Sénégal 
(PCAE-PforR) (le "Programme") 
ENTRE 
La République de Sénégal (l’"Emprunteur") 
Et  
Le Fonds international de développement agricole (le "Fonds" ou le "FIDA") 
(désignés individuellement par une "Partie" et collectivement par les "Parties") 
ATTENDU QUE: 
A. 
Le Programme est une opération de prêt basée sur les résultats (le "RBL") qui a pour 
objectif d’améliorer la productivité et l'accès au marché des chaînes de valeur des produits 
de  base  prioritaires  et  de  l'élevage,  dans  le  bassin  arachidier  élargi  et  les  zones 
agropastorales, comme définies dans l’Annexe 1 de cet accord de financement; 
Le 12 Février 2019, l‘Emprunteur a  officiellement demandé au FIDA  de  financer le 
B. 
Programme; 
Ainsi, l’Emprunteur a sollicité du Fonds un prêt pour le financement du Programme 
C. 
décrit à l’Annexe 1 du présent accord de financement; 
D.  Dans le cadre de la contribution du FIDA pour le Programme, un financement sera 
aussi mobilisé pour l'appui institutionnel et le renforcement des capacités via le Projet FIDA 
PADAER II; 
E. 
Le Programme sera cofinancé par la Banque Mondiale (la "BM"). Le 12 mai 2020, le 
Conseil d'administration (le "CE de la BM") de la BM a approuvé un crédit de 150 millions 
de  dollars  pour  le  financent  du  Programme.  L'accord  de  financement  de  la  BM  pour  le 
Programme est entré en vigueur le 2 septembre 2020 et sera clôturé le 31 décembre 2025; 
et 
L’Emprunteur  s’est  engagé  à  fournir  un  soutien  supplémentaire,  financier  ou  en 
F. 
nature, qui pourrait être nécessaire au Programme. 
Considérant que le Fonds a accepté de financer le Programme, 
1 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Par conséquent, les Parties conviennent de ce qui suit: 
Section A 
Le présent accord de financement (l’"Accord") comprend l’ensemble des documents 
1. 
suivants: le présent document, la description du Programme et les dispositions relatives à 
l’exécution  (Annexe  1),  le  tableau  d’affectation  des  fonds  (Annexe  2)  et  les  clauses 
particulières (Annexe 3). 
2. 
Les Conditions générales applicables au financement du développement agricole en 
date  du  29  avril  2009,  telles  que  modifiées  en  décembre  2020  et  toutes  éventuelles 
modifications  postérieures  (les  "Conditions  générales")  sont  annexées  au  présent 
document,  et  l’ensemble  des  dispositions  qu’elles  contiennent  s’appliquent  au  présent 
Accord à l’exception des dispositions indiquées à la section E, paragraphe 4 ci-dessous, les 
cas  échéants.  Aux  fins  du  présent  Accord,  les  termes  dont  la  définition  figure  dans  les 
Conditions générales ont la signification qui y est indiquée. 
Le  Fonds  accorde  à  l’Emprunteur  un  prêt  (le  "Prêt"  ou  le  "Financement"),  que 
3. 
l’Emprunteur utilise aux fins de l’exécution du Programme, conformément aux modalités 
et conditions énoncées dans le présent Accord. 
4. 
Aux fins du présent Accord: 
i)  l’"Indicateur  lié  au  décaissement"  ou  l’"ILD"  désigne,  pour  une  catégorie  donnée, 
l'indicateur lié à ladite catégorie qui sera utilisé pour déclencher le décaissement des fonds, 
et comme indiqué dans le tableau de l'Annexe 2 du présent Accord; 
ii)  le  "Résultat  lié  au  décaissement"  ou  le  "DLR"  désigne  pour  une  catégorie  donnée,  le 
résultat au titre de ladite catégorie tel qu'il est indiqué dans le tableau de l'Annexe 2 du 
présent Accord, sur la base de l'atteinte de laquelle, le montant du Financement affecté 
audit résultat pourra être retiré. 
5.1.  Les exceptions suivantes à la section 4.02 a) et à la section 4.03 d) des Conditions 
générales s'appliquent: 
i) le décaissement sera déclenché par des DLI vérifiables au lieu de dépenses éligibles; 
ii)  le  Fonds  n'exigera  pas  de  l'Emprunteur  qu'il  fournisse  la  preuve  que  les  retraits 
antérieurs  ont  été  correctement  dépensés  pour  des  dépenses  éligibles,  mais  plutôt  la 
preuve que les DLR convenus ont été respectés; 
iii)  les  dépenses  seront  considérées  comme  éligibles  lorsque  les  DLR  convenus  seront 
atteints; 
iv) l'Emprunteur peut retirer le produit du Financement afin de financer des dépenses sur 
la  base  des  résultats  (les  "Résultats  liés  au  décaissement"  ou  le  "DLR")  obtenus  par 
l'Emprunteur,  mesurés  par  rapport  aux  indicateurs  spécifiques  (les  "Indicateurs  liés  au 
décaissement" ou l’"ILD") dans le montant alloué par rapport à la catégorie du tableau de 
l'Annexe 2; 
5.2.  Les  exceptions  suivantes  au  Cadre  conceptuel  pour  l'établissement  de  rapports 
financiers et l'audit des projets financés par le FIDA et le Manuel relative mentionnés à la 
section 9.03  des  Conditions  générales,  sont  applicables,  conformément  aux  lois  et 
réglementations applicables de l'Emprunteur; 
i) les audits ne sont pas nécessaires pour retracer les fonds du FIDA jusqu'aux bénéficiaires 
finaux; et 
2 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
ii) le contenu minimum prescrit, tel que prévu au tableau 3 du Manuel, des états financiers 
annuels du Programme n'a pas à être soumis au FIDA. 
Section B 
Le  montant  du  Prêt  est  de  dix-sept  millions  trois  cent  vingt  mille  Euro 
1. 
(17 320 000 EUR). 
Le  Prêt  est  accordé  à  des  conditions  particulièrement  favorables  exempt  d'intérêt 
2. 
mais assorti d'une commission de service de 0,75% l’an et un délai de remboursement de 
quarante (40) ans dont un différé d’amortissement de dix (10) ans, à compter de la date 
d'approbation du Prêt par le Conseil d'administration du Fonds. Le Principal du Prêt sera 
remboursé à un taux de 4,5 % du montant total du Principal per annum à partir de l'année 
onze (11) et jusqu’à l'année trente (30), et à un taux de 1 % du montant total du Principal 
à partir de l'année trente-et-un (31) et jusqu'à l'année quarante (40). 
3. 
La monnaie de paiement au titre du service du Prêt est l’euro (EUR). 
4. 
L’exercice financier débute 1er janvier et clôture le 31 décembre. 
Le remboursement du principal et le paiement de la commission de service du Prêt 
5. 
sont exigibles le 15 avril et le 15 octobre. 
Il  y  aura  un  compte  désigné  libellé  en  euro  (EUR),  pour  l’utilisation  exclusive  du 
6. 
Programme ouvert à la Banque Centrale au nom du Trésor Public du Sénégal. 
Section C 
1. 
L'agent principal du Programme est le Ministère en charge des finances (le "MFB") 
avec le Ministère en charge de l’agriculture (le "MAER") responsable des activités agricoles 
et le Ministère en charge de l’élevage (le "MEPA") responsable des activités de l’élevage. 
2.  Des  supervisions  annuelles  conjointes  seront  organisées  desquelles  le  FIDA  fera 
partie intégrante. 
3. 
Un examen à mi-parcours sera effectué conformément aux dispositions des alinéas 
8.03 b) et c) des Conditions générales. Toutefois, les Parties peuvent convenir d'une date 
différente pour l'examen à mi-parcours de la mise en œuvre du Programme. 
4. 
La date d’achèvement du Programme est fixée au 31 décembre 2025 et la date de 
clôture du financement sera 6 mois plus tard, ou toute autre date désignée par le Fonds 
par notification à l'Emprunteur. 
5. 
L'acquisition de biens, travaux et services financés par le Financement est effectuée 
conformément  aux  dispositions  de  la  réglementation  de  l'Emprunteur  en  matière  de 
passation  des  marchés,  dans  la  mesure  où  elles  sont  conformes  aux  directives  pour  la 
passation des marchés relatifs aux projets du FIDA. 
Section D 
1. 
Le  Financement  sera  administré  et  le  Programme  sera  supervisé  par  la  Banque 
Mondiale (la "BM"), en tant qu'institution coopérante, au sens de l'Article III des Conditions 
générales en vertu d'une lettre de nomination (la "LdN") qui sera conclue entre le FIDA et 
la BM. 
3 
Appendix I 
Section E 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Les  éléments  suivants  constituent  des  conditions  additionnelles  préalables  aux 
1. 
décaissements:  
a) 
Le personnel clé du Programme a été nommé. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
La  LdN entre le FIDA et la BM  comme décrit plus en détail dans la section D 
ci-dessus, est conclue et est entrée en vigueur.  
L'accord de financement entre l’Emprunteur et la BM pour le Programme n’est 
pas  entré  pleinement  en  vigueur  dans  les  180  jours  suivant  la  date  de  la 
signature du présent Accord, et les fonds de remplacement ne sont pas mis à 
la disposition de l’Emprunteur selon des modalités acceptables pour le Fonds. 
Le droit de l’Emprunteur de retirer le montant du financement de la BM n’a pas 
été suspendu, annulé ou résilié, en tout ou en partie, ou le financement de la 
BM est devenu exigible et payable avant l’échéance convenue de  celui-ci; ou 
aucun  événement  n’est  survenu  qui,  avec  le  passage  du  temps  pourrait 
entraîner l’une ou l’autre de ces situations. 
Aucun  décaissement  ne  sera  effectué  tant  que  et  à  moins  que  l'Emprunteur, 
par l'intermédiaire de l'agence principal du Programme, n'ait fourni des preuves 
satisfaisantes pour le FIDA (rapport de vérification) que les DLR ont été atteints 
et confirmés par un organisme de vérification tiers indépendant conformément 
au protocole de la vérification, tel que prévu entre les Parties. 
Toutes les communications ayant trait au présent Accord doivent être adressées aux 
2. 
représentants dont le titre et l’adresse figurent ci-dessous: 
Pour l’Emprunteur: 
[cliquez et tapez le titre du représentant] 
[cliquez et tapez le nom et l'adresse du ministère] 
Pour le Fonds: 
[Cliquez et tapez le titre] 
Fonds international de développement agricole 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italie 
[Copie à:]8 
8 Le cas échéant. Lorsqu’un Prêt ou un Don est lié à un autre projet du FIDA, il est recommandé de toujours copier le pays du 
FIDA/ou le chargé de projet du FIDA afin d'assurer une bonne coordination. 
4 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Le  présent  Accord,  [en  date  du  ___________] 9,  a  été  établi  en  langue  française  en 
deux (2) exemplaires originaux, un (1) pour le Fonds et un (1) pour l’Emprunteur. 
NOM OFFICIEL DU PAYS 
____________________ 
[(Nom du Représentant autorisé)] 
[(Titre du Représentant autorisé)] 
Date: _______________10 
FONDS INTERNATIONAL 
DE DEVELOPPEMENT AGRICOLE 
____________________ 
Gilbert F. Houngbo 
Président 
Date: _______________ 
9 À conserver uniquement si l'Accord de Financement est signé par les deux parties à la même date et au même endroit. 
10 Dans le cas où l'Accord de Financement n’est pas signé au siège du FIDA. 
5 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Annexe 1 
Description du Programme et dispositions relatives à l’exécution 
I.  Description du Programme 
1. 
Population cible. 
Le PCAE est un programme basé sur les résultats (RBL) dans l’agriculture et l’élevage, qui 
a  été  conçu  comme  un  outil  pour  réduire  la  pauvreté  rurale  et  améliorer  la  sécurité 
alimentaire  et  nutritionnelle  des  petits  exploitants  agricoles,  des  femmes  et  des  jeunes 
dans  les  régions  les  plus  pauvres  du  Sénégal.  Les  bénéficiaires  sont  un  large  éventail 
d'acteurs (petits exploitants, coopératives, agences de R&D, commerçants, transporteurs, 
exportateurs) impliqués dans les chaînes de valeur prioritaires des cultures et de l'élevage. 
Le groupe cible du Programme est essentiellement le même que celui des projets soutenus 
par le FIDA (PAFA, PAFA-E et PADAER). 
2. 
Zone d'intervention du Programme. 
Le  Programme  pourra  intervenir  sur  tout  le  territoire  national,  principalement  dans  le 
bassin arachidier élargi et les zones agro-pastorales11, qui ont la plus forte incidence de 
pauvreté et de malnutrition dans le pays, qui sont également les plus vulnérables à l'impact 
de la variabilité et du changement climatique et de la dégradation des sols. 
3. 
Finalité. 
La finalité du Programme est de soutenir les éléments de transformation, comme indiqué 
dans  le  Programme  de  relance  et  d'accélération  de  la  cadence  de  l’agriculture,  phase  II 
(PRACAS  II)  et  le  Plan  National  de  Développement  de  l'Elevage  (PNDE).  Deux  points 
d'entrée stratégiques pour s'attaquer à la faible productivité du secteur agricole du Sénégal 
et améliorer le bien-être des ménages ruraux pauvres dans le cadre du PforR sont i) les 
systèmes à base d'arachide et ii) les systèmes d'élevage. 
4.  Objectif. 
L'objectif du Programme est d'améliorer la productivité et l'accès au marché des chaînes 
de valeur des produits de base prioritaires et de l'élevage, dans le bassin arachidier étendu 
et les zones agropastorales. 
5. 
Composantes. 
Le Programme étant un programme basé sur les résultats ne comprend pas de composante 
au sens strict, mais des domaines de résultats comme suit: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Amélioration de la productivité et de la résilience des cultures et de l'élevage; 
Amélioration de l'environnement des affaires et intégration des marchés; 
Gestion du programme et la gouvernance sectorielle; 
L’appui institutionnel et le renforcement des capacités; 
Dialogue Politique. 
11 Le bassin arachidier élargi signifie les départements avec des activités de production arachidière dans les régions de Kaffrin, 
Kaolack, Sedhiou, Fatick, Tambacounda, Kolda et Diourbel et toute autre zone agrée entre les Parties. 
6 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
II.  Dispositions relatives à l'exécution 
6. 
Les agents techniques du Programme. 
Les ministères MAER et MEPA, chargés de la mise en œuvre, préfinanceront et exécuteront 
le programme par le biais de leurs budgets annuels de programme sectoriel. Lorsque les 
DLI seront atteints et que la preuve de réalisation sera partagée à la suite d'une série de 
vérifications approfondies et convenues, le GBM et le FIDA autoriseront le décaissement 
du montant encouru conformément à l'accord de financement PCAE/P4R et convenu pour 
chaque DLI. 
7. 
Comité de surveillance du programme. 
Il  est  prévu  que  la  Banque  mondiale  soit  désignée  en  tant  qu'institution  coopérante,  au 
sens de l'article III des Conditions générales applicables au financement du développement 
agricole en date du 29 avril 2009, telles que modifiées en dernier lieu en décembre 2020, 
en vertu d'une lettre de nomination (la "LdN") qui est actuellement en cours de rédaction 
et de négociations entre les parties. Au regard de la LoA, la BM sera donc formellement 
chargée  de  l’administration  du  prêt  et  de  la  supervision  du  PCAE.  En  pratique,  la 
supervision sera effectuée conjointement par le GBM, le FIDA et le GoS. 
8. 
Unité de gestion du Programme. 
Le Programme a une structure de gouvernance à trois niveaux avec un Comité de Pilotage 
(SC), deux Comités Techniques (TC), des Comités régionaux de coordination et de suivi, 
et deux Equipes Techniques de Coordination (TCT), ainsi que des points focaux techniques, 
au  sein  du  MAER  et  du  MEPA,  qui  ont  été  mis  en  place  et  sont  opérationnels.12 Le  CP  a 
organisé  sa première  réunion en mars 2021  et a approuvé le premier plan de travail et 
budget annuels (PTBA). L’Unité de Gestion se partage entre le MAER et le MEPA. 
9. 
Partenaires stratégiques. 
Les partenaires Stratégiques du FIDA dans le cadre de ce programme sont le Groupe de la 
Banque mondiale (GBM), le Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'équipement rural (MAER), du 
Ministère de l'élevage et de la production animale (MEPA) et le Ministère des finances  et 
du budget (MFB).  
10.  Suivi et évaluation. 
Le Programme est fortement axé sur le S&E, et le FIDA sera en première ligne des activités 
de  suivi  et  d'évaluation  grâce  à  l’appui  au  renforcement  des  capacités  et  d'assistance 
technique à la mise en place de systèmes de suivi et d'évaluation capables de suivre les 
performances et les résultats, d'élaborer des documents d'orientation connexes. Le FIDA 
aura  la  possibilité  de  contribuer  davantage  à  ce  domaine  grâce  à  l'utilisation  de  dons 
mondiaux pour le renforcement des capacités. 
11.  Gestion des connaissances. 
La  préparation  d'une  stratégie  de  gestion  des  savoirs  et  les  activités  seront  également 
financées  grâce  au  volet  "appui  institutionnel  et  renforcement  des  capacités".  Les 
approches et pratiques de mise en œuvre sont développées/adaptées en fonction des défis 
et/ou des risques identifiés. Ils s'appuieront sur le renforcement des systèmes de S&E pour 
documenter les meilleures pratiques et analyses. 
12 Banque mondiale. Mission virtuelle d’appui à l’exécution du PCAE du 8 au 15 mars 2021. Aide-mémoire. 
7 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
III.  Indicateurs liés aux décaissements et allocation des financements IDA et 
FIDA 
ILD[1] 
IDA 
millions de 
dollars US 
FIDA 
millions de 
dollars US 
Domaine de résultats 1: amélioration de la productivité et de la résilience des cultures et du 
bétail 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Quantité de graines d'arachide certifiées acquises annuellement 
(tonnes) 
Quantité cumulée de semences certifiées acquises pour les cultures 
de diversification (tonnes) 
Pourcentage de la subvention destiné aux petits producteurs et aux 
technologies intelligentes du point de vue climatique (% du montant 
de la subvention) 
Taux de couverture vaccinale contre la peste des petits ruminants 
(PPR) (% de couverture) 
Quantité cumulée de semences certifiées fourragères acquises par 
les producteurs (tonnes) 
35.0 
15.0 
20.0 
30.0 
10.0 
0.0 
6.0 
0.0 
7.0 
0.0 
Domaine de résultats 2: amélioration de l'environnement des entreprises et de l'intégration 
des marches 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Restructuration de l'interprofession de l'arachide (CNIA) 
Nombre de producteurs ayant accès à une assurance agricole pour 
les cultures et le bétail (par an) 
Opérationnalisation du système de réception des entrepôts (WRS) 
dans le bassin arachidier étendu 
Nombre de centres de collecte de lait soutenus et/ou équipés et 
opérationnels 
10.0 
10.0 
4.01 
5.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Domaine de résultats 3: amélioration de la gouvernance, de la coordination et de la gestion  
des programmes dans le secteur 
10 
Mise en place et fonctionnement d'un système de suivi et 
d'évaluation (S&E) au MAER et au MEPA pour les performances en 
matière d'agriculture et d'élevage 
Allocation totale DLIs 
Avance sur la préparation du programme (pas de DLI) 
Soutien institutionnel et renforcement des capacités (IPL, pas DLI) 
TOTAL GÉNÉRAL 
10.0 
2.0 
149.01 
0.99 
150.0 
20.0 
- 
3.0 
23.0 
[1] Tous les DLI sauf le DLI 10 sont extensibles, ce qui implique que les fonds seront déboursés annuellement en fonction des 
progrès réalisés. 
8 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Annexe 2 
Tableau d’affectation des fonds 
1. 
Affectation du produit du Prêt FIDA. 
a) 
Le tableau ci-dessous indique les ILDs de dépenses admissibles à un financement 
sur le paiement du Prêt ainsi que le montant du prêt affecté à chaque ILD: 
Programme de compétitivité de l'agriculture et de l'élevage axé sur les résultats 
Retrait du produit du Prêt FIDA 
Cofinancement de la Banque mondiale (IDA) et du 
FIDA 
Résultat lié au 
déboursement 
(le cas échéant) 
Montant du crédit total alloué 
(exprimé en EUR) 
Catégorie (y 
compris 
l'indicateur lié 
au 
déboursement, 
le cas échéant) 
(2) DLI #2: 
Quantité cumulée 
de semences 
certifiées 
acquises pour les 
cultures de 
diversification 
DLR #2: 53.000 
tonnes métriques 
de semences 
certifiées, 
comprenant entre 
autres le fonio, le 
maïs et le sésame, 
acquises par les 
producteurs du 
bassin arachidier 
étendu, à partir 
d'une base de 0 
tonne métrique. 
(4) DLI #4: Taux 
de couverture 
vaccinale contre 
la peste des 
petits ruminants 
(PPR) 
DLR #4: 80% de 
ruminants 
vaccinés dans les 
zones 
agropastorales à 
partir d'une base 
de 30%. 
(7) DLI #7: 
Nombre de 
producteurs 
ayant accès à 
l'assurance 
agricole pour les 
cultures et le 
bétail 
DLR #7.1: Les 
arriérés de primes 
d'assurance dus 
par le bénéficiaire 
au CNAAS ont été 
entièrement 
réglés. 
13 700 000 (de l'IDA) + 5 480 000 
(du FIDA) = 19 180 000 
Formule: pour chaque tranche 
supplémentaire de 10 600 tonnes 
métriques par rapport à la situation 
de référence, 2 740 000 (de l'IDA) 
+ 1 096 000 (du FIDA) = 
3 836 000 peuvent être mis à 
disposition pour être retirés par le 
bénéficiaire, jusqu'à concurrence 
de 13 700 000 + 5 480 000 = 
19 180 000. 
Pour chaque tranche de 10 600 
tonnes, les proportions de 
décaissement de l'IDA et du FIDA 
sont respectivement de 71% et 
29%. 
27 400 000 (de l'IDA) + 6 120 000 
(du FIDA) = 33 520 000 
Formule: Pour chaque 
augmentation supplémentaire de 
10 points de pourcentage par 
rapport à la situation de référence, 
5 480 000 (de l'IDA) + 1 224 000 
(du FIDA) = 6 704 000 peuvent 
être mis à disposition pour être 
retirés par le bénéficiaire, jusqu'à 
concurrence de 33 520 000. 
Pour chaque tranche 
supplémentaire de 10%, les 
proportions de décaissement de 
l'IDA et du FIDA sont 
respectivement de 82% et 18%. 
DLR #7.1: 1 825 000 
Les proportions de décaissement 
de l'IDA et du FIDA sont 
respectivement de 100% et 0%. 
9 
Montant du 
crédit alloué 
par le FIDA 
(exprimé en 
EUR) 
5 480 000 
6 120 000 
0 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
DLR #7.2: 400 
000 + 75 000 = 
475 000 
agriculteurs et 
éleveurs des zones 
agropastorales 
couverts par le 
régime 
d'assurance du 
CNAAS, à partir 
d'une base de 
269 000. 
DLR #10a Un 
système de suivi 
et d'évaluation 
adéquat est en 
place et fonctionne 
dans chaque MAER 
et MEPA pour 
suivre les 
performances du 
programme. 
DLR10b: 
Finalisation de la 
restructuration des 
interprofessions. 
DLR #7.2: 7 300 000 (de l'IDA) + 
4 020 000 (du FIDA) = 11 320 000 
Formule: Pour chaque tranche 
supplémentaire de 41 200 
agriculteurs et éleveurs couverts 
par rapport à la situation de 
référence, 1 460 000 (de l'IDA) + 
804 000 (du FIDA) = 2 264 000 
peuvent être mis à disposition pour 
être retirés par le bénéficiaire, 
jusqu'à concurrence de 7 300 000 
(de l'IDA) + 4 020 000 (du FIDA) = 
11 320 000 
Pour chaque tranche 
supplémentaire de 41 200 
agriculteurs, les proportions de 
décaissement de l'IDA et du FIDA 
sont respectivement de 64% et 
36%. 
9 130 000 (de l'IDA) + 850 000 
(du FIDA) = 9 980 000  
DLR10a: Formule: Par système de 
suivi et d'évaluation mis en place et 
fonctionnant dans chaque MAER ou 
MEPA,  
4 565 000 (de l'IDA) + 425 000 
(du FIDA) = 4 990 000 peuvent 
être mis à disposition pour être 
retirés par le bénéficiaire, jusqu'à 9 
130 000 + 850 000 = 9 980 000 
EUR 
Les proportions de décaissement 
de l'IDA et du FIDA sont 
respectivement de 91% et 9 %. 
DLR10b: Formule: pour la 
restructuration interprofessionnelle 
finalisée au MAER et au MEPA, 850 
000 peuvent être mis à disposition 
pour être retirés par le bénéficiaire, 
jusqu'à concurrence de 850 000 
(425 000 pour chaque ministère). 
Les proportions de décaissement 
de l'IDA et du FIDA sont 
respectivement de 0% et 100% 
4 020 000 
850 000 
850 000 
17 320 000 
(10) DLI #10: 
Système de suivi 
et d'évaluation 
des performances 
de l'agriculture et 
de l'élevage 
MONTANT 
TOTAL FIDA 
(EUR) 
10 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Annexe 3 
Clauses particulières 
Conformément aux dispositions de la section 12.01 a) xxiii) des Conditions générales, le 
Fonds peut suspendre, en tout ou partie, le droit de l'Emprunteur de solliciter des retraits 
du compte du prêt du Fonds si l'Emprunteur n’a pas respecté l'une quelconque des clauses 
énoncées ci-dessous, et si le FIDA a établi que ladite défaillance a eu, ou risque d'avoir, un 
effet préjudiciable important sur le Programme: 
1.  Dans les six mois suivant l'entrée en vigueur de l'Accord, le Programme achètera et 
installera un logiciel de comptabilité personnalisé, conformément aux pratiques en vigueur 
dans  les  projets  soutenus  par  le  FIDA,  afin  de  satisfaire  aux  normes  comptables 
internationales et aux exigences du FIDA. 
Planification,  suivi  et  évaluation.  L'Emprunteur  veillera  à  ce  qu’un  système  de 
2. 
Planification, de Suivi et d'Evaluation (PM&E) soit mis en place dans les douze (12) mois à 
compter de la date d'entrée en vigueur du présent Accord. 
3.  Genre. La stratégie pour l'inclusion et l'autonomisation des femmes tiendra compte 
des  principales  contraintes  auxquelles  elles  sont  confrontées  selon  les  cinq  dimensions 
d'autonomisation des femmes: i) dimension production: faible participation aux décisions 
sur la conduite de l'exploitation familiale et/ou autonomie limitée à des petites parcelles 
de  terre  et/ou  à  des  terres  exploitées  en  groupements,  et/ou  à  certains  activités  de 
post-récolte (transformation); ii) dimension ressources: faible accès et pouvoir de décision 
sur  les  ressources  et  facteurs  de  production:  terre,  matériel  agricole,  nouvelles 
technologies de production et transformation, formation/information, financement/crédit, 
etc.;  iii)  dimension  revenus:  faible  accès  et  décisions  sur  les  revenus  des  exploitations 
familiales dirigées par les hommes; iv) dimension leadership: faible capacité de prise de 
parole  en  public  et  de  manifestation  de  leurs  besoins  au  sein  des  ménages,  des 
communautés,  des  OP  et  autres  structures  associatives  dont  elles  sont  membres; 
v) dimension temps: charges de travail agricole et domestiques occupant la totalité de la 
journée et répartition non équilibrée par rapport aux hommes.  
4.  Mesures  anticorruption.  L'Emprunteur  doit  se  conformer  à  politique  du  FIDA  en 
matière  de  prévention  de  la  fraude  et  de  la  corruption  dans  le  cadre  de  ses  activités  et 
opérations. 
5.  Harcèlement  sexuel,  exploitation  sexuelle  et  abus.  L’Emprunteur  et  les  Parties  au 
Programme  doivent  s’assurer  que  le  Programme  est  exécuté  conformément  aux 
dispositions de la politique du FIDA en matière de prévention du harcèlement sexuel, de 
l’exploitation sexuelle et des abus sexuels, qui peut être modifiée de temps à autre. 
6. 
Conformité  aux  procédures  d'évaluation  sociale  environnementale  et  climatique 
(SECAP). L'Emprunteur veillera à ce que le Programme soit mis en œuvre conformément 
au SECAP de la banque mondiale (la "BM") et plus précisément aux mesures suivantes:  
L’Emprunteur veille à ce que: a) toutes les activités du Programme soient mises en œuvre 
dans  le  strict  respect  des  lois/réglementations  pertinentes  de  l’Emprunteur;  b) les 
propositions de travaux de génie civil incluent la confirmation qu'aucune acquisition forcée 
de terres ou réinstallation involontaire n'est requise dans le cadre du Programme. En cas 
d’acquisition  de  terres  non  prévue  ou  de  réinstallation  involontaire  dans  le  cadre  du 
Programme,  l’Emprunteur  devra  immédiatement  informer  le  Fonds  et  préparer  les 
documents  de  planification  nécessaires  conformément  à  la  déclaration  de  politique  de 
sauvegarde;  c)  les  hommes  et  les  femmes  reçoivent  une  rémunération  égale  pour  un 
travail de valeur égale au titre du Programme; d) le recours au travail des enfants n’est 
11 
Appendix I 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
pas prévu dans le Programme; e) les mesures incluses dans le plan d'action pour l'égalité 
des sexes préparé pour le Programme sont entreprises et les ressources nécessaires à leur 
mise en œuvre sont mises à disposition en temps utile; et f) toutes les mesures nécessaires 
et appropriées pour mettre en œuvre le plan d'action en faveur de l'égalité des sexes afin 
de garantir que les femmes puissent participer et bénéficier équitablement du Programme 
sont dûment prises. 
7. 
Evaluation des systèmes environnementaux et sociaux. Une évaluation des systèmes 
environnementaux et sociaux a été réalisée par la BM dans le cadre de ce Programme, et 
qui comprend une liste des investissements exclus du financement. Ainsi, le Programme 
ne devrait pas financer de grandes infrastructures, l'extension des terres agricoles ou toute 
expansion  des  réseaux  d'irrigation.  Toute  activité  ayant  un  risque  environnemental  et 
social  élevé  sera  exclu  du  Programme.  Selon  cette  évaluation,  les  systèmes  de  gestion 
environnementale  et  sociale  applicables  au  Sénégal  sont  généralement  appropriés  et 
complets.  
12 
IFAD Logical framework 
Results hierarchy 
Outreach 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-term 
WB Target 
End target 
Source 
Frequency 
Respon
sibility 
Indicators13 
Means of verification 
Assumptions 
1.Estimated corresponding total 
number of households members - 
C.I.-1.b 
2.Corresponding number of 
households reached - C.I.-1.a 
of which women 
of which young farmers 
Project development objective 
Number of households reporting 
adoption of new or improved 
inputs, technologies or practices 
of which women 
of which young farmers 
Yield increase (metric ton)        of 
diversification crops 
2,152,000 
4,800,000 
7,200,000 
7,800,000 
269,000 
600,000 
900,000 
975,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
115,000 
100,000 
90,000 
n/a 
357,500 
130,000 
100,000 
150,000 
200,000 
40,000 
12,500 
60,000 
n/a 
85,000 
25,000 
M&E 
Survey 
Baseline 
Midterm 
Endline 
TCTs 
MAER 
MEPA 
Appropriate women 
and young farmers 
targeting and 
inclusion 
mechanism (based 
on IFAD funded 
projects’ 
experience) 
Survey 
Baseline 
Midterm 
Endline 
TCTs 
MAER 
MEPA 
Better MAER and 
MEPA Financial 
Management and 
staffing  
Maize 
Millet 
Cowpea 
Irish potato 
Onion 
Sweet potato 
2.50 
1.00 
0.80 
25.00 
23.00 
38.00 
2.70 
1.20 
1.10 
29.00 
26.00 
42.00 
n/a 
3.00 
1.50 
1.50 
30.00 
27.00 
45.00 
1
3
To enhance 
productivity and 
market access of 
priority 
commodity value 
chains and 
livestock, in the 
extended 
groundnut basin 
and agro-pastoral 
areas 
Results Area 1: Improved crop and livestock productivity and resilience 
Sub-Results Area 
1.1.a: Increased 
crop productivity 
Metric ton of cumulative quantity 
of certified seeds acquired for 
diversification crops (DLI 2) 
Sub-Results Area 
1.1.b:  
Vaccination coverage rates for 
African horse sickness 
(percentage) 
0 
40 
53 
70 
M&E 
Annually 
MAER 
35 
55 
n/a 
65 
M&E 
Annually 
MEPA 
Environmental 
safeguards plan 
13 To be disaggregated by gender and youth for all “people related” indicators. 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
1
/
1
3
4
/
R
.
4
7
/
R
e
v
.
1
Results hierarchy 
Name 
Baseline 
Mid-term 
WB Target 
End target 
Source 
Frequency 
Increased 
livestock 
productivity 
Vaccination coverage rates for 
pasteurellosis of small ruminants 
(percentage) 
4 
25 
n/a 
30 
Annually 
Respon
sibility 
MEPA 
properly 
implemented 
Indicators13 
Means of verification 
Assumptions 
Results Area 2: Improved business environment and market integration 
Sub-Results Area 
2.3: increased 
access to 
financial services 
Number of persons in rural areas 
accessing financial services (DLI 
7: agriculture insurance for crops 
and livestock) 
269,000 
346,000 
400,000 
472,000 
of which women 
of which young farmers 
0 
0 
115,000 
100,000 
120,000 
n/a 
145,000 
130,000 
Results Area 3: Improved sector governance, coordination, and Program management 
M&E 
Annually 
Ministry 
of 
finance 
Continuation of 
related policy 
reforms  
1
4
Output 3.1.: policy 
dialogue on 
agriculture and 
livestock 
strengthened 
Output 3.2.: 
capacity at MAER 
and MEPA for 
program planning, 
statistics, and 
M&E enhanced 
Coordination platforms of 
diversification value chains 
organized by MAER/MEPA 
Number of existing/new laws, 
regulations, policies or strategies 
proposed to policy makers for 
approval, ratification, amendment 
Monitoring and evaluation system 
for agriculture and livestock 
performance (DLI 10) 
Share of targeted beneficiaries 
with rating ‘satisfied’ or above on 
project interventions / support 
(Percentage) 
No 
Set-up 
n/a 
Efficient 
0 
5 
5 
8 
Reportin
g 
Annually 
Draft M&E 
system at 
MAER 
and MEPA 
Adequate M&E system to 
track Program performance 
Adopted by 
central/ 
decentralized 
services 
Efficient technical 
assistance 
TCTs 
MAER 
MEPA 
0 
n/a 
85 
Survey 
Endline 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
1
/
1
3
4
/
R
.
4
7
/
R
e
v
.
1
ORIGINAL WB RESULTS FRAMEWORK
1
5
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
1
/
1
3
4
/
R
.
4
7
/
R
e
v
.
1
1
6
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
1
/
1
3
4
/
R
.
4
7
/
R
e
v
.
1
1
7
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
1
/
1
3
4
/
R
.
4
7
/
R
e
v
.
1
1
8
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
2
1
/
1
3
4
/
R
.
4
7
/
R
e
v
.
1
Appendix III 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Integrated programme risk matrix 
Risk Category / Subcategory  
Country Context 
Political Commitment 
Governance 
Macroeconomic 
Fragility and Security 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
Policy alignment 
Policy Development and Implementation 
Environment and Climate Context 
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions 
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts 
Project Scope 
Project Relevance 
Technical Soundness 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
Implementation Arrangements 
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
Project Financial Management 
Project Organization and Staffing 
Project Budgeting 
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements 
Project Internal Controls 
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting 
Project External Audit 
Project Procurement 
Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Accountability and Transparency 
Capability in Public Procurement 
Public Procurement Processes 
Environment, Social and Climate Impact 
Biodiversity Conservation 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
Cultural Heritage 
Indigenous People 
Labour and Working Conditions 
Community Health and Safety 
Physical and Economic Resettlement 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and 
hazards 
Stakeholders 
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination 
Stakeholder Grievances 
Overall 
Country Context 
Political Commitment 
Risk:  
Inherent 
risk 
Residual 
risk 
High 
High 
Substantial 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Substantial  Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Substantial  Moderate 
Substantial  Moderate 
Substantial  Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Substantial  Moderate 
Substantial  Moderate 
Substantial  Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Substantial  Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Substantial  Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
High 
High 
Substantial 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Lack of political will, resistance from vested interests, and well-grounded practices in 
the administration may hinder the implementation of reforms that would lead to more 
19 
Appendix III 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
transparency in systems of subsidies and oligopolies, in particular in the groundnut 
value chain and in the current system of seed multiplication and input supply.  
Mitigations:  
Continuous support for these key Program elements through the policy dialogue with 
the GoS will help mitigate this risk.  
The World Bank Group is experienced in coordinating a PforR, in addition to the policy 
dialogue with Government. In addition, several DLIs have been developed that focus 
on policy reforms and that put pressure on vested interests in the current system of 
subsidizing and elite capturing, including: (a) DLI1 and DLI2 that encourages Ministry 
of Agriculture to subsidized only certified seed;(b) DLI3 that obliges channeling 
support to small producers; (c) DLI6 that pushes for restructuring of the Groundnut 
inter-profession; (d) DLI7 that encourages making agriculture insurance available for 
small farmers; (e) DLI8 and DLI9 that push for support to small farmers (warehouse 
receipt system and dairy cooperatives). 
Governance 
Risk:  
Government may underfinance implementation of PRACAS II and PNDE. 
Mitigations:  
The Program Action Plan (PAP), adopted by Government, the WBG and IFAD, includes 
a Sector Expenditures Review in order to monitor financing of the agriculture and 
livestock sector. In addition, first assessments have been made during the design 
mission. In addition, the implementation support mission in March 2021 discussed the 
issue of the updating of agriculture strategies and financing of the sector with 
Government. Two recommendations were made: (1) finalizing and adopting the 
PASAE of the Ministry of Agriculture; (7) linking the PforR proposals to existing 
budgetary programmes for agriculture and livestock.  
The Technical Coordination Teams (TCT) will receive the required backstopping and 
capacity building.  
Macroeconomic 
Risk:  
The expected positive economic growth in Senegal (expected at 6,3 percent for 2020 
(AfDB, 2020) may severely be affected by the measures of restrictions to fight the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The closure of borders may severely affect the vital trade of 
agricultural and animal products in the region.  
Mitigations:  
Existing economic, crucial for the local economies are and will be used to develop sane 
and safe trade behaviors to keep them functioning and supplying both rural and urban 
areas.  
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate  Moderate 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Fragility and Security 
Risk:  
High 
Moderate 
Senegal is not directly confronted with a war situation, however it shares borders with 
Mali in its eastern regions. Senegal host refugees camps and population fleeing Mali 
whose extreme economic vulnerability is even exacerbated with the COVID-19 
pandemic.  
High 
Moderate 
Mitigations:  
The overall approach favours a shift of support from the Ministries of Agriculture and 
Livestock towards smallholder farmers and livestock owners, and rural poor.  
Sector Strategies and Policies 
Policy alignment 
Risk:  
Internal discussions within the MAER on the modernization and streamlining of Sector 
Strategies and Policies. 
Mitigations:  
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
20 
Appendix III 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
The instrument used—the PforR—is designed to ensure full ownership by the 
Government. The DLIs will be linked to the implementation of the selected critical 
sector reforms, providing a strong incentive for their implementation. 
Policy Development and Implementation 
Risk:  
The sector strategies and policies risk is substantial and also relates to the 
implementation of key reforms as discussed above. 
Mitigations:  
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Continuous support for these key Program elements through the WBG and IFAD policy 
dialogue with the GoS will help mitigate this risk. In addition, the PCAE/PforR pushes 
for updating and implementing national agriculture and livestock policies, as starting 
point and precondition of the design of a PforR.  
Environment and Climate Context 
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions 
Risk:  
The environmental issues associated with the Program are related to the potential 
increase of water, fertilizer and pesticide use resulting from the intensification of the 
targeted value chains (groundnuts, horticultural crops and milk production). The ESSA 
found that the applicable Environmental and Social Management systems in Senegal 
are generally appropriate and comprehensive  
Mitigations:  
Substantial Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
An Environmental safeguards plan will be implemented, as agreed. Monitoring was 
already undertaken by the Implementation Support Mission in March 2021.  
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts 
Moderate  Moderate 
Risk:  
Climate risk is high in Senegal. So they are exposed to climate change effects on 
agriculture and natural resources. The high risk in the Groundnut Basin and pastoral 
areas can lead to:  
i)Decrease in crops productivity because of heat stress due to high temperature  
iii) Decrease of rainfall pattern in the Groundnut Basin  
Mitigations:  
Moderate  Moderate 
The PCAE/PforR has developed a comprehensive ESSA that propose some mitigation 
measures like:  
i) use of certified drought-tolerant seeds and crops shifting to be used to cope with 
heat stress impacts on crops.  
ii) improve the capacity of storage facilities and promotion of cultivation practices that 
reduce water loss;  
iii) promotion of climate-smart agriculture and adapted technology packages.  
Project Scope 
Project Relevance 
Risk:  
The programme scope is rather broad with regards to the actual needs and fully 
aligned with national priorities. 
Mitigations:  
The programme is complementing and up scaling existing interventions implemented 
by the development partners. The programme activities were discussed in detail with 
the national stakeholders, including relevant public services (research, agriculture and 
livestock services) and farmers’ organizations. 
Technical Soundness 
Risk:  
Capacity to implement the proposed technical solutions.  
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
21 
Appendix III 
Mitigations:  
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
The Programme supports and up-scales existing and proven technical interventions 
whose the main implementing partners are familiar with. The programme activities 
were discussed in detail with the national stakeholders, including relevant public 
services (research, agriculture and livestock services) and farmers’ organizations.  
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
Implementation Arrangements 
Risk:  
Areas of intervention may induce heavy governance processes and delay actual 
implementation 
Mitigations:  
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
The Programme will be implemented in Senegal within existing programmes and 
directly supervised by WBG and GoS in collaboration with IFAD. The approach of the 
PCAE/PforR in new in the Ministries of Agriculture and Livestock, but is at the same 
time an opportunity. In order to mitigate risks, technical assistance was mobilized by 
IFAD through the PADAER2 as well as through an additional financing (3 million USD), 
mainly to build the internal capacity of the implementing entities.  
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
Risk:  
M/E tools may differ from the one used by existing IFAD and WBG projects 
Mitigations:  
TCTs will be put in place and capacity building will be supported. Technical assistance 
was mobilized by IFAD through the PADAER2 as well as through an additional 
financing (3 million USD), mainly to build the internal capacity of the implementing 
entities.  
Project Financial Management 
Project Organization and Staffing 
Risk:  
The Program is implemented by MAER, MEPA, and their affiliates, such as their central 
and regional departments, ISRA, ANCAR, and ANIDA. The roles and functions are not 
clearly defined and the Procedures Manual is still under development. The accounting 
function needs additional staff. The personnel while experienced in implementing IFAD 
projects needs additional capacity building on IFAD procedures and accounting.  
Financial management will be the responsibility of DAGE as head of the ministerial 
financial function (RFFIM cf. decree on State budget management). This management 
will be carried out with the assistance of the heads of the administrative and financial 
offices (BAF) of the national and regional departments, as well as the administrative 
and financial departments (DAF) or accounting officers (AC) of the autonomous 
structures. However, the DAGE does not have visibility and regular monitoring of the 
financial execution of autonomous structures (Agencies, public establishments, 
national companies and other similar structures).  
Mitigations:  
Roles and functions to be clarified in the Procedures manual and additional trainings to 
be performed on IFAD policies and procedures and accounting. The minister to recruit 
additional accounting agents.  
Have a reporting framework and regular monitoring (monthly or quarterly) of the 
execution of the transfer expenses of autonomous structures, as well as expenses on 
external financing. Systematize quarterly budget execution reports by program and 
structure. 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
High 
Substantial 
Substantial Moderate 
High 
Substantial 
Project Budgeting 
Risk:  
Substantial Moderate 
The 2020 budgets of all line ministries, including MAER and MEPA, have been prepared 
in a program-based format. This major change aims to increase the links between 
public policy objectives and resource allocation and institutionalize the results-based 
approach in public resource management. All RAs and result indicators supported by 
Substantial Moderate 
22 
Appendix III 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
the Program and the corresponding resource allocations are not yet comprehensively 
included in the 2020 budget approved by Parliament in December 2019 and the three-
year Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (DPPD, 2020–22). 
There is a need to further improve the credibility of the budget. The World Bank 
analysis suggests that multiple factors require attention, such as inadequate costing, 
shortcomings in procurement planning and implementation, changes in priorities, and 
lack of capacity to plan for complex projects. 
The execution of budget credits is subject to modulation and authorization from the 
services of the Ministry of Finance (mainly Budget Directorate) with cuts and 
cancellations. 
Mitigations:  
Adjustments to the DPPD will be undertaken during the budget revision process, since 
the planning process is dynamic. In future years of Program implementation, to 
further enhance the policy alignment of the budget, technical assistance should be 
provided to MAER and MEPA. In addition, the year n+1 draft program budget, PAP, 
and DPPD shall be shared with the World Bank and IFAD for discussion and technical 
advice to ensure with the government that the planning and budgeting document 
includes RAs, results indicators, and budget allocation for the World Bank and IFAD 
financed portion of the Program . 
The Program has embedded actions to enhance the realism of the multiyear 
expenditure plans, such as: (i) approval of the PRACAS II and LPDE to signal high-
level commitment to deliver the strategic objectives for the sector; (ii) Government’s 
commitment to allocate resources at a level consistent with the delivery of Program 
results over the five years of the Program as reflected in the Program expenditure 
framework; and (iii) the PAP stipulating that the initially approved annual Program 
budget should not to deviate by more or less than 3 percent to comply with best 
international practice. 
The ministry of Finance should notify the MAER and MEPA of the monthly or quarterly 
commitment ceilings.  
Clearly identify in the SYSBUDGEP the budget lines of P4R activities so that they are 
carried out without constraints.  
Ensure that the credits necessary for the implementation of the project will not be 
blocked or cancelled. 
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements 
Moderate  Low 
Risk:  
The MAER and MEPA staff is experienced in using and managing temporary advances 
and statement of expenditures and disbursements for with various financing 
institutions. The counterpart funds of the State are entered in the State finance laws 
(initial, amended) or by amending acts (orders or decrees of transfer or transfer of 
credits) signed by the Ministry in charge of Finance or the president of the Republic. 
Moderate  Low 
Mitigations:  
Disbursement will be processed as per World Bank instructions and into a distinct 
dedicated account with the State Treasury. 
Project Internal Controls 
Risk:  
Substantial Moderate 
The texts governing public finances establish the principle of the separation of the 
functions of authorizing officer of expenditure and of accountant.  
The P4R with the World Bank has an operations manual that clearly defines the role of 
each stakeholder.  
The update should be done whenever necessary and with the approval of the Program 
Steering Committee.  
Reconciliation is not yet a frequent operation. 
Substantial Moderate 
The principle separation exists on the texts. But in practice, the same department and 
the same actors can exercise ordering and receiving functions, as a member of the 
procurement commission and the materials receiving commission. 
23 
Appendix III 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
The Ministry does not yet have an internal audit service. It is necessary to study the 
content of the new decree on internal inspections adopted by the Council of Ministers 
of June 16, 2021 to assess whether it takes into account the functions assigned to an 
internal audit service.  
Mitigations:  
The segregation of duties should be enforced by differentiating between agents who 
are members of procurement committees and those of reception committees. 
MAER and MEPA need to create dedicated internal audit functions if the new decree on 
internal inspections adopted by the Council of Ministers of June 16, 2021 does not 
takes into account the functions assigned to an internal audit service.  
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting 
Substantial Moderate 
Risk:  
For the execution of the budget, the DAGE works on the SYSBUDGEP software 
developed by the Information Systems Department (DSI) of the DGB of the MFB.  
This software only allows monitoring of operating expenses and investment on internal 
resources. Thus, the monitoring of staff costs (category 2) and expenditure on 
external resources is not possible as well as the transfer expenditure of autonomous 
structures. 
There are internal shortcomings in the archiving and the original documents of the 
expenditure files are always sent to the Treasury. 
Substantial Moderate 
The decree on the preparation of the state budget requires the MAER to produce an 
annual performance report (RAP) which details the technical and financial results by 
budget program. 
An Independent Verification Agent (AVI) is also recruited within the framework of P4R 
to measure the results of the Program being financed.  
Mitigations:  
If proved to be needed, acquire software that supports all the specifics and necessary 
reports while awaiting the commissioning of SIGIF, a new application dedicated to the 
financial management of the State. 
Ensure sufficient archiving conditions for supporting documents.  
Project External Audit 
Risk:  
Substantial Moderate 
Since the line ministries are not required to prepare a full set of financial statements, 
including statements of revenue and expenditures, financial position, statement of 
cash flow, and notes to the financial statement, for the purposes of the proposed 
Program, a fit-for-purpose annual financial statement format that will be subject to 
external audit has been agreed upon during negotiations. Each line ministry (MEPA, 
MAER, Ministry of Finance and Ministry in charge of Trade) will prepare its fit-for-
purpose financial statement under the responsibility of DAGE. Other line ministries will 
submit their financial statement to the MAER DAGE not later than two months after 
the end of the period for consolidation. The fit-for-purpose financial statement will be 
prepared each semester and will feed the program progress report.  
Mitigations:  
The annual fit-for-purpose financial statement will be subject to external audit by the 
Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) with the support of a private audit firm. The 
information to prepare the fit-for-purpose financial statement will be extracted from 
the new IFMIS. 
Project Procurement 
Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Risk:  
Inexperience of staff in the MAER and MEPA with the PforR tool. 
Mitigations:  
Substantial Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
24 
Appendix III 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
An assessment was made during design and measures proposed. The WBG in Dakar 
has a dedicated team and will provide backstopping to the implementing entities. The 
implementation support mission of World Bank in collaboration with IFAD that was 
undertaken in March 2021, monitored the progress that was made with respect to 
procurement and formulated recommendations. The Autorité de Régulation des 
Marchés Publics du Sénégal did an audit of the system. 
Accountability and Transparency 
Risk:  
The risk that accountability, transparency and oversight arrangements (including the 
handling of complaints regarding, for example, SH/SEA and fraud and corruption) are 
inadequate to safeguard the integrity of project procurement and contract execution, 
leading to the unintended use of funds, misprocurement, SH/SEA, and/or execution of 
project procurements outside of the required time, cost and quality requirements. 
Mitigations:  
The WBG in Dakar has a dedicated team and will provide backstopping. 
Capability in Public Procurement 
Risk:  
Inexperience of staff in the MAER and MEPA with the PforR tool. 
Mitigations:  
Training sessions with the main implementing agencies will be organized to ensure 
that their dedicated staff is well acquainted to the requirements.  
An assessment was made during design and measures proposed.  
Public Procurement Processes 
Risk:  
Inexperience of staff in the MAER and MEPA with the PforR tool. 
Mitigations:  
An assessment was made during design and measures proposed In addition to the 
alignment on their respective procurement manuals, TA short-term support missions 
will be planned. The WBG in Dakar has a dedicated team and will provide 
backstopping. 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Environment, Social and Climate Impact 
Biodiversity Conservation 
Risk:  
Substantial Moderate 
Low 
Low 
The ESSA notes that the promotion of water resource efficiency and increased land 
productivity is not expected to have substantial downstream impacts in terms of water 
quantity and quality.  
Low 
Low 
Mitigations:  
The proposed Program can be used strategically to strengthen Senegal’s 
Environmental and Social Management Systems by reinforcing the human, financial 
and logistical capacities of the key institutions to promote best practices, provide 
quality assurance and monitor for compliance.  
Training on sustainable use of pesticides and introduction to organic pesticides like 
Neem oil. 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention 
Low 
Low 
Risk:  
The intensification of the groundnuts, horticultural crops and livestock value chains 
may result in increased use of fertilizers and pesticides. 
Mitigations:  
Low 
Low 
Guidelines on FAO norms, as well as training and awareness was included in the 
mitigation plan. 
25 
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate  Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
Substantial Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Appendix III 
Cultural Heritage 
Risk:  
Cultural heritage are under threat in the region because of the presence of armed 
groups and terrorist groups and desire to migrate 
Mitigations:  
Programme itself provide opportunities and working towards peace and development 
nexus 
Indigenous People 
Risk:  
Social exclusion of women and youth due to limited access to land, elite capture. 
Mitigations:  
Technical assistance has been provided to prepare a gender action plan and youth 
action plan to address such risks. 
Labour and Working Conditions 
Risk:  
Child labor and poor labor conditions 
Mitigations:  
Integration of labor and decent working conditions into the ESSA 
Community Health and Safety 
Risk:  
The COVID- 19 is a real threat for human health and people in the region. Unsafe and 
non-healthy working conditions 
Mitigations:  
Activities to be considered are: remote sensing tools to better understand immediate 
impacts of COVID 19 on food security and agricultural productivity, trainings on safe 
labor practices, access to more protective equipment such as masks and gloves, 
restrictions on workers on producer’s field, use of drones and other digital extension 
tools for labor and input saving practices, shared mechanization. Additionally, risk 
sharing mechanism such as insurance including pandemic insurance, digital marketing 
platforms and logistics, sanitary and phyto-sanitary controls and good practices 
gender dimension to COVID-19 to reduce women exposure. 
Physical and Economic Resettlement 
Moderate  Moderate 
Risk:  
It is not expected that populations could be physically or economically resettled 
according to the assessment that was made during the design. 
Moderate  Moderate 
Mitigations:  
An ESSA has been prepared 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Risk:  
CO2 emission from the investment is limited and would contribute to the climate 
change 
Mitigations:  
FAO Exact tool was used to assess the volume of CO2 reduced or avoided and 
adaptation activities under this programme are the response to this risk. The 
environmental impact was quantified and included in the economic analysis of the 
Programme. In addition, the CSA technologies and certified seeds that would be 
promoted, lead to a better soil coverage and lower greenhouse gas emissions. 
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate  Moderate 
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and hazards  High 
Moderate 
26 
Appendix III 
Risk:  
EB 2021/134/R.47/Rev.1 
Rural Communities/ ecosystems, which they depend on, are extremely vulnerable to 
natural hazards, which are, frequents in the region. Droughts, floods, sand storms, 
locusts and pandemic 
High 
Moderate 
Mitigations:  
The program itself is a response to climate variability and natural hazards. Adaptation 
and mitigation activities are identified to enhance the resilience of communities and 
their ecosystems to climate variability and hazards  
Stakeholders 
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination 
Risk:  
Various national initiatives differ and lack regional cohesiveness.  
Mitigations:  
All stakeholders- government, implementing entities, farmers’ organizations, etc., 
expressed their commitment and are involved in the project design. Coordination 
mechanisms at national and regional levels will allow decision makers to grasp mutual 
challenges and achievements and act on them accordingly. 
Stakeholder Grievances 
Risk:  
In terms of information, public consultations and grievance management, the 
mechanisms set up for citizen participation at the local level, are moderately effective. 
Mitigations:  
The project governance is combined with a grievances set-up that will allow the 
feedback from beneficiaries facilitated by the first line implementation partners (local 
NGOs, CSOs as women and youth organisations, FOs that all strengthen social bounds 
within communities) to be aired and reach out the coordination mechanisms. The 
implementation support mission of World Bank in collaboration with IFAD that was 
undertaken in March 2021, monitored the progress that was made with respect to the 
setting up of a grievances mechanism. The mission was informed that a draft 
document was prepared regarding the establishment of a grievance mechanism. 
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Low 
Moderate  Moderate 
Moderate  Moderate 
27 
Disbursement-linked indicators  
ILD[1] 
IDA 
millions de dollars 
US 
FIDA  
millions de dollars 
US 
Domaine de résultats 1 : amélioration de la productivité et de la résilience des cultures et du bétail  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Quantité de graines d'arachide certifiées acquises annuellement (tonnes) 
Quantité cumulée de semences certifiées acquises pour les cultures de diversification (tonnes)  
Pourcentage de la subvention destiné aux petits producteurs et aux technologies intelligentes 
du point de vue climatique (% du montant de la subvention)  
Taux de couverture vaccinale contre la peste des petits ruminants (PPR) (% de couverture)  
Quantité cumulée de semences certifiées fourragères acquises par les producteurs (tonnes)  
Domaine de résultats 2 : amélioration de l'environnement des entreprises et de l'intégration des marches  
6 
7 
8 
9 
2
8
Restructuration de l'interprofession de l'arachide (CNIA)  
Nombre de producteurs ayant accès à une assurance agricole pour les cultures et le bétail (par 
an) 
Opérationnalisation du système de réception des entrepôts (WRS) dans le bassin arachidier 
étendu  
Nombre de centres de collecte de lait soutenus et/ou équipés et opérationnels   
35.0 
15.0 
20.0 
30.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
4.01 
5.0 
Domaine de résultats 3 : Amélioration de la gouvernance, de la coordination et de la gestion des programmes dans le secteur. 
10  
Mise en place et fonctionnement d'un système de suivi et d'évaluation (S&E) au MAER et au 
MEPA pour les performances en matière d'agriculture et d'élevage. 
Allocation totale DLIs 
Avance sur la préparation du programme (pas de DLI) 
Soutien institutionnel et renforcement des capacités (IPL, pas DLI) 
TOTAL GÉNÉRAL 
10.0 
149.01 
0.99 
150.0 
0.0 
6.0 
0.0 
7.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.0 
20.0 
- 
3.0 
23.0 
[1] Tous les DLI sauf le DLI 10 sont extensibles, ce qui implique que les fonds seront déboursés annuellement en fonction des progrès réalisés. 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
V
E
B
2
0
2
1
/
1
3
4
/
R
.
4
7
/
R
e
v
.
1
