Document: 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Agenda: 
Date: 
Distribution: 
Original: 
5(a)(ii) 
11 April 2018 
Public 
English 
E 
President’s report 
Proposed loan and grant to the 
Republic of Uganda for the 
National Oil Palm Project 
Note to Executive Board representatives 
Changes highlighted in yellow were introduced after the technical meeting held 
on 13 March to reflect discussions with Member States. 
An addendum to this document, to be released shortly, will include further 
information on actions requested by Member States. 
Technical questions: 
Dispatch of documentation: 
Focal points: 
Alessandro Marini 
Country Director 
East and Southern Africa Division 
Tel.: +256 312 320 202 
e-mail: a.marini@ifad.org 
Alessandra Zusi Bergés 
Senior Governing Bodies Officer  
Governing Bodies  
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092 
e-mail: gb@ifad.org 
Executive Board — 123rd Session 
Rome, 16-17 April 2018 
For: Approval 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
ii 
iii 
v 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
3 
3 
5 
5 
6 
6 
7 
7 
7 
7 
8 
8 
9 
9 
10 
10 
11 
11 
12 
12 
12 
Contents 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Maps of IFAD operations in Uganda  
Financing summary 
Recommendation for approval 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development and poverty context 
B.  Rationale and alignment with government priorities and 
RB-COSOP 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
B. Project development objective 
C.  Components/outcomes 
III.  Project implementation 
  Approach 
A.
B.  Organizational framework 
C.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and 
knowledge management 
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 
E.  Supervision 
IV.  Project costs, financing and benefits 
A. Project costs 
B. Project financing 
C.  Summary benefit and economic analysis 
D. Sustainability 
E.  Risk identification and mitigation 
Corporate considerations 
V. 
A.
B.
C.
D.
  Compliance with IFAD policies 
  Alignment and harmonization 
  Innovations and scaling up 
 Policy engagement 
VI.  Legal instruments and authority 
VII.  Recommendation 
Appendices 
I.  Negotiated financing agreement  
II.  Logical framework 
i 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
4P 
AWP/B 
CPO 
EHS 
ESIA 
M&E 
MAAIFE 
NOPP 
OPG 
PMU 
RSPO 
SECAP 
TSS 
VODP 
public-private-producer partnership 
annual workplan and budget 
crude palm oil 
environmental, health and safety 
environmental and social impact assessment 
monitoring and evaluation 
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 
National Oil Palm Project 
oil palm grower 
project management unit 
Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
technical support services 
Vegetable Oil Development Project  
ii 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Maps of IFAD operations in Uganda 
Uganda 
National Oil Palm Project 
iii 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Uganda 
Ongoing IFAD-funded operations 
iv 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oil Palm Project 
Financing summary 
Initiating institution: 
IFAD 
Borrower: 
Government of the Republic of Uganda 
Executing agency: 
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 
Total project cost: 
US$210.4 million 
Amount of IFAD loan: 
US$75.82 million 
Amount of IFAD grant: 
US$1.21 million 
Terms of IFAD loan: 
Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years, 
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service 
charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per cent) 
per annum 
Cofinancier(s): 
Private sector (various) 
Amount of cofinancing: 
US$90.6 million 
Terms of cofinancing: 
Direct investment 
Contribution of borrower: 
US$25.6 million 
Contribution of beneficiaries: 
US$17.2 million 
Appraising institution: 
IFAD 
Cooperating institution: 
Directly supervised by IFAD 
v 
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
x
I
I
[
C
l
i
c
k
h
e
r
e
a
n
d
i
n
s
e
r
t
E
B
.
.
/
.
.
/
R
.
.
]
EB 2019/123/R.9 
Recommendation for approval 
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed 
financing to the Republic of Uganda for the National Oil Palm Project, as contained in 
paragraph 55. 
Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Uganda for 
the National Oil Palm Project 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development and poverty context 
1. 
Economic and rural development. Uganda’s development experience over the 
past two decades has been characterized by high sustained growth. This has 
allowed substantial economic and social gains. The country was among the fastest 
in sub-Saharan Africa to reduce the share of its population living on less than 
US$1.90 a day – from 53 per cent in 2006 to 35 per cent in 2013.  
2. 
Poverty. Uganda ranks 163rd of 188 countries in the Human Development Index 
for 2016. Some 20 per cent of the population lives below the national poverty line, 
while 43 per cent is economically active but vulnerable. Fully 77 per cent of the 
population lives in rural areas, where poverty rates are higher and poverty is most 
concentrated. 
3.  Gender. Uganda ranked 121st of 159 countries in the Gender Inequality Index for 
2015. Four of five women in Uganda are employed in agriculture and are generally 
more dependent than men on on-farm self-employment due to inadequate skills, 
discrimination in formal labour markets, and difficulty combining employment with 
family responsibilities. 
4. 
5. 
Youth. Uganda has one of the world’s youngest populations, with over 78 per cent 
below 30 years of age, and one of the highest youth unemployment rates in 
sub-Saharan Africa. With the majority of youth lacking the requisite skills, the 
informal sector is the major source of employment, predominantly in agricultural 
labour in rural areas and in petty trade and artisanship in the urban setting. 
Agriculture. The agriculture sector remains the backbone of the Ugandan 
economy, contributing more than 20 per cent of national GDP and over 50 per cent 
of export earnings. About three quarters of agricultural households depend on 
largely subsistence-oriented, low-input, rainfed agriculture, with holdings averaging 
less than 1.5 hectares (ha). Yields remain low for most food and cash crops. Use of 
fertilizer is among the lowest in the region. The effects of climate change and 
unsustainable natural resource management on agricultural productivity are key, 
with high climatic variability. 
B.  Rationale and alignment with government priorities and 
6. 
RB-COSOP 
Impact of oil palm investment. Part of the rationale for the National Oil Palm 
Project (NOPP) lies in the transformative socioeconomic impact achieved under the 
Vegetable Oil Development Project (VODP) and Vegetable Oil Development Project 
– Phase 2 (VODP2). Prior to the VODP project, the major – though declining – 
economic activity in Kalangala was fishing, and food crops were mainly for 
subsistence or local markets. Through VODP, over 1,800 households benefited 
directly as smallholder oil palm growers, while another 3,000 people gained 
employment on the nucleus estate and smallholders' plots and in the mill. Not only 
1 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
does oil palm offer smallholders a high net income, it also – critically – offers 
regular and reliable monthly payments.  
7. 
In 2000, Kalangala was among the 10 poorest districts in the country. Today, 
97 per cent of households on Bugala Island live in houses with permanent roofing 
materials and 45 per cent use improved pit latrines compared with national 
averages of 69 and 9 per cent respectively. Twenty-two per cent of the population 
has completed secondary education, higher than the national average of 
19 per cent. The island now has regular ferry service, an expanded road network, 
solar-generated electricity and a clean water supply. Private investment has 
resulted in new mobile phone infrastructure, petrol stations, bank branches, hotels 
and resorts. Tourism is emerging as an important resource for the island. 
8.  Opportunity for scaling up. The experience of Kalangala provides a strong  
“proof of concept” for scaling up oil palm investment, based on: (i) favourable  
agroecological conditions in some areas of the country; (ii) the viability of 
smallholder oil palm production; (iii) the nucleus estate/smallholder model, which 
has provided a framework for sharing incentives and risks; and (iv) consistent 
attention to environmental and social safeguards. 
9. 
At the same time, expanding national and regional markets for vegetable oil 
provide a clear opportunity, with demand for edible oils rapidly increasing. Only half 
of national demand is met by domestic production. Crude palm oil (CPO), which is 
refined locally, constitutes the bulk of vegetable oil imports. The current domestic 
production of CPO accounts for less than 10 per cent of the installed refining 
capacity. This percentage will increase to 30 per cent through NOPP investments, 
which will thus have primarily an import substitution effect. 
10.  The NOPP theory of change. NOPP will expand a vertically integrated value chain 
with strong linkages between smallholder oil palm growers and primary processors, 
based on the innovative public-private-producer partnership (4P) arrangement 
developed under VODP. This will reduce the market risks faced by smallholders and 
ensure their access to quality inputs, technical know-how and investment credit. 
The Government will provide the necessary public infrastructure and offer growers 
financial, technical and organizational support. IFAD’s main role will be to broker 
this 4P relationship and build trust among the partners. 
11.  NOPP will also ensure that the benefits of oil palm are shared by the larger 
communities where it is grown. It will empower community members to seize the 
emerging economic opportunities – both on- and off-farm. It will mitigate the 
potentially negative effects of oil palm investment in areas such as land tenure 
security, food security, environmental and natural resource management, and social 
risks, including HIV/AIDS. And by diversifying income streams and improving 
services, it will improve the climate resilience of communities in the project areas. 
12.  IFAD's comparative advantage. IFAD’s comparative advantage in this 
investment stems from its 20 years of engagement in the sector, in terms of: 
(i) the experience and knowledge accumulated in oil palm investment in Uganda 
and the wealth of lessons, including in matters related to environmental and social 
sustainability; (ii) the “trust capital” built with both the Government and the private 
sector partner; (iii) the solid evidence on impact, which has been well documented 
by a number of studies; and (iv) the fact that no evidence of major environmental 
and social sustainability issues has come to light during the implementation of the 
project in Kalangala. 
13.  Alignment with government and IFAD strategies. NOPP is fully aligned with 
the Government of Uganda’s strategic priorities. The Second National Development 
Plan 2015/16-2019/20 (NDP II) acknowledges agriculture as one of the three 
priority sectors in building “a modern and prosperous country within 30 years”. Key 
to this is a focus on value addition and agroprocessing; strong public-private 
partnerships; and private sector-led growth. The Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan 
2 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
2015/16-2019/20 supports NDP II with the aim of transforming subsistence 
farming into commercial agriculture. Oil palm is one of its four strategic 
commodities.  
14.  NOPP is consistent with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025: Enabling 
inclusive and sustainable rural transformation in all three strategic objectives and 
key outcomes. NOPP also encompasses each of the three strategic objectives of the 
Uganda country strategic opportunities programme 2013-2018, particularly that of 
enhancing integration of smallholders into markets. 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
15.  Geographical hub approach. The project will work in a limited number of 
geographical hubs, defined as agroclimatically suitable areas within a radius of 
30 km around a crude palm oil mill, in which at least 3,000 ha of smallholder oil 
palm production can be assured. The following new hubs have been identified (see 
map): Buvuma, Mayuge and Masaka. A fourth new hub is yet to be definitively 
identified. In Kalangala, the hub where investment has been made during VODP 
and VODP2, the project will consolidate the investments to date, but will not 
expand the area under oil palm production. 
16.  Target group. The project will support poor and vulnerable households in the 
communities located within the hubs. A first target group will be prospective oil 
palm growers, most of them with less than 2 ha to dedicate to oil palm. A second 
group will be poor families in the communities where oil palm investment will take 
place, who will be assisted in responding to increased economic opportunities and in 
managing social risks. Many more people are expected to benefit from employment 
opportunities in oil palm plantations. Finally, the communities within the hubs will 
indirectly benefit from the broader spillover economic and social benefits. 
17.  Targeting mechanisms. Principal targeting mechanisms include: (i) setting a limit 
of 2 ha/household for the area eligible for project financing; (ii) promoting the 
participation of women and youth; (iii) promoting alternative economic 
opportunities in oil palm communities; and (iv) mitigating the potential social risks 
in hosting communities.  
B.  Project development objective 
18.  The overall goal is inclusive rural transformation through oil palm investment. 
19.  The development objective is to sustainably increase rural incomes through 
opportunities generated by establishment of an efficient oil palm industry that 
complies with modern environmental and social standards. 
C.  Components/outcomes 
20.  Outcomes. The development objective will be realized through three outcomes: 
sustainable supply chains for oil palm growers established; household livelihoods 
diversified and resilience increased; and an enabling environment created for 
sustainable scaling up of oil palm investment. These will be achieved through three 
investment components. 
21.  Component 1: Scaling up smallholder oil palm development. This component 
will support the establishment of sustainable supply chains between smallholder oil 
palm growers and private processors. 
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Development of smallholder oil palm plantations. 
In the four new hubs, about 9,230 smallholder growers will be supported by 
development loans to establish 12,000 ha of oil palm. In Mayuge, Masaka and 
hub 4, about 20 per cent of growers will plant a further 3,000 ha, financed 
through commercial loans and/or their own resources. A hub development 
plan will ensure synchronized planting within blocks and units. It will be built 
3 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
 
 
 
on a number of assessments and activities, including: environmental and 
social impact assessments; a 'rapid physical planning assessment'; and 
identification, mobilization and registration of oil palm growers. In each hub a 
start-up team will be set up under the project management unit (PMU, see 
below) to implement the plan and provide initial technical services to 
smallholder producers. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Development of oil palm grower (OPG) 
organizations. Technical support services (TSS) for oil palm plantation 
establishment in the new hubs will be provided initially by the hub start-up 
team. Once plantations are established, the start-up team will transfer this 
responsibility to a dedicated TSS team, for provision of the necessary 
production services (technical, extension, logistics, etc.) to oil palm growers. 
Mechanisms will be put in place to ensure eventual full cost recovery of the 
services delivered.During establishment of the plantations, NOPP will assist 
OPGs in forming well-structured hub-level organizations. These will play a key 
role in oversight of TSS and gradually assume their ownership. Eventually, 
TSS are expected to become self-financing entities, owned by the 
organizations under an appropriate governance/legal framework. An 
international NGO will be recruited through an IFAD grant to provide capacity-
building on a broad range of governance, organizational and management 
aspects and on environmental, health and safety (EHS) safeguards and 
measures. Intensive capacity-building will be provided to strengthen self-
enforcement and monitoring of EHS safeguards by the farmers' organizations 
themselves. The contracted NGO will have experience and credibility in the oil 
palm sector (i.e. will be a member of and/or accredited to the Roundtable on 
Sustainable Palm Oil – RSPO) as a key requirement. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Establishment of support infrastructure. NOPP will 
construct some 300 km of access roads and 910 km of farm roads critical for 
oil palm development. It will also finance establishment of ferry services in 
Buvuma Island and Kalangala. Road and landing site construction will be 
contracted out to selected service providers.  
Subcomponent 1.4: Investment in nucleus estates and mills. On 
Buvuma Island, Bidco Uganda Ltd. (BUL)1 will establish a nucleus estate for oil 
palm production of approximately 5,000 ha and a CPO mill. In all other hubs, 
a private-sector partner will establish a CPO mill after at least 3,000 ha of 
smallholder oil palm have been planted. Under its Framework Agreement with 
the Government of Uganda for the development of an oil palm industry BUL 
has expressed firm commitment in this respect. 
22.  Component 2: Livelihoods diversification and resilience. This component aims 
to diversify livelihoods and increase the resilience of households in oil-palm-growing 
communities. 
 
 
Subcomponent 2.1: Alternative economic opportunities. Support will be 
provided to develop crop and livestock enterprises and off-farm 
microenterprises. Activities will include: improving extension service 
delivery; supporting establishment of farmer field schools; improving farmers' 
access to quality inputs; providing business incubation services; and 
improving access to financial services. This subcomponent is targeted 
primarily at non-oil-palm-growing households, focusing particularly on 
women, youth and poorer households. 
Subcomponent 2.2: Mitigation of social risks. NOPP will assist households 
and communities in effectively managing social risks that might result from 
rapid economic development. These include intra-household vulnerabilities, 
1 A private company registered in Uganda for managing the processing and distribution of vegetable oils and soaps, 
whose main shareholders are Bidco Africa Ltd. and Wilmar International Limited. 
4 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
high-risk sexual behaviour, pressure on land tenure systems and social 
fragmentation. Household mentoring will be used to enable household 
members to jointly self-assess the challenges they face and identify the 
required actions. To address land access and tenure security risks, NOPP will 
facilitate participatory land-use planning; support resolution of local land 
disputes, providing legal advice and land rights registration; and promote civic 
education and public sensitization. 
23.  Component 3: Oil palm sector development framework. This component will 
assist the Government in establishing enabling conditions for the sustainable scaling 
up and long-term development of the oil palm sector.  
 
 
Subcomponent 3.1: Policy and institutional support for national  
oil palm sector development. NOPP will support development of a national 
policy, an investment strategy and an associated bill to promote and regulate 
the sector. The policy is expected to propose a national institutional 
framework for the sector’s development, regulation and administration.  
A sector-level strategic environmental assessment will analyse the cumulative 
impact of scaling up oil palm development in the country. 
Subcomponent 3.2: Strengthening the national capacity for oil palm 
research. NOPP will promote systematic management of existing technical 
knowledge; strengthen oil palm research through establishment of a 
dedicated programme under the National Agricultural Research Organisation; 
and build the capacity of a number of key actors – researchers, field staff, 
farmers and lecturers/students – through training and international visits. 
24.  Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and 
knowledge management. This component will support staffing and operations 
related to project management (see section III). 
III.  Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
25.  The project approach presents a number of key features: 
 
 
 
 
Smallholder-based oil palm model. While the nucleus estate/smallholder 
model will be replicated in Buvuma, overall NOPP will promote  
smallholder-based oil palm production and increase the proportion of total 
national area under smallholders from the current 40 per cent to about 
65 per cent. 
Hubs and phasing. NOPP will invest in agroecologically suitable, 
commercially viable hubs. Synchronizing establishment of the mill with the 
planting of oil palm will be critical. In all hubs, at least 3,000 ha will be 
planted within a two-year period to provide an incentive to the private 
investor to establish the mill. 
OPG institutions. A sustainable institutional framework for oil palm business 
at the local level will be created by: ensuring provision of TSS right from 
plantation establishment, while at the same time supporting oil palm growers 
in forming their own organizations, to eventually own the TSS. 
Transparency. The price of fresh fruit bunches (FFBs) will be set each month 
on the basis of an agreed formula linking it to the international price of CPO. A 
pricing committee with representatives of all key stakeholders from the sector 
(Government, the private investor and oil palm growers) meets each month 
to oversee and endorse the calculation of the monthly FFB price. This formula 
is acknowledged as best practice to ensure a transparent and fair pricing 
mechanism for smallholders (see the World Bank Group Framework and 
Strategy for Engagement in the Palm Oil Sector, 2011). 
5 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
 
 
Social inclusion. Various measures will ensure that resources reach poor and 
economically active, but highly vulnerable, households. The project will spread 
the economic benefits and mitigate the social risks of oil palm production to a 
broader group within local communities.  
Environmental sustainability. In a sector where, globally, there have been 
major and justified concerns regarding environmental sustainability, the use 
of advanced environmental standards is critical. The project approach 
incorporates global best practice as per the RSPO principles and criteria – an 
agenda fully shared by private sector partners, the Government and IFAD. 
Furthermore, the design of NOPP was informed by the World Bank Group 
Framework and Strategy for Engagement in the Palm Oil Sector (2011). 
B.  Organizational framework 
26.  The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) will be the lead 
implementing agency and will work and coordinate with other government agencies 
to ensure smooth and effective project implementation. 
27.  Project steering committee (PSC). A multiagency PSC, chaired by MAAIF, will 
meet twice yearly to provide strategic guidance to the project and to review annual 
workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs) and overall implementation progress. 
28.  Project management unit. MAAIF will establish a PMU responsible for planning 
and supervising project implementation, financial management, procurement, M&E 
and knowledge management. The PMU will be headed by a project manager, 
reporting to the Permanent Secretary of MAAIF, and will be structured in four units 
(operations; M&E and learning; finance and administration; and procurement and 
disposal), each headed by a manager. 
29. 
Implementation will be through diverse institutions and service providers, including: 
hub start-up teams; district local governments; private sector partner(s); OPG 
organizations; and contracted service providers (private companies, NGOs and 
individual consultants). 
C.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and 
knowledge management 
30.  The M&E and learning unit will be responsible for preparation of the AWP/Bs, 
progress monitoring, M&E, reporting, knowledge management and communication. 
31.  Planning. Planning and budgeting under NOPP will be integrated into the 
government performance-based budgeting process and will be based on AWP/Bs 
that will form the backbone of project planning.  
32.  Results-based monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will be based on 
the logical framework and linked to the MAAIF M&E framework, while also 
complying with IFAD’s guidelines. It will allow the PMU to monitor physical and 
financial performance and adjust its strategy accordingly. The system will be 
designed to evolve into a comprehensive M&E system for the oil palm sector. Major 
building blocks include: implementation monitoring at output and outcome levels; 
baseline, midterm and final impact assessments; a midterm review; a project 
completion report; and thematic studies. 
33.  Knowledge management and communication. Knowledge management will 
draw heavily on the M&E outputs and will serve to: bring operational experience to 
national policy processes; analyse implementation experience and lessons learned; 
and document best practice and project successes. Knowledge management will 
feed into a proactive and targeted communication strategy aimed at: proactively 
engaging and building awareness of NOPP; demonstrating that oil palm investment 
is transforming the lives of smallholder farmers and their communities; and 
changing perceptions of oil palm investment in Uganda. 
6 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
34.  Financial management. The PMU’s finance and administration unit will be 
responsible for: budget preparation and submission for inclusion in the national 
budget; disbursement of funds; management of withdrawal applications; 
consolidation of financial reports; and facilitation of project audits. The project’s 
initial fiduciary risk was assessed as high, due mainly to the inherently high country 
risk. This is expected to improve to medium or low once mitigating controls have 
been implemented, based on the experience of a similar project currently classified 
as low risk, whose processes and procedures will be adopted. The national 
Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) has strong control features for 
segregation of duties, payments and budget control, and the project will use the 
IFMS in conjunction with an accounting software to enhance financial reporting, 
which will be prepared on an International Public Sector Accounting Standards cash 
basis at the PMU.  
35.  Flow of funds. Funds will flow through a holding account in the Bank of Uganda. 
Growers’ organizations at each hub will operate through project-specific bank 
accounts. The PMU will be delegated full authority to carry out payments to shorten 
the payment processing cycle.  
36.  Audit and governance. Internal audit will be performed either by MAAIF or by an 
independent qualified service provider. External audits will be conducted by the 
Auditor General, either directly or through an appointed firm, based on terms of 
reference duly approved by IFAD in accordance with International Standards on 
Auditing. Trust fund loan reflows will be subject to audit and the figures included in 
overall project financial reporting. IFAD’s anticorruption policy and reporting 
mechanisms will be covered in the project implementation manual and start-up 
workshops, and duly communicated to staff and implementers. 
37.  Procurement. The PMU’s procurement and disposal unit will be responsible for 
procurement planning and execution; submission of requests for “no objection” to 
IFAD; and support for contract management by relevant technical managers within 
the PMU. The Uganda Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act has 
been reviewed and found to provide an appropriate framework. A NOPP-specific 
contracts committee will be constituted to facilitate project-related processes. 
E.  Supervision 
38.  NOPP will be supervised jointly by the Government and IFAD through regular 
supervision and implementation support missions. Continuous support will be 
provided by the IFAD Country Office. Results-based supervision will be used as an 
opportunity to bring technical support to NOPP, assess achievements and lessons 
jointly, and reflect on ways to improve implementation and impact. 
IV.  Project costs, financing and benefits 
A.  Project costs 
39.  The total cost of NOPP inclusive of taxes and duties is estimated at  
US$210.4 million, including base costs of US$207.0 million and price and physical 
contingencies of US$3.4 million. Recurrent costs represent 5.5 per cent of total 
costs and 12.4 per cent of the total IFAD contribution (loan and grant). 
7 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
Table 1 
Project costs by component and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Component 
Amount 
% 
Amount  % 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
IFAD loan 
IFAD grant 
Private sector 
Beneficiaries 
Borrower/ 
counterpart 
Total 
1. Scaling up 
smallholder oil palm 
development 
2. Livelihoods 
diversification and 
resilience 
3. Oil palm sector 
development framework 
4. Project management, 
M&E and knowledge 
management 
Total 
51 741 
28.4 
1 210 
0.7 
90 622 
49.7 
17 213 
9.4 
21 614 
11.8 
182 400 
11 075 
88.8 
3 051 
81.4 
9 953 
75 820 
84.1 
36.0 
1 393 
11.2 
12 468 
696 
18.6 
3 747 
1 210 
0.6 
90 622 
43.1 
17 213 
8.2 
25 580 
1 877 
15.9 
12.2 
11 830 
210 445 
B.  Project financing 
40.  About US$75.8 million (36 per cent of project costs) will be financed by an IFAD 
loan and US$1.2 million (or 0.6 per cent) by an IFAD grant.2 The Government’s 
contribution is estimated at US$25.6 million (12.2 per cent) in duties and taxes, 
plus reinvestment of the reflows from development loans. Direct investment from 
private sector partners is estimated at US$90.6 million (43.1 per cent). 
Beneficiaries will finance a total of US$17.2 million (8.2 per cent), including 
cofinancing of their plantations (both through own resources and commercial loans) 
and payment for services received from TSS.  
Table 2 
Project costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars)  
Expenditure category 
Amount 
% 
Amount  % 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
IFAD loan 
IFAD grant 
Private sector 
Beneficiaries 
Borrower/ 
counterpart 
Total 
1. Investment costs 
(a)  Credit and guarantee 
funds 
(b)  Works 
(c)  Goods, services and 
inputs 
(d)  Vehicles 
(e)  Nucleus estate 
establishment and 
mill 
23 751 
7 894 
32 706 
2 045 
45.1 
77.3 
77.9 
61.6 
15 088 
28.6 
13 831 
26.3 
52 670 
484 
4.7 
1 839 
18 
10 217 
1 210 
2.9 
1 241 
3.0 
6 854 
1 275 
16.3 
38.4 
42 011 
3 320 
90 622 
100 
90 622 
Total investment costs 
66 396 
33.4 
1 210 
0.6 
90 622 
45.6 
16 813 
8.5 
23 799 
12.0 
198 840 
2. Recurrent costs 
(a)  Salaries and 
allowances 
(b)  Operating costs 
Total recurrent costs 
Total  
6 973 
2 451 
9 424 
75 820 
91.4 
61.7 
81.2 
36.0 
1 210 
0.6 
90 622 
43.1 
17 213 
400 
400 
658 
8.6 
1 123 
1 781 
28.3 
15.3 
7 631 
3 974 
11 605 
25 580 
12.2 
210 445 
10.1 
3.4 
8.2 
C.  Summary benefit and economic analysis 
41.  Direct beneficiaries. Poor and vulnerable households will benefit directly from 
increased income from oil palm production and alternative economic activities (both 
2 Specifically for the recruitment of an international NGO for capacity-building and monitoring on EHS safeguards and 
practices at the smallholder level. 
8 
farm and off-farm) and from mitigation of social risks. Overall, an estimated 
30,800 households will benefit directly from NOPP activities (table 3). 
Table 3 
Summary of direct NOPP beneficiaries  
EB 2019/123/R.9 
Hub 
Kalangala 
Buvuma  
Mayuge 
Masaka 
Hub 4 
Smallholder oil 
palm growers 
(households) 
Alternative 
economic 
opportunities 
Mitigation of 
social risks 
Total beneficiary 
households
a
Total 
beneficiaries 
b
1 810
1 923 
2 692 
2 308 
2 308 
3 892  
4 135  
5 788  
4 962  
4 962  
1 482  
1 560  
1 851  
1 587  
1 587  
5 215  
5 526  
7 404  
6 346  
6 346  
26 075  
27 630  
37 019  
31 731  
31 731  
11 041 
Total 
a “Total beneficiary households” is not the sum of the three sets of activities, as a significant number of households will 
participate in more than one activity, which entails overlapping in terms of number of beneficiaries. 
b Already growing oil palm. 
154 186 
 23 738 
30 837  
8 066  
42.  Financial benefits. Project investments will generate substantial incremental net 
returns, both to oil palm growers and other households engaged in  
income-generating activities and intensification of agricultural production. Growers’ 
net incomes after financing are estimated to exceed US$1,000/year from full 
maturity onwards. Annual incremental net incomes are projected to range from 
US$300 to US$1,200 for microenterprises and from US$100 to US$200 for 
agricultural intensification.  
43.  Economic analysis. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) to the project 
investment is estimated at 14.3 per cent, with an economic net present value of 
US$28 million at a 10 per cent discount rate. The sensitivity analysis shows that the 
EIRR is rather robust, as it remains above 12 per cent in most cases, except that of 
a simultaneous 20 per cent reduction in both yields and prices. 
D.  Sustainability 
44.  Sustainability of project results is built into the character of the 4Ps relationship. 
The private sector partner(s) has a vested interest in ensuring that smallholder 
production is profitably sustained to achieve full use of milling capacity. For 
smallholder oil palm growers, the private sector partner offers a secured and 
reliable market for their production, and a regular monthly income. The role of the 
Government will be to: facilitate existing commercial relationships; ensure an 
enabling policy and institutional framework; and provide the required public goods 
and services (i.e. infrastructure). 
E.  Risk identification and mitigation 
45.  The main risks, and related mitigation measures, include: 
 
 
Environmental risks. The oil palm sector has a relatively high risk profile in 
terms of increased greenhouse gas emissions, loss of habitat and reduction in 
biodiversity, and contamination of surface waters. However, VODP2’s 
experience shows that, if carried out properly, oil palm investments can 
actually counteract environmental degradation and contribute to sustainable 
development. A number of mitigation measures have been taken during the 
design stage, and others are envisaged during implementation as part of a 
comprehensive environmental and social management (and monitoring) 
system (see section V, part A). The main private sector partner is strongly 
committed to the environmental safeguards. 
Land tenure insecurity. There are two types of risk for land tenure security. 
The first relates to the land acquisition and compensation process for the 
nucleus estate. The land purchase process was reviewed during NOPP design 
9 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
 
and found broadly consistent with international best practice and free, prior 
and informed consent principles (see section V, part A). The second risk 
relates to the pressure on land tenure systems in a context of increasing land 
value. This will be mitigated through activities under subcomponent 2.2. 
Reputational risk. There is a generally negative attitude towards large-scale 
agricultural investments in Africa, due to the risk of “land grabbing”, as well 
as towards oil palm development in general, due to the associated 
environmental impact in other areas of the world. This can attract negative 
publicity, even when the actual underlying risks are properly mitigated. NOPP 
will mitigate the reputational risk through proactive knowledge management 
and communication (see section III, part C). With respect to reputational risk, 
the experience under VODP2 has been positive, with no major issues having 
emerged thus far. This is attributable in part to proper mitigation of the 
underlying social and environmental risks, and in part to successful 
management of the few cases that have arisen so far through coordination 
between IFAD's Communications Division, the IFAD Country Office and the 
Government. 
V.  Corporate considerations 
A.  Compliance with IFAD policies 
46.  The project complies with relevant IFAD policies. Particularly important is 
compliance with IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP), given NOPP classification as environmental and social category “A”. 
47.  The following elements constitute the building blocks of the environmental and 
social safeguards of the project: 
 
 
Standards and procedures. The main reference for these are IFAD's SECAP, 
which require adherence to the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible 
Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests and the principles of 
Free Prior and Informed Consent. Furthermore, the project is explicitly aligned 
with international best practice for palm oil production, as reflected in the 
RSPO principles and criteria. These include a specific reference to 
International Labour Organization conventions on forced labour, protection of 
children, and protection of smallholders and tenants. Loan covenants in the 
financing agreement explicitly refer to the standards above. Failure by the 
Government to comply with any of these covenants may lead to suspension 
and, eventually, cancellation of the IFAD loan. 
Risk assessment and design of mitigation measures. Besides the high 
quality Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) carried out for 
Buvuma, a number of complementary studies have been undertaken during 
design by independent experts, including: an environmental and social audit 
of the ongoing investment in Kalangala; a gap analysis of the ESIA for 
Buvuma; and an assessment of the process of land acquisition and 
compensation for Buvuma. The key conclusions of the ESIA are that: (i) all 
expected positive impacts are of major significance after enhancement 
measures; (ii) the potential negative impacts after mitigation are mostly 
moderate; and (iii) in a no-project scenario, significant negative impacts 
would still occur. The ESIA includes a detailed environmental and social 
management plan whose recommendations have been mainstreamed in the 
project design. A high conservation value (HCV) study for Buvuma has been 
undertaken and is being finalized through a peer review process. It is agreed 
that areas of special conservation value identified through the HCV studies will 
not be used for oil palm plantations. The process of land acquisition and 
compensation in Buvuma (the only one envisaged under the project) has been 
found compliant with IFAD procedures (SECAP) and relevant international 
best practice. Similar ESIAs (and complementary studies, including HCVs) will 
10 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
be undertaken for the other hubs. Appropriate clauses have been included in 
the financing agreement to ensure that investments in each hub are preceded 
by a related ESIA and its disclosure and approval, including by the IFAD 
Executive Board. 
 
Implementation, monitoring and enforcement of safeguards. IFAD will 
closely monitor compliance with the agreed standards and procedures. The 
SECAP unit of IFAD and other relevant technical staff will participate in IFAD’s 
regular supervision and implementation support exercises. Independent 
environmental and social audits will also be conducted annually. Complaint 
and grievance mechanisms are envisaged at the local and national levels 
(through a stakeholder engagement plan) and global levels (through IFAD's 
complaint mechanism). In addition, key actors will receive support to 
strengthen their capacity and ensure implementation of safeguards as 
appropriate: 
‒ 
‒ 
‒ 
‒ 
The private sector partner (BUL) is fully committed to environmental 
and social sustainability: one of its main shareholders (Wilmar 
International Limited) is a member of the RSPO. Wilmar also has an 
explicit No Deforestation, No Peat, No Exploitation Policy, whose 
commitments go even beyond those of the RSPO. BUL is regularly 
monitored for its environmental, social and governance performance by 
an independent organization and such confidential reports are regularly 
shared with the IFAD Country Office. 
On the smallholders' side, the project will invest in capacity-building for 
environmental and social monitoring by an experienced international 
NGO that is a member of or accredited to the RSPO, through an IFAD 
grant. 
A dedicated EHS officer will be recruited at the PMU level with the 
primary responsibility of monitoring and ensuring that good EHS 
practices are followed in the oil palm investments under NOPP. 
Local and central authorities will be strengthened to enable them to 
perform their enforcement functions under the national regulatory 
framework. 
B.  Alignment and harmonization 
48.  NOPP is fully aligned with the overall government strategic framework (see section 
I, part B). Implementation arrangements are mainstreamed in and supportive of 
the national institutional framework and harmonized with national systems for 
financial management and procurement (see section III, part D). Harmonization 
with other development partners is under the leadership of the lead implementing 
agency (MAAIF) through the Agriculture Sector Working Group and the Agricultural 
Development Partners Group, which IFAD will be chairing in 2018. 
C.  Innovations and scaling up 
49.  Scaling up. As a large-scale 4P project built on the successful “pilot” investment in 
Kalangala, NOPP is an example of scaling up by extending geographical scope, 
broadening the 4P relationship, and laying down policy and institutional conditions 
for further expansion of the sector. The area under oil palm production in the 
country will increase almost fourfold. Hub areas will see a transformation in local 
economies. The Government will have an operational 4Ps model to replicate 
elsewhere in the country (geographically and regarding commodities) and a policy 
framework that attracts further investment to the sector. 
50.  Innovation. NOPP will introduce important innovations to further enhance the 
impact of oil palm investment on rural poverty reduction. First, the nucleus 
estate/smallholder model will gradually evolve towards one more suitable to the 
conditions of the country, with increasing emphasis on smallholder production, 
11 
EB 2019/123/R.9 
while focusing private sector investment on the processing side. Second, 
acknowledging the social and economic opportunities and risks associated with oil 
palm investment, emphasis will be given to ensuring participation of non-oil-palm-
growing households for the inclusive development of oil-palm-growing 
communities. 
D.  Policy engagement 
51.  Recognizing the importance of policy, NOPP has a specific component to support the 
Government in establishing an enabling policy and institutional framework that 
stimulates the development of a modern, environmentally sustainable and socially 
responsible oil palm sector. IFAD's role is not to advocate for specific policy 
outcomes; it is rather to assist the Government in steering the policy process and 
to facilitate dialogue among national stakeholders on key policy issues. To achieve 
this, IFAD will draw on lessons learned under VODP, the momentum created in the 
oil palm sector, and the reputation it has acquired as a broker of partnerships 
between key players in the sector. 
VI.  Legal instruments and authority 
52.  A project financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and IFAD will 
constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the 
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as 
appendix I. 
53.  The Republic of Uganda is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 
IFAD. 
54. 
I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing. 
VII.  Recommendation 
55. 
I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 
the following resolutions: 
RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to 
the Republic of Uganda in the amount of seventy-five million eight hundred 
and twenty thousand United States dollars (US$75,820,000), and upon such 
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms 
and conditions presented herein. 
RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of 
Uganda in the amount of one million two hundred and ten thousand United 
States dollars (US$1,210,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall 
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented 
herein. 
RESOLVED FURTHER: that no investment in oil palm development in a given 
hub may be made unless the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for 
such activity has been disclosed to the Executive Board and the public for a 
period of 120 days and no objection to such ESIA has been submitted by a 
member of the Executive Board within that period. In the event that a 
member of the Executive Board objects to the ESIA, the matter shall be 
tabled for approval at the subsequent session of the Executive Board and the 
investment shall not be permitted unless the Executive Board provides its 
approval. This restriction shall not apply to expenditures for preparatory 
activities related to such investments, including, but not limited to, the 
preparation of the ESIA. 
Gilbert F. Houngbo 
President 
12 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Negotiated financing agreement 
Loan No:  ______ 
Grant No: ______ 
Project Title: National Oil Palm Project (“NOPP” or “The Project”) 
The Republic of Uganda (the “Borrower/Recipient”) 
and 
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”) 
(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”) 
hereby agree as follows: 
WHEREAS  the  Borrower/Recipient  has  requested  a  Loan  and  a  Grant  from  the  Fund  to 
partially finance the Project. 
Section A 
1. 
The  following  documents  collectively  form  this  Agreement:  this  document,  the 
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), the Allocation Table 
(Schedule 2) and the Special Covenants (Schedule 3). 
2. 
The  Fund’s  General  Conditions  for  Agricultural  Development  Financing  dated 
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from time to 
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof 
shall  apply  to  this  Agreement.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement  the  terms  defined  in 
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein. 
3. 
The  Fund  shall  provide  a  loan  (“the  Loan”)  and  a  grant  (“the  Grant)  to  the 
Borrower/Recipient (collectively the “Financing”), which the Borrower/Recipient shall use 
to implement the Project in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement. 
Section B 
1. 
A. 
The  amount  of  the  Loan  is  seventy-five  million  eight  hundred  and  twenty 
thousand United States dollars (USD 75 820 000). 
B. 
The amount of the Grant is one million two hundred and ten thousand United 
States dollars (USD 1 210 000). 
2. 
The Loan is granted on highly concessional terms, and shall be free of interest but 
bear  a  service  charge  of  three  fourths  of  one  per  cent  (0.75%)  per  annum  payable 
semi-annually in the Loan Service Payment Currency, and shall have a maturity period of 
forty  (40)  years,  including  a  grace  period  of  ten  (10)  years  starting  from  the  date  of 
approval of the Loan by the Fund’s Executive Board. 
3. 
The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be United States dollar (USD). 
4. 
The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1st of July. 
Payments  of  principal  and  service  charge  shall  be  payable  on  each  15th  February 
5. 
and 15th of August. 
1 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
The arrangements through which the proceeds of the Financing shall be channelled 
6. 
to  the  Borrower/Recipient,  as  well  as  the  arrangements  for  any  other  operational  bank 
accounts shall be detailed in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient (LTB), including for the 
accounts  at  the  level  of  the  participating  districts  and  farmers’  organisations.  Any 
changes  to  the  above  arrangements,  including  the  use  of  the  Treasury  Single  Account 
(TSA),  will  be  agreed  between  the  Borrower/Recipient  and  the  Fund  and  reflected  in 
amendments to the LTB. 
The  Borrower/Recipient  shall  provide  counterpart  financing  for  the  Project  in  an 
7. 
amount approximately equivalent to twenty-five million five hundred and eighty thousand 
United  States  dollars  (USD 25 580 000).  This  amount  will  cater  for  duties  and  taxes, 
financing of oil palm development loans (through re-application of the loan reflows) and 
part of water transport infrastructure. 
Section C 
The  Lead  Project  Agency  shall  be  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Animal  Industry  and 
1. 
Fisheries (MAAIF). 
The following are designated as additional Project Parties: the National Agricultural 
2. 
Research Organization (NARO) and participating District Local Governments.  
The Project Completion Date shall be the tenth anniversary of the date of entry into 
3. 
force of this Agreement. 
Section D 
The Financing will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund. 
Section E 
The  following  are  designated  as  additional  general  conditions  precedent  to 
1. 
withdrawal:  
(a)  The  Project  Manager  and  the  Finance  and  Administration  Manager  within  the 
Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  shall  have  been  appointed  with  terms  of 
reference and qualification acceptable to the Fund; 
(b) 
The  Holding  Account  or  any  other  banking  arrangements,  acceptable  to  the 
Fund, to channel the proceeds of the financing shall have been established. 
2. 
The following is designated as additional specific condition precedent to withdrawal:  
(a)  No funds will be disbursed for investment in a given hub under category A of 
Schedule  2  before  the  Borrower/Recipient  has  secured  a  firm  commitment 
from  an  investor/partner,  acceptable  to  the  Fund,  for  the  establishment  of  a 
crude palm oil mill within such hub with the required capacity to process the 
expected production from smallholders from this hub. For all other categories, 
a  maximum  cumulative  expenditure  of  USD 500 000  per  hub  will  be  eligible 
before the above condition is met. 
(b)  No withdrawal shall be made for investment in a given hub under categories A 
and B of Schedule 2 unless the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIA) for such activity has been disclosed to IFAD's Executive Board and the 
public  for  a  period  of  120  days  and  no  objection  to  such  ESIA  has  been 
submitted by a member of the  Executive Board within that period; or, in the 
event  that  an  objection  has  been  raised,  until  the  Executive  Board  has 
2 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
decided  to  permit  the  investment  in  spite  of  the  objection. For  all  other 
categories of Schedule 2 a maximum cumulative expenditure of USD 750,000 
per hub will be eligible before the above condition is met. 
The  following  are  designated  as  additional  grounds  for  suspension  of  this 
3. 
Agreement in accordance with Section12.01(a)(xxvi) of the General Conditions: 
(a)  Key  staff  have  been  appointed,  transferred  or  moved  from  the  PMU  without 
the non-objection of the Fund. 
(b)  The Project Implementation Manual (PIM), or any provision thereof, has been 
waived,  suspended,  terminated,  amended  or  modified  without  the  non-
objection  of  the  Fund,  and  the  Fund  has  determined  that  such  waiver, 
suspension,  termination,  amendment  or  modification  has  had,  or  is  likely  to 
have, a material adverse effect on the Project. 
(c)  A Project Contracts Committee as outlined under schedule 1 section II of this 
Agreement  and  acceptable  to  the  Fund,  has  not  been  established  within  six 
(6) months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement. 
4. 
In  accordance  with  section  13.01  of  Article  XIII  of  the  General  Conditions  this 
Agreement  shall enter into force subject to the reception by the Fund  of a legal opinion 
issued  by  the  Attorney  General  or  any  other  legal  authority  authorized  by  the 
Borrower/Recipient to issue such a legal opinion. 
The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any 
5. 
communication related to this Agreement: 
For the Borrower/Recipient: 
Minister of Finance, Planning and  
  Economic Development  
The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury 
P O Box 8147 
Kampala, Uganda 
For the Fund: 
The President 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
3 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
This  Agreement,  dated  ______,  has  been  prepared  in  the  English  language  in  two  (2) 
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Borrower/Recipient. 
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA 
____________________  
Authorized Representative 
(name and title) 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR 
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT  
___________________ 
Gilbert F. Houngbo  
President 
4 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Schedule 1 
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements 
I. 
Project Description 
1. 
Geographic area. The Project will invest in a limited number of oil palm investment 
hubs, defined as agro-climatically suitable areas within a radius of approximately 30 km 
around a crude palm oil (CPO) mill, in which at least 3,000 ha of oil palm production can 
be assured. Three hubs have been identified: Buvuma Island, Mayuge, Masaka/Rakai. In 
agreement with the Fund, a  fourth hub will be identified during Project implementation. 
In Kalangala, the Project will consolidate the investments undertaken under Vegetable Oil 
Development Project, Phase 2 (VODP2) and support oil palm communities with activities 
complementary  to  oil  palm  investment,  but  will  not  expand  the  area  under  oil  palm 
production. 
Target  population.  The  Project  will  mainly  support  poor  and  vulnerable  households 
2. 
in  the  communities  located  within  the  identified  hubs.  A  first  target  group  will  be 
prospective oil palm growers. A second group will be poor families in communities where 
oil  palm  investment  will  take  place,  who  will  be  assisted  to  respond  to  the  increased 
economic opportunities and manage the social risks. More people are expected to benefit 
from  employment  opportunities  in  oil  palm  plantations.  Finally,  the  communities  within 
the hubs will indirectly benefit from the broader spill-over economic and social benefits. 
Goal.  The  goal  of  the  Project  is  inclusive  rural  transformation  through  oil  palm 
3. 
investment. 
4.  Objective.  The  development  objective  is  to  sustainably  increase  rural  incomes 
through  opportunities  generated  by  the  establishment  of  an  efficient  oil  palm  industry 
that complies with modern environmental and social standards. 
5. 
Components. The Project shall consist of the following components: 
5.1  Component 1.  Scaling-up Smallholder Oil Palm Development 
5.1.1  Sub-Component 1.1.   Development  of  smallholder  oil  palm  plantations. 
Smallholder  growers  will  be  supported  with  development  loans  to  establish  12,000 
hectares of oil palm for a maximum of 2 ha per household. An additional 3,000 hectares 
are  expected  to  be  developed  by  commercial  farmers  through  loans  from  financial 
institutions  and/or  through  their  own  resources,  supported  by  the  project  through 
Technical Assistance. 
5.1.2  Sub-Component 1.2.   Development  of  oil  palm  growers  organizations.  Oil  palm 
growers  (OPG)  will  be  supported  to  form  well-structured  organizations  in  each  hub.  At 
the  same  time,  the  Project  will  establish  capacity  for  the  provision  of  the  required 
Technical  Support  Services  (TSS)  to  the  oil  palm  growers.  Eventually  the  TSSs  are 
expected  to  become  self-financing  entities,  owned  by  the  OPG  organizations  under  a 
governance/legal framework to be defined. 
5.1.3  Sub-Component 1.3.   Establishment  of  support  infrastructures.  About  1,200  km 
of  roads  critical  for  oil  palm  development  will  be  constructed  or  rehabilitated;  and 
necessary ferry services in Buvuma and Kalangala will be established.  
5 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Investment  in  Nucleus  Estate  and  Mills.  On  Buvuma 
5.1.4  Sub-Component 1.4.  
Island,  the  private  sector  partner  “Bidco”  will  establish  a  nucleus  estate  for  oil  palm 
production  of  approximately  5,000  ha  and  a  CPO  mill.  In  all  other  hubs,  an 
investor/partner  will establish a CPO mill after  at least 3,000 ha of smallholder oil palm 
have been planted.  
5.2  Component 2.   Livelihoods Diversification and Resilience 
5.2.1  Sub-Component 2.1.  Alternative  economic  opportunities.  Support  will  be 
provided primarily, although not exclusively, to households that are not oil palm growers 
to  develop  agricultural  and  off-farm  enterprises  to  seize  the  opportunities  generated  in 
the  local  economy  by  oil  palm  investment.  Particular  emphasis  will  be  given  to 
participation by women, youth, and other vulnerable persons. 
5.2.2  Sub-Component 2.2.   Mitigation of social risks. Households and communities will 
be  assisted  to  effectively  manage  the  social  risks  that  might  result  from  the  rapid 
economic  development  generated  by  oil  palm  investment,  including  intra-household 
vulnerabilities,  high-risk  sexual  behaviour,  pressure  on  land  tenure  systems  and  social 
fragmentation. 
5.3  Component 3.  Oil Palm Sector Development Framework 
5.3.1  Sub-Component 3.1.  Policy and institutional support for national oil palm sector 
development.  Establishment  of  a  conducive  policy  and  strategic  framework  to  promote 
and regulate the sector will be supported.  
5.3.2  Sub-Component 3.2.  Strengthening  of  national  capacity  for  oil  palm  research. 
Systematic  management  of  the  existing  technical  knowledge  and  strengthening  of  oil 
palm research at national level through NARO.   
5.4  Component 4.  Project  Management,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  and 
Knowledge  Management.  Support  for  the  staffing  and  operations  related  to  Project 
management. 
II. 
Implementation Arrangements 
A 
Organisation and Management 
6. 
Lead Project Agency (LPA).  The LPA shall be the MAAIF.  
7. 
Project Steering Committee (PSC).  
7.1   Establishment  and  composition.  A  PSC  will  be  established  and  chaired  by  MAAIF. 
The  PSC  membership  will  include  representatives  from  agencies  and  organisations  that 
are actively engaged in the development of the oil palm sector. The PSC will meet twice a 
year. 
7.2   Responsibilities.  PSC  shall  provide  overall  strategic  guidance  and  oversight  on 
project  activities,  ensure  coordination  between  the  different  government  agencies,  and 
review  both  the  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPB)  and  overall  implementation 
progress. 
6 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
8. 
Project Management Unit (PMU). 
8.1.  Establishment and composition. A PMU shall be  established within MAAIF.  The key 
PMU staff shall include: a Project Manager, heading the PMU and directly reporting to the 
PS  MAAIF;  and  four  unit  managers  heading  the  respective  units  within  the  PMU: 
Operations;  M&E  and  Learning;  Finance  and  Administration;  and  Procurement  and 
Disposal.  PMU  staff  shall  be  appointed  by  MAAIF  subject  to  prior  approval  by  the  Fund. 
Individual  staff  members  shall  be  selected  from  the  PMU  of  the  VODP2,  if  an  objective 
assessment  of  the  candidate’s  performance,  acceptable  to  the  Fund,  confirms  their 
suitability  for  the  PMU  position.  Where  no  suitable  candidate  is  identified,  recruitment 
shall be carried out through an open competitive process. 
8.2   Responsibilities  The  PMU  shall  handle  all  project  management  and  administrative 
aspects  and  shall  be  responsible  for  planning  and  reporting;  financial  management; 
procurement; monitoring; and knowledge management. 
9. 
Contracts  Committee.  A  Project  Contracts  Committee  with  fully  delegated  powers 
from MAAIF, acceptable to the Fund, shall be established with required authority within 6 
months from entry into force of this agreement. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure the 
continuing  operation  of  the  Project  Contracts  Committee  all  along  the  Project 
implementation period. 
B  Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) 
10.  The M&E system for the Project will be based on the Logical Framework and will be 
designed  to  allow  for  interlinkages  with  the  MAAIF  M&E  system.  The  M&E  system  will 
serve to enable the PMU to monitor its physical and financial performance and to adjust 
its strategy accordingly, particularly through the AWPB process. 
C  Mid-Term Review (MTR) 
11.  The  Fund  and  the  Borrower/Recipient, 
in  close  collaboration  with  other 
stakeholders, shall jointly carry out a MTR of the Project implementation based on terms 
and reference prepared by the LPA and approved by the Fund. Among other things, the 
MTR shall consider the achievement of the Project objectives and the constraints thereon, 
and  recommend  such  reorientation  as  may  be  required  to  achieve  such  objectives  and 
remove such constraints. 
D 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
12.  Preparation.  The  LPA  shall  prepare  a  draft  PIM  acceptable  to  the  Fund.  The  PIM 
shall  include  inter  alia:  (i) institutional  coordination  and  day-to-day  execution  of  the 
Project;  (ii) Project  budgeting,  disbursement,  financial  management,  procurement, 
monitoring  and  evaluation,  reporting  and  related  procedures;  (iii)  description  of 
implementation  arrangements  for  each  Project  component;  and  (iv) such  other 
administrative,  financial,  technical  and  organizational  arrangements  and  procedures  as 
shall be required for the Project. 
13.  Approval  and  Adoption.  The  LPA  shall  forward  the  draft  PIM  to  the  Fund  for  no 
objection. The LPA shall adopt the PIM, substantially in the form approved by the Fund. 
The Borrower shall carry out the Project in accordance with the PIM and shall not amend, 
abrogate,  waive  or  permit  to  be  amended,  abrogated,  or  waived,  the  aforementioned 
manual, or any provision thereof, without the prior written consent of the Fund. 
7 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Schedule 2 
Allocation Table 
1. 
Allocation of Loan Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the Categories of Eligible 
Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and the Grant and the allocation of the amounts 
to  each  category  of  the  Financing  and  the  percentages  of  expenditures  for  items  to  be 
financed in each Category: 
Category 
IFAD LOAN 
Amount Allocated 
(expressed 
in USD) 
IFAD GRANT 
Amount Allocated 
(expressed 
in USD) 
Percentage 
Net of taxes  
A.   Credit and Guarantee Funds 
21 380 000 
B.   Works 
7 100 000 
100% 
100% 
C.  Goods, Services and Inputs 
31 280 000 
1 210 000 
100% 
D.  Operating costs 
8 480 000 
E. 
Unallocated 
7 580 000 
100% 
100% 
TOTAL 
75 820 000 
1 210 000 
(c)  The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:  
(i)  The amounts of the Financing are net of any Third Party Private Contribution, 
Beneficiary contribution and Government contribution. 
(ii)  Credit  and  Guarantee  funds,  includes  financing  for  development  of 
smallholder oil palm plantations. 
(iii)  Goods,  Services  and  Inputs,  includes:  vehicles  (including  ferries  and  water 
barges), equipment, materials, consultancies, contracts for service provision, 
training and workshops. 
(iv) Operating Costs, includes: staff remuneration and other operating costs. 
(v)  Unallocated  Funds:  funds  that  can  be  reallocated  to  any  of  the  other 
categories upon  request from the Borrower/Recipient, subject to the Fund's 
approval.  The  funds  will  cater  for  unforeseen/contingency  costs  that  will 
arise  during  project  implementation  such  as  price  and  physical  cost 
variations.  
2. 
Start-up  Costs.  Withdrawals  in  respect  of  expenditures  for  start-up  costs  incurred 
before the satisfaction of the general conditions precedent to withdrawal shall not exceed 
an aggregate amount of five hundred thousand United States dollars USD 500 000. 
8 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
Schedule 3 
Special Covenants 
In  accordance  with  Section  12.01(a)(xxiii)  of  the  General  Conditions,  the  Fund  may 
suspend,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  right  of  the Borrower  to  request  withdrawals  from  the 
Loan Account if the Borrower has defaulted in the performance of any covenant set forth 
below,  and  the  Fund  has  determined  that  such  default  has  had,  or  is  likely  to  have,  a 
material adverse effect on the Project: 
1. 
Environmental  and  social  sustainability.  The  Borrower/Recipient  shall  ensure  that 
the production of palm oil will be in line with international best practice on environmental 
and  social  sustainability,  as  reflected  in  the  Roundtable  on  Sustainable  Palm  Oil (RSPO) 
Principles and Criteria as may be amended from time to time. 
2. 
Land tenure security.  The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that the land acquisition 
process  has  already  been  completed  and  that  compensation  processes  were  consistent 
with international best practice and free prior and informed consent principles. 
3. 
Compliance  with  the  Social  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures 
(SECAP).  The  Borrower/Recipient  shall  ensure  that  the  Project  will  be  implemented  in 
compliance with IFAD's SECAP and more specifically that the following measures shall be 
taken: 
  Environmental  and  social  safeguards.  The  Borrower/Recipient  shall  ensure  that 
prior  to  carrying  out  any  investment  in  oil  palm  development  in  a  given  hub,  an 
Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  shall  have  been  conducted 
on  the  Project's  smallholder  activities  (including  as  appropriate  a  High 
Conservation  Value/High  Carbon  Stock  assessment  as  well  a  Greenhouse  Gas 
Emissions  analysis)  following  the  terms  of  reference  approved  by  IFAD  and  the 
National  Environmental  Management  Authority  (NEMA)  and  that  a  compliance 
certificate  shall  have  been  issued  by  NEMA.  In  addition,  the  Borrower/Recipient 
shall ensure that all ESIAs for both public and private sector investments in any of 
the  hubs  shall  be  disclosed  in  draft  form  in  the  project  area,  and  in  a  form  and 
language  understandable  to  project-affected  parties  and  other  stakeholders,  for 
the purposes of keeping them informed and obtaining their meaningful feedback. 
  Environmental  and  Social  Management  System  (ESMS).  The  Borrower/Recipient 
shall ensure that an ESMS shall be established within 12 months from the date of 
entry  into  force  of  this  Agreement  to  provide  an  appropriate  framework  for 
environmental  and  social  risk  management.  As  part  of  it,  the  Borrower  shall 
ensure  that  annual  environmental  and  social  audits  are  carried  out  using 
independent experts. 
4. 
Development  loans.  The  Borrower/Recipient  shall  ensure  that  IFAD  financing 
shallnot  be  used  to  provide  development  loans  to  smallholders  to  develop  plantations 
above  a  maximum  of  2  ha/household.  In  the  event  that  this  threshold  hinders  the 
attainment  of  project  objective  and  targets,  the  Fund  and  the  Borrower/Recipient  will 
review and adjust it accordingly.  
5. 
Loan Reflows. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that repayments of development 
loans,  including  from  VODP2,  are  re-cycled  to  finance  further  loans  to  smallholder  oil 
palm  growers  (at  least  until  the  NOPP  target  of  12,000  ha  of  smallholder  plantations  is 
reached).  Such  reflows  are  to  be  ring-fenced  within  a  mechanism,  acceptable  to  the 
Fund, and included within the scope of the Project's external audit. 
9 
Appendix I 
EB 2018/123/R.9 
5.  National  Research  on  Oil  Palm.  Within  twelve  months  from  the  date  of  entry  into 
force  of  this  Agreement,  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  shall  have  been 
concluded with the NARO for the  research work to be  carried out for  oil palm, including 
the commitment to eventually establish a dedicated national research programme for oil 
palm. 
6. 
Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that (i) a 
Planning,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (PM&E)  system  shall  be  established  within  twelve 
(12) months from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, thereby allowing for the 
appropriate  determination  of  the  outcomes  and  impact  of  the  Project  components  and 
(ii) a base line survey shall be undertaken in each hub within nine (9) months from the 
beginning of the investment.  
7. 
Project accounting software. Within the 6 months of the the entry into force of this 
agreement, the LPA, shall have procured, installed and implemented a Project accounting 
software,  acceptable  to  the  Fund,  capable  of  providing  an  audit  trail  that  tracks 
expenditure by expense category, Project component and financier at all Project levels. 
8. 
Internal  audit.  The  LPA  shall  be  responsible  for  the  internal  audit  of  the  Project  in 
accordance  with  appropriate  terms  of  reference,  including  an  obligation  to  provide  at 
least a semi-annual internal report to be shared with the Fund. 
Legal  Agreements.  The  Borrower/Recipient  shall  ensure  that  the  oil  palm  activities 
9. 
under component 1 shall be implemented in accordance with the following agreements: 
 
 
the  Agreement  entered  into  force  between  the  Borrower/Recipient  and  the 
private  sector  company  “Bidco”,  in  April  2003,  for  the  investments  in  the  hubs 
where Bidco, or any of its subsidiaries, is the main private sector partner; 
the tri-partite Agreement entered into force amongst the Borrower/Recipient, Oil 
Palm Uganda Limited and the Registered Trustees of Kalangala Oil Palm Growers 
Trust, on 28 April 2006, laying out the roles and responsibilities of each party to 
the Agreement, for the investments in the hubs where such parties are relevant. 
In  addition  the  Borrower/Recipient  shall  undertake  to  cause,  in  consultation  with  IFAD, 
any  relevant  agreements  with  any  other  private  sector  companies  or  relevant 
organizations  including  representative  of  oil  palm  growers,  as  needed  for  the 
implementation of oil palm activities under this Project.  
12.  District  accounting.  The  participating  districts  shall  designate  a  part-time  project 
specific accounts officer to facilitate the justification of advances by the Project. 
10 
Logical framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Goal: Inclusive rural transformation 
through oil palm investment /b 
1.  District poverty rates /c 
Development Objective: 
Sustainably increase rural incomes through 
opportunities generated by the 
establishment of an efficient oil palm 
industry that complies with modern 
environmental and social standards 
2.  Household gross income /d 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions and Risks 
Base- 
Line /a 
(2018/19) 
Mid-Term 
(2022/23) 
End Target 
(2027/28) 
Source 
Freq. 
Resp. 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  UBOS 
poverty 
maps 
X  Progr  
surveys 
Baseline, 
mid & 
end 
Baseline 
mid & 
end 
UBOS 
PMU 
  Peace and stability remain 
3.  # of households receiving project 
1,810 
24,490 
30,837 
Progr. M&E  Annual 
PMU 
services (*) 
Outcome 1: 
Sustainable supply chains for oil palm 
growers established  
4.  # of smallholder OP growers selling 
FFBs to processors 
1,810 
(37% W) 
1,810 
(37% W) 
Progr. M&E   Annual 
PMU 
9,887 /e 
(30% W; 
40% Y) 
1
1
Outputs: 
1.1. Smallholder oil palm plantations 
developed.  
1.2 Smallholder OP growers’ organizations 
able to source cost-effective good quality 
technical  support services (TSS) 
5.  Area (ha) planted by smallholder 
4,700 
OP growers, financed by 
development loan and other 
sources 
13,700 
500 
14,200 
16,700 
 3,000 
19,700 
Progr. M&E  Annual 
PMU 
6.  % of  TSS costs paid directly by 
0 
n.a. 
100  Progr. M&E  Annual 
PMU 
OPGs /f 
1.3 Support infrastructures established 
7.  Km of access and farm roads 
constructed/ rehabilitated (*) 
410 
1,370 
1,580  Progr. M&E  Annual 
PMU 
1.4 Complementary processing capacity by 
private sector installed 
8.  Total CPO milling capacity installed 
40 
60 
in Uganda (Mt/hr) 
100  Private 
sector 
Annnual 
PMU 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
8
/
1
2
3
/
R
.
9
favourable for rural economic 
growth 
  Socioeconomic infrastructure 
and services are attracted by oil 
palm-generated income 
  GoU and private sector remain 
sensitive to inclusive and 
environmentally sustainable 
agric. Investment 
  International prices remain high 
enough for industry viability. 
  Trade with neighbouring 
countries remains open 
  GoU/private sector honour 
commitments to invest /g 
  Commercial farmers able to 
mobilize financing for expansion 
  Self-standing smallholder model 
(no nucleus estate) proves 
viable 
  Climate change does not 
negatively affect oil palm yields. 
  A viable institutional model for 
sustainable provision of TSS is 
established. 
  Farmers apply good agronomic 
practices. 
  Proper operation and 
maintenance for transport 
infrastructure (roads and 
ferries) is ensured. 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions and Risks 
Base- 
Line /a 
(2018/19) 
Mid-Term 
(2022/23) 
End Target 
(2027/28) 
Source 
Freq. 
Resp. 
Outcome 2: 
Household livelihoods diversified and 
resilience increased. 
9.  # of households reporting an 
0 
8,910 
15,310  Progr. 
Annual 
PMU 
increase in food production or in 
income from a new income-
generating activity (*) /h 
surveys 
Outputs: 
2.1 Households enabled to take up 
alternative economic opportunities. 
10. # of persons trained in income-
0 
generating activities or production 
practices and/or technologies (*) /i 
13,922 
(50% W; 
50% Y) 
23,922 
(50% W; 
50% Y) 
Progr. M&E  Annual 
PMU 
2.2 Social risks mitigated.  
11. # of households graduating from 
0 
4,892 
8,066  Progr. M&E   Annual 
PMU 
  HIV/AIDS transmission risks can 
household methodologies 
programme 
12. # of persons, whose ownership or 
user rights over land has improved  
(*) /j 
0 
10,708 
16,193  Progr. M&E    Annual 
PMU 
be mitigated 
Outcome 3: Enabling environment created 
for sustainable scaling-up of oil palm 
investment  
Outputs: 
3.1 Policy and institutional arrangements 
for OP sector development established 
1
2
3.2 National OP research capacity 
strengthened 
Notes:  
13. Total value of private sector 
150 
195 
investment in oil palm sector (USD 
million) 
14. # of policy, strategy and bill for oil 
palm development prepared and 
proposed to policy makers for 
approval (*) 
15. % Increase of FFB yields achieved 
on demonstration plots through 
improved agronomy practices 
0 
0 
240  Private 
sector 
Annual 
PMU 
  National policies remain 
conducive for private sector 
agricultural investment. 
2 
3 /k  Progr. M&E  Annual 
PMU 
  Oil palm bill approved as an Act 
5% 
10%  NARO 
Annual 
NARO 
of Parliament 
  GOU gives necessary priority to 
investment in research capacity 
for oil palm 
(*) Indicators from IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) Framework, presented at the Executive Board in April 2017. 
/a  Baseline indicators for oil palm include achievements of VODP and VODP2 in Kalangala District 
/b  Rural transformation is defined as a process in which rising agricultural productivity, increasing marketable surpluses, expanded off-farm employment opportunities, better access to services and 
infrastructure, and capacity to influence policy, all lead to improved rural livelihoods and inclusive growth. 
/c  Depending on Uganda National Household Surveys (UNHS). Most recent disaggregated poverty rates available are from UNHS 2012/13. The UNHS 2015/16 is currently ongoing and will be used 
to populate baseline data. Mid-term and end-targets will be populated based on baseline data. 
/d  Baseline data will be collected through baseline survey. Mid-term and end-targets will be populated based on baseline data. 
/e  At full development in 2028/89, a total 11,041 are expected to sell their FFBs to the processors. 
/f  This indicator is organization-specific. Baseline for KOPGT is 62%. End-target for all OPGs' organizations is 100%. 
/g  For the private sector, in Buvuma the key commitment is to establish the nucleus estate and CPO mill; in other areas the commitment is to establish a CPO mill to service a minimum 3,000 ha 
production cluster. 
/h  Assuming overlapping of 20% among persons trained in IGAs and agricultural technologies and 80% 'success rate' among households supported. 
/i   No discounting for overlapping among persons trained in IGAs and agricultural technologies. 
/j   Assuming it applies to 100% of OP growers and 20% of non-OP growers 
/k  Actually approved. 
A
p
p
e
n
d
x
i
I
I
E
B
2
0
1
8
/
1
2
3
/
R
.
9
