Pehur High Level Canal Extension Project (RRP PAK 47024) 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 47181-004 
Loan Numbers: XXXX 
October 2016 
Islamic  Republic  of  Pakistan:  Pehur  High  Level 
Canal Extension Project  
CONTENTS 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. 
Impact and Outcome 
B.  Outputs 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A.  Project Readiness Activities 
B.  Overall Project Implementation Plan 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A.  Project Implementation Organizations–Roles and Responsibilities 
B.  Key Person Involved in Project Implementation 
C.  Details of Cost for Project Management 
IV. 
COST AND FINANCING 
A.  Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
B.  Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
C.  Detailed Cost Estimate by Financier 
E.  Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
F.  Contract Awards and Disbursement Projection 
G.  Fund Flow Diagram 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A.  Financial Management Assessment 
B.  Disbursement 
C. Project Financial Reporting, Auditing, and Public Disclosure 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A.  Advance Contracting and Retroacting Financing 
B.  Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
C.  Procurement Plan 
D.  Consultant’s Terms of Reference 
VII.  SAFEGUARDS 
A.  Environmental Safeguard 
B.  Social Safeguards 
C.  Prohibited Investment Activities 
1 
3 
3 
8 
8 
9 
11 
11 
14 
17 
25 
25 
26 
27 
29 
30 
31 
32 
32 
35 
36 
37 
37 
37 
37 
40 
40 
40 
40 
41 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE 
COMMUNICATION 
MONITORING, 
EVALUATION, 
REPORTING, 
A.  Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
B.  Monitoring 
C.  Evaluation 
D.  Reporting 
E.  Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
i 
42 
AND 
44 
44 
46 
47 
47 
47 
GUIDANCE NOTE TO DEVELOP PLAN FOR SUSTAINABLE O&M OF PHLCE          50 
X. 
XI. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
XII.  ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
XIII.  RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
54 
54 
54 
ii 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes 
the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with  Government  and  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  policies  and  procedures.  The  PAM 
should include references to all available templates and instructions either through linkages to 
relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM.  
The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigation Department, the executing agency, is wholly responsible for 
the implementation of ADB financed project, as agreed jointly between the borrower and ADB, 
and  in  accordance  with  Government  and  ADB’s  policies  and  procedures.  ADB  staff  is 
responsible  to  support  implementation  including  compliance  by  executing  agencies  of  their 
obligations and responsibilities for project implementation in accordance with ADB’s policies and 
procedures.  
At  Loan  Negotiations  the  borrower  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  the  PAM  and  ensure  consistency 
with  the  legal  agreements.  Such  agreements  shall  be  reflected  in  the  minutes  of  the  Loan 
Negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of the Loan Agreement shall prevail.  
After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP), 
changes  in  implementation  arrangements  are  subject  to  agreement  and  approval  pursuant  to 
relevant  Government  and  ADB  administrative  procedures  (including  the  Project  Administration 
Instructions) and upon such approval they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM.  
iii 
ADB 
AES 
AWB 
EMP 
EIA 
FFS 
FO 
KPAD 
KPID 
KPP 
LARP 
masl 
M&E 
O&M 
OCR 
OFWM 
PAM 
PHLC 
PHLCE 
PIO 
PMO 
WUA 
ha 
kg 
m 
m3 
m3/s 
km3 
ABBREVIATION  
Asian Development Bank 
Agriculture Extension Services 
Area Water Board 
environmental management plan 
environmental impact assessment  
farmer field school 
Farmer organization 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agriculture Department 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigation Department 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province 
land acquisition and resettlement plan 
meter above mean sea level 
monitoring and evaluation 
operation and maintenance 
ordinary capital resources 
on farm water management 
project administration manual 
Pehur High Level Canal 
Pehur High Level Canal Extension 
project implementation office 
project management office 
water users’ association 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
hectare 
kilogram 
meter 
cubic meter 
cubic meter per second  
cubic kilometer 
GLOSSARY 
abiana 
biraderi 
chakbandi 
– 
– 
conjunctive use 
– 
irrigation service fee 
clan
delineating  the  command  area  served  by  various  elements  off
irrigation system 
use of surface water and groundwater to  meet  water needs in
the same geographic area
rabi 
kharif 
–  winter crop growing season from about October to March
– 
summer crop growing season from about April to September
NOTE 
In this report, “$” refers to US dollars. 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
1. 
The Pehur High Level Canal Extension (PHLCE) Project will develop new irrigated area 
of  over  8,727  hectare  (ha)  in  Swabi  and  Nowshehra  districts  located  in  the  middle-east  of 
Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Province  (KPP),  in  which  water  resources  for  agricultural  production  is 
currently dependent on rainfall only. To supply reliable irrigation water to the new irrigated area, 
the  PHLCE  Project  will  finance  the  extension  of  the  existing  Pehur  High  Level  Canal  (PHLC) 
system for a population of about 75,000.  
2. 
The 1991 Water Apportionment Accord forms the basis for distribution of water among 
the provinces. The share of water of KPP under the water accord is 7.03 billion cubic meter (m3) 
(4.29  billion  m3  in  kharif  and  2.84  billion  m3  in  rabi).  However,  due  to  capacity  constraint  KPP 
cannot use its entire allocated share. The average water withdrawals by KPP from 1999-2013 
amounted to 6.8 billion m3 (4.2 billion m3 in kharif and 2.6 billion m3 in rabi), which is about 0.23 
billion m3 less than the allocated share of the province.1 
In  late  nineties,  construction  of  the  PHLC  was  started  with  financing  from  Asian 
3. 
Development Bank (ADB).2 The main aim of the PHLC Project was to realize the full agricultural 
potential of about 40,300 ha in the project area by (i) alleviating shortage of irrigation supplies to 
about 35,800 ha at the far reaches of the Upper Swat Canal system; (ii) reclaiming about 6,000 
ha of waterlogged land within the Upper Swat Canal system command area; and (iii) providing 
irrigation  development  for  about  4,500  ha  of  mainly  rainfed  land  outside  Upper  Swat  Canal 
system  command  in  Topi  Priority  Area.  The  PHLC  was  designed  for a  maximum  discharge of 
28.7 m3/s and had an annual water allocation of 0.57 million m3 from the Tarbela reservoir. The 
commissioning of PHLC in 2003 not only ensured the availability of water to the tail end of the 
Upper Swat Canal but also provided an opportunity to develop new areas for irrigation as some 
of the proposed new areas could not be developed. These new areas identified included Janda 
Boka, Indus, and Ambar. At that time, the requirement of pumping irrigation for these areas had 
been recognized. As all the area proposed to be included in the PHLC was not developed PHLC 
does  not  operate  at  its  design  discharge  of  28.7  cubic  meter  per  second  (m3/s)  and  does  not 
make use of its authorized share.  
Due  to  sediment  deposition  in  the  reservoir  the  minimum  draw  down  level  of  Tarbela 
4. 
Dam has been raised to El 420 masl (elevation in meter above mean sea level) as compared to 
396  masl  at  the  design  stage.  Thus,  availability  of  additional  head  of  23.8  meter  (m)  gives  an 
opportunity to irrigate additional areas through gravity  which could not be included at the time 
PHLC was designed. It is now possible to irrigate parts of Janda Boka and Indus Ambar areas 
under  gravity  through  construction  of  pressure  pipes  utilizing  the  available  head  from  Tarbela 
Dam  and  running  the  canal  on  a  higher  contour.  The  estimated  minimum  operating  level  of 
Tarbela Dam for 2020 is 423.5 m, which is taken as the design level for the PHLCE Project.  
5. 
The PHLCE will mainly irrigate lands in Swabi District. The entire area of the district is 
fertile  and  produces  good  crops.  However,  most  of  the  cultivated  area  is  rainfed  and  under 
favourable environmental conditions and sufficient rainfall gives very good output. Construction 
of PHLC has brought prosperity to the area and enhanced the agricultural output. The sources 
of irrigation in Swabi district are canals, government tube wells, and private tube wells. 
1  As per data of Canal withdrawals from IRSA (Indus River System Authority). 
2  ADB.  1993.  Report  and  Recommendation  of  the  President  to  the  Board  of  Directors:  Pehur  High  Level  Canal 
Project. Manila. 
2 
According to crop use statistics the total reported area of Swabi district is 148,689 ha out 
6. 
of  which  87,046  ha  has  been  reported  as  cultivated  area.  In  the  cultivated  area,  the  total 
irrigated  area  is  37,248  ha  in  which  the  Government  canals  irrigate  24,787  ha,  tube  wells 
irrigates  94  ha  of  land,  wells  irrigate  11,427  ha,  lift  pump  irrigate  121  ha  and  other  sources 
irrigate 819 ha of land. Almost 49,798 ha of land had been reported as rain fed. The project will 
convert  about  8,727  ha  of  rainfed  area  to  irrigated  agriculture  aiming  to  increase  the  present 
rainfed cropping intensity of 52.4% to irrigated 165.75%. The project will result in improving the 
living conditions of the local population through economic growth from irrigated agriculture. The 
pressure pipes and canal system have extra capacity to increase the irrigated area by 1,400 ha 
in  future,  which  will  increase  the  total  cultivable  command  area  of  PHLCE  to  10,127  ha.  The 
project will thus increase the existing 24,787 ha area in Swabi District irrigated by government 
canals to 34,950 ha an increase of 41% over the present canal irrigated area. At this stage the 
economic viability of the project is based on additional production from the proposed cultivable 
command area of 8,727 ha only. 
7. 
The farm size in the command area is very small, and thus a large number of farmers 
will benefit from the project. There are 8,630 farms with an average size of 1.01 ha. According 
to  distribution  by  size,  the  number  of  farms  comes  to  7,266;  1,214;  130;  12  and  7  in  the  farm 
size categories of I, II, III, IV, and V, respectively.3 Thus, about 84.2% of the farms are less than 
2 ha size and occupy 51.5% of the cultivable farmland and 98.27% of the farmers own a farm of 
less than 5 ha and collectively occupy 87.3% of the cultivable farmland of the command area. 
Vast majority of farmers are owners and own most of the farmland which is quite favorable for 
development  of  the  project.  81.7%  farms  in  the  project  area  are  operated  by  the  owners, 
possessing  75.83%  of  farmland.  The  tenant  operated  farms  are  9.6%,  farming  on  12.3%  of 
farmland.  The  land  owners  in  the  project  area  are  looking  forward  to  convert  from  rainfed  to 
irrigated  farming  as  their  incomes  and  the  values  of  their  properties  would  appreciate  with 
project development. 
Climate  change.  Climate  change  studies  were  carried  out  during  project  preparation 
8. 
stage. 4 These  studies  indicate  that  during  the  last  century,  average  annual  temperature  in 
Pakistan increased by 0.6°C, which is in agreement with the global trend, with the temperature 
increase  over  northern  Pakistan  being  higher  than  southern  Pakistan  (0.8°C  versus  0.5°C). 
These  studies  project  that  the  average  temperature  over  Pakistan  will  increase  in  the  range 
1.3°C to 1.5°C by 2020, 2.5°C to 2.8 °C by 2050 and 3.9°C to 4.4 °C by 2080, corresponding to 
an  increase  in  average  global  surface  temperature  by  2.8°C  to  3.4  °C  by  the  end  of  the  21st 
century. 
9. 
The  median  scenario  change  projection  indicates  that  the  annual  rainfall  in  the  project 
area will not substantially increase; only 5% by 2050. However, there will be obvious change for 
2100, with an average increase across the project area of 8%. While it is projected that climate 
change will impact the frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall events, with fewer but larger 
rainfall  events  expected  (IPCC,  2007),  degree  of  variation  of  floods  (i.e.,  variation  of  return 
periods)  cannot  be  estimated  with  confidence  as  different  models  give  different  results. 
However, the projected increased rainfall is not uniform and is more pronounced during the wet 
months. This means that more frequent floods will be experienced and consequently adequate 
discharge capacity of cross-drainage structures must be provided. 
3  Category I = Less than 2.02 ha, II = 2.02 to < 5.06 ha, III = 5.06- < 10.12 ha, IV = 10.12- < 20.23 ha, V = 20.23 -> 
20.23 ha. 
4  ADB.  2013.  Project  Preparatory  Technical  Assistance  for  KP  Water  Resources  Sector  Project  (Consultant  Final 
Report). Manila.  
3 
Irrigation water requirements have been estimated for the targeted cropping pattern with 
10. 
due consideration to climate change impact on agriculture by 2050. The studies conclude that 
climate change impact will result in nominal increase of 1.36 million m3 in annual irrigation water 
requirements,  which  is  available  from  the  source  (Tarbela  Reservoir).  The  additional 
requirements  fall  mostly  within  the  designed  canal  capacity  except  for  the  month  of  October, 
wherein the system capacity is projected to be 5% less than the demand. Thus, the crops will 
face  a  minor  stress  of  5%  during  this  period.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  PHLCE  canals 
have extra capacity to increase the irrigated area by 1,400 ha in future, which will augment the 
potential  water  balance  deficit  due  to  the  climate  change.  During  the  remaining  period,  the 
required additional discharge due to the climate change would be easily accommodated by the 
PHLCE system. If needed, climate change impact can be neutralized by staggering the sowing 
time  of  crops  grown  at  high  intensity  like  maize  and  wheat  in  order  to  reduce  the  peak 
requirements during May and October.  
A. 
Impact and Outcome 
The project impacts, which are aligned with the government strategy will be the following 
11. 
(i) increased irrigated agriculture area in the KPP; and (ii) ensured food security for the decade 
2010-2020 in KPP.5 The outcome will be increased agricultural production in the project areas.   
B. 
Outputs 
1. 
Output 1: Available agricultural water in project areas increased  
This  output  includes  (i)  construction  of  the  irrigation  system  in  Janda  Boka-Malikabad 
12. 
area  (JBMA);  (ii)  construction  of  the  irrigation  system  in  Indus  Ambar  area  (IAA);  (iii) 
developments  of  efficient  monitoring  and  evaluation  (E&M)  system  to  assess  the  irrigation 
efficiency of PHLCE system and sustainable PHLCE O&M plan and rule.   
a. 
Construction of the irrigation system in JBMA  
13. 
Connection with Gandaf Tunnel. The outlet to the pressure pipe will off take from the 
Gandaf tunnel just downstream of the access chamber before the Pehur Hydropower station off 
take point. A valve chamber was constructed about 21 m from the tunnel centerline with a valve 
inside. The diameter of the pipe which was plugged for future Janda Boka Irrigation Scheme is 
0.60 m. 
14. 
Pressure pipe and Outlet Works. A 3,939 m long proposed pressure pipe will connect 
the  Gandaf  Tunnel  with  the  Janda  Boka  area  canal.  This  pipe  is  proposed  to  be  1.22  m 
diameter steel pipe up to Janda Boka Minor after which 850 millimeter pressure pipe continues 
to  Janda  Boka  Main  Canal.  The  change  in  diameter  results  in  decrease  of  head  loss  and 
consequently  it  is  possible  to  feed  higher  elevations  of  the  area  through  gravity.  The  pipe  is 
proposed to be buried at a minimum depth of 1.5 m to absorb the ground loading and coated 
with  protective  material  to  be  safe  against  corrosion.  Concrete  cover  has  been  provided  and 
depth of excavation has been increased at the locations where it is crossing vehicular roads to 
avoid the direct impact of load on the pipe. Drainage and two air/vacuum valves are proposed 
along  the  pipe  to  protect  against  the  abnormal  flow  conditions  in  the  pipe.  The  pipe  outlet  is 
provided with a control system to regulate the flow for seasonal variation. Before the valve and 
operation  room,  a  thrust  block  is  proposed  to  absorb  the  transient  pressure  of  the  emergency 
5  KPP Government. 2009. Comprehensive Development Strategy 2010-2017. Peshawar. 
4 
wave. The control system comprises two valves i.e., a gate valve for open/shut conditions and a 
sleeve valve for regulation and energy dissipation.  
15. 
A stilling well is proposed at the outlet to dissipate excess energy during the higher level 
in  the  reservoir.  The  well  is  protected  with  steel  sheets  against  the  high  pressure  jets  of  the 
incoming  water.  A  sleeve  valve  is  proposed  to  be  protected  against  vibrations  by  anchoring  it 
with the chamber walls. A control room will be provided for the operator and emergency spare 
parts.  A  weir  at  the  other  side  of  the  well  is  proposed  to  spill  the  water  into  a  stabilizing  pool 
which will carry it to the canal.   
16. 
Main Janda Boka Canal. The Main Canal has been proposed to be a contour channel, 
running at higher contour and irrigating areas only on its left side. Fifteen (15) numbers of direct 
outlets  are  also  provided  in  the  main  canal.  A  minor  canal  offtakes  directly  from  the  Pressure 
Pipe in which five (5) outlets will be provided. Janda Boka command area is bounded by high 
level semi-hilly area to the north, PHLC canal to the south, Gadoon Industrial Area to the east, 
and the Maini Village to the west. Part of the land is already covered by the Gadoon Industrial 
Estate,  Maini  Village  and  high  hills.  The  Gross  Command  Area  after  excluding  Gadoon 
Industrial  Estate  and  major  settlements  is  1,374  ha,  while  the  cultivable  command  area  (after 
accounting for roads, nullahs, etc.)  is  1,316  ha  which  can  be  commanded  under  gravity  
from  Tarbela.  The command area is divided into subcommand areas (engineering chackbandi) 
with a total discharge of 0.65 m3/s.  
17. 
Canal  and  Drainage  Structures:  Main  structures  on  the  Janda-Boka  canals  are 
aqueducts,  drainage  culverts,  super  passages,  road  bridges,  foot  bridges,  outlets  etc.  The 
outlets are mostly proportional dividers i.e., bifurcaters and trifurcaters but for the smaller chaks 
and in the canal reach, open flumes have also been proposed. The proposed structures include; 
four  falls/drop,  one  aqueduct,  nine  cross  drainage  culverts,  14  road  bridges,  11  foot  bridges, 
one minor, and 20 outlets.   
b. 
Construction of the irrigation system in IAA 
18. 
Connection  with  Gandaf  Tunnel.  The  proposed  pressure  pipe  starts  from  the 
downstream of the control valve and passes through a number of villages to reach the Ambar 
area where it opens into a discharge basin. Total length of the pipe is about 24.17 km. The pipe 
diameter  for  a  discharge  of  4.19  cumecs  (148.06  cusecs)  is  2.00  m  (10.76  ft).  The  pipe  is 
proposed to be buried at a minimum depth of 1.5 m to absorb the ground loading and coated 
with protective material to safe against corrosion. Concrete cover has been provided and depth 
of excavation has been increased at the locations where it is crossing vehicular roads to avoid 
the  direct  impact  of  load  on  the  pipe.  Similarly,  it  crosses  a  number  of  Nullahs  and  canals 
including  Kundal  and  Badri.  Again  the  depth  is  increased  and  surface  is  protected  by 
riprap/stone apron to avoid the chances of exposure due to scour. It is proposed to connect the 
new  pressure  pipe  with  the  existing  steel  liner  of  the  Gandaf  Tunnel  at  the  point  of  access 
chamber just before the Janda Boka pipe and power offtakes. Although the other works could 
be carried out at any time, the connection will be established in a closure period by closing the 
bulkhead and control gates at the head of the Gandaf Tunnel. This arrangement will ensure that 
there will be no disruption of power generation in the Pehur power station as well as disruption 
of irrigation in PHLC. 
Pressure  pipe  and  Outlet  Works.  The  proposed  pressure  pipe  starts  from  the 
19. 
downstream of the control valve and passes through a number of villages to reach the Ambar 
area  where  it  opens  into  a  discharge  basin.  The  total  length  of  the  pressure  pipe  is 
5 
approximately  24,170  m  and  pipe  diameter  is  2.0  m.  The  pressure  pipe  has  been  sized  to  be 
able to carry discharge of 4.19 m3/s. The pipe will be buried in ground at a minimum depth of 1.5 
m  (4.93  ft)  to  absorb  the  ground  loading.  The  pressure  pipe  crosses  a  number  of  rivers  and 
canals  including  Kundal  and  Badri,  where  the  depth  of  the  pressure  pipe  is  increased  and 
surface is protected by a stone apron to avoid the chances of exposure due to scour. There are 
about  19  drainage  valves  and  17  air-vacuum  valves.  These  valves  are  protected  in  RCC 
chambers and projected above the ground. At the end, normal control valves and stilling wells 
are proposed. Water with surface waves will fall into a stabilizing pond through a spill weir in the 
well and reach the canal through a transition section. 
20. 
Main  Indus  Ambar  Canal. The main Indus-Ambar canal will serve both the Indus and 
Ambar areas by gravity. It will start from the downstream end of the stabilizing pond. The total 
length of the canal is 27,400 m. The canal includes one Syphon in between Indus and Ambar 
areas and one aqueduct to cross the link channel (Mira Branch–Indus Branch Link Channel).  
21. 
Distribution  Canal  System  in  IAA.  Apart  from  direct  off  takes  to  the  IAA  from  main 
Indus-Ambar Canal, there are five minor canals serving the Ambar area. Indus Area is divided 
into two distinct portions i.e., north and south of Motorway M-1. Northern part is mostly served 
directly from the main Indus-Ambar Canal, therefore there is only one minor to the right of the 
canal.  To  serve  the  southern  part,  an  aqueduct  through  an  existing  culvert  or  underpass  is 
proposed to cross the Motorway.  After crossing the motorway, another minor is  offtaking from 
the  distributary.  The  distributary  canal  will  end  at  the  point  where  it  will  be  linked  with  the 
existing  Indus  Branch  to  feed  the  Nandrak  Minor  to  overcome  the  shortage  in  the  tail  of  the 
system.  
c. 
Development of M&E system to assess the irrigation efficiency and 
sustainable PHLCE O&M plan and rule. 
An M&E system using satellite remote sensing technology and field-monitored irrigation 
22. 
water  flow  will  be  developed  to  assess  irrigation  performance  efficiently  of  existing  PHLC  and 
proposed  PHLCE  systems.  The  M&E  system  with  field  calibration  will  also  be  used  for  crop 
growing assessment, which will help the KPP Agriculture Department (KPAD) assess the status 
of  agriculture  production,  and  the  KPP  Irrigation  Department  (KPID)  conduct  objective  abiana 
assessment with expected abiana collection more than the average collection rage of 50%-60% 
in KPP. At project completion, the M&E system will be handed over to KPID and KPAD whose 
staff will be trained on the use of the system. Also, a rule and sustainable plan of PHLCE O&M 
with  expected  increase  of  abiana  collection  and  KPP’s  committed  budget  allocation  will  be 
developed by incorporating the M&E system in the plan. 
2. 
Output 2: Water-use skill and farm management capacities increased in the 
project areas 
23. 
This  output  will  maximize  the  agricultural  benefits  resulting  from  the  increased  water 
availability through Output 1. This includes (i) construction of on-farm level irrigation canals (i.e., 
watercourses  and  farm  turnouts);  (ii)  formation  and  capacity  development  of  WUAs;  and  (iii) 
trainings  to  farmers  on  profitable  farming  system  and  efficient  water  use  skills  through 
demonstration activities and farmer field schools (FFSs).  
6 
a. 
Construction of on-farm level irrigation canals 
24. 
Estimated  20  and  86  watercourses  will  be  constructed  in  JBMA  and  IAA,  respectively 
with the total estimated length of over 120 km. Farm turnouts will also be installed, one for each 
farm. These watercourses will be connected with irrigation system through outlets which will be 
constructed under Output 1, and will deliver the water to the tail end of farmlands in all project 
areas.  The  construction  of  watercourses  will  be  undertaken  on  participatory  basis.  The 
watercourses  will  be  constructed  with  the  participation  from  water  users’  associations  (WUAs) 
that will be formed under the project and beneficiaries who will provide land for watercourses at 
no  cost  and  will  provide  unskilled  labor  thus  contributing  about  10%  of  the  cost  of  the 
watercourse  construction  in  kind.  Other  costs  such  as  material,  skilled-labor  will  be  financed 
under the project.  
b. 
Formation and capacity development of WUAs 
25. 
There  will  be  106  WUAs  (each  WUA  will  in  principle  operate  and  maintain  one 
watercourse.)  formed  and  trained  to  cover  all  project  areas.  The  PIO  will  develop  WUA’s 
organization, and operation and management manual for smooth WUAs’ formation and efficient 
watercourse O&M by WUAs.  
The  WUA  is  responsible  for  the  following  (i)  provide  right  of  way  for  constructing  the 
26. 
watercourse; (ii) arrange unskilled labor required for construction of watercourse and installation 
of structures; (iii) settle any disputes amongst the water users in respect of channel alignment, 
fixation  of  farm-turnouts,  distribution  of  work  etc.;  (iv)  regularly  undertake  O&M  of  the 
watercourse;  (v)  undertake  construction  /  improvement  of  farmers’  branches  and  field  ditches; 
(vi)  participate  in  the  process  of  water  allocations  and  distribution  (warabandi)  within  the 
watercourse command; (vii) facilitate distribution of non-water inputs; (viii) access funding from 
various  government  and  non-government  organizations  to  carry  out  development  works  in 
agriculture  sector;  (ix)  arrange  collective  purchase  and  distribution  of  agriculture  inputs  (i.e., 
seed, fertilizer and pesticides) on time; and (x) assist KPID in collection of abiana.6 
27. 
In  KPP,  WUAs  have  been  established  under  KPP’s  on-farm  water  management 
(OFWM) program. While these WUAs functioned well during the rehabilitation or construction of 
watercourses,  these  become  redundant  after  completion  of  the  rehabilitation  or  construction 
process. Thus, currently, the WUAs are not adequately equipped and trained to undertake their 
tasks  efficiently.  They  are  not  quite  conversant  with  water  distribution  and  measurement  in  a 
practical way. Under the Project, WUAs will be trained to develop their capacity for overall water 
resources management and efficient use of irrigation water. 
28. 
The WUAs will be formed through social mobilization by the PIO and will be registered 
under  “On  Farm  Water  Management  &  Water  Users’  Association  Ordinance  [Act]-1981 
(Amended  2001)”.7 To  ensure  continued  periodic  training  to  the  new  office  bearers  and  staff, 
training modules will be prepared by the project implementation office (PIO) in consultation with 
OFWM directorate and Agriculture Extension Services, and periodic short training sessions will 
be  conducted  within  the  area  of  each  WUA  to  address  various  topics  which  will  cover  the 
following but not limited to: (i) administrative and financial management of WUA, (ii) introduction 
of  new  practices  and  technologies  like  information  on  new  crops  introduced,  (iii)  double 
cropping, (iv) minimum tillage, (v) efficient methods of irrigation, water conservation and water 
6  Abiana will be collected by KPID. 
7  The On-Farm Water Management and Water Users’ Associations Ordinance, 1981. 
7 
saving technologies, (vi) off-season production, (vi) tunnel farming, (vii) efficient harvesting and 
post-harvest,  and  (viii)  financial  management,  preparing  crop  budgets,  and  selecting  most 
suitable  crop  mix  at  a  farm.  Also,  the  WUAs  will  be  trained  on  how  to  collectively  procure  the 
agriculture  inputs  (e.g.,  seeds,  fertilizers,  pesticides)  and  distribute  the  same  among  their 
members. 
c. 
Trainings  to  farmers  on  profitable  farming  system  and  efficient 
water use skills through demonstration activities and FFSs 
29. 
One hundred (100) demonstration plots will be established on selected farmers’ fields to 
demonstrate  the  effectiveness  of  the  following:  (i)  improved  irrigated  farm  practices  including 
efficient  farm  operation  and  balanced  use  of  agricultural  inputs,  (ii)  use  of  certified  seeds,  (iii) 
precise  land  levelling;  (iv)  cultivation  of  high  value  crops,  and  (v)  high  efficiency  irrigation 
systems,  depending  on  the  demonstration  plot.  For  the  first  year  of  the  activity,  50 
demonstration  plots  will  mainly  demonstrate  profitable  farming  system,  and  efficient  water  use 
skills using irrigation water from constructed PHLCE system will be demonstrated in different 50 
demonstration  plots  for  the  second  year  of  the  activity,  inviting  total  target  2,500  farm 
households.  Each  FFS  will  also  train  participants  on  efficient  water  use  such  as  (i)  improved 
field channel layout and operation at the watercourse level, (ii) practices for improved water use 
efficiency,  (iii)  scheduling  irrigation  according  to  crop  water  requirements,  and  (iv)  other 
management techniques to maximize production per unit volume of irrigation water applied.  
30. 
These demonstration plots will be owned by the respective farmers who will be obliged 
to  bear  all  running  costs  and  follow  the  advice  of  the  experts  of  the  PIO  with  support  from 
Agriculture  Extension  Services  (AES)  and  OFWM  Directorate.  All  inputs  for  use  on  the 
demonstration plots will be provided by the Project. These plots will also include part of the area 
cultivated  using  uncertified  seeds,  so  as  to  demonstrate  the  yield  difference  between  certified 
and uncertified seeds. The average size of the demonstration plots will be about 5 ha. As the 
average farm size is about one ha, many demonstration plots will be established as clusters of 
small  size  plots.  The  proceeds  from  the  agriculture  on  the  demonstration  plots  will  go  to  the 
owners of the land. Farmers from the distributary where the demonstration plot is located will be 
shown round and trained in use of water conservation technologies, introduction of high value 
crops and achieving high yields from crops.   
31. 
The results obtained at the demonstration plots will be disseminated through farmer field 
schools (FFSs) and field trips by inviting over 2.500 farm households. The FFSs will be held in 
both rabi and kharif seasons. The staff of PIO will be responsible for training of farmers through 
FFSs with the support from the AES Directorate.  
32. 
The field offices of AES Department and OFWM Directorate lack proper office facilities 
like desk top computers, lap tops, printers and office furniture etc. To fulfill their intended tasks, 
required equipment and office furniture will be provided under the Project.  
33. 
The M&E system to be developed under Output 1 with field calibration will inform crop 
growing area in each crop type, estimated crop yield, water use efficiency cropping type, in each 
determined  crop  area  size,  and  this  will  also  help  KPAD  to  assess  the  status  of  agriculture 
production, and  KPID  assess  and  collect  abiana.  The  staff  of  KPAD  will  be  trained  to  use  the 
system. 
8 
A. 
Project Readiness Activities 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
The loan for the project is expected to become effective in December 2016 and will be 
34. 
implemented over a period of five years.  
35. 
The  terms  of  reference  of  the  project  implementation  consultant  (PIC)  and  its  cost 
estimated  was  already  developed  and  submitted  to  KPID  in  December  2015.  Prior  to  the 
approval  of  the  loan,  the  advertisement  and  necessary  processing  to  recruit  the  project 
implementation  consultant  (PIC)  will  commence  by  ADB  on  behalf  of  the  KPID  while  the  EA 
retains the responsibility for negotiating and signing the contract with the consultant, issuing the 
notice  to  proceed,  and  supervising  the  consultant’s  services  to  enable  KPID  to  start 
implementing the Project immediately after the loan signing. The PIC will be contracted by the 
PMO  and  the  detailed  design  for  civil  work  packages  will  commence  under  PMO  using 
retroactive financing prior to the loan effectiveness.8 The PC-1 document will be prepared based 
on the feasibility level design and will be approved by the government of Pakistan prior to the 
loan  negotiations.  PMO  staff  and  key  staff  in  each  project  implementation  office  (PIOs)  be 
appointed and/or employed prior to the PIC contract. Regardless of the actual schedule of PIC 
contract, an accounts manager and two accountants in the PMO will be fielded within 3 months 
after loan effectiveness. Disbursement of the proceeds of ADB loan will be conditional upon the 
fielding of the accounts staff.    
36. 
The main project readiness activities are provided in Table 1.  
Table 1: Project Readiness Activities 
2016 
8 
7 
9 
10 
11 
12 
1 
2 
2017 
Indicative Activities 
Start advertisement and 
processing to recruit PIC 
Completion of Feasibility 
Design  
PC-1 Approval 
Loan negotiations 
ADB Board approval 
PMO and key PIO staff  
PIC contract 
Loan signing 
Government legal 
opinion provided 
Government budget 
inclusion 
Loan effectiveness  
3 
4 
5 
6 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Responsibility 
KPID 
PPTA Consultant 
GoP 
ADB-GoP 
ADB 
KPID 
PMO under KPID 
X 
ADB-GoP 
GoP 
GoP 
X  GoP-ADB 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, GoP = Government of Pakistan, PIC = Project Implementation Consultant, 
PIO = project implementation office, PMO = project management office. 
8  The PMO director was assigned all contractual matter by the KPID. 
9 
B. 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
37. 
The  project implementation  schedule  is  shown  in  Figure  1. Implementation  of  activities 
will except for PIC activities start from November 2016 prior to the expected loan effectiveness 
in  December  2016,  and  the  project’s  physical  completion  and  loan  financial  closings  are 
expected on 31 December 2022 and 30 June 2023, respectively.  
Figure 1: Proposed Project Implementation Schedule 
No.
Outputs/Components/Major Activities
Year‐1
II
III IV I
Year‐2
II
III IV I
Year‐3
II
III IV I
Year‐4
II
III IV I
Year‐5
II
III IV I
Year‐6
II
III IV I
Year‐7
II
III IV
I
10 
1 Project Management
Formation of PMO and Recruitment of the PIC
Formation of PMO
Recruitment of PIC
a
b
2 Output1: Increased Available Agricultural Water
Detailed Design and Bidding
a
b
Detailed Engineering Design and Budding Document
Bidding and Bid Evaluation
Construction pf Pressure Pipes and Irrigation System
X
Construction of Main System in IAA
Construction of Main System in JBMA
c
d
e
f
g
h
3 Output 2: Improved Water‐use Skill and Farm Management Cpacity
Land Acquisition and Resettlements
Defect Notification (O&M) for Construction Contract
Development of a M&E System for PHLC and PHLCE
Full Implementation of O&M Plan and its Guideline
JBMA
Formation of WUAs
Construction of Watercourses and Farm Turnouts
Farmers' Capacity Building (demonstration and FFSs)
IAA
Formation of WUAs
Construction of Watercourses and Farm Turnouts
Farmers' Capacity Building (demonstration and FFSs)
a
b
c
d
e
f
IAA  =  Indus  Ambar  area,  JBMA  =  Janda  Boka-Malikabad  area,  M&E  =  monitoring  and  evaluation,  O&M  =  operation  and  maintenance,  PMO  =  project 
implementation consultant, PMO = project management office, WUA = water users’ association.   
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.
11 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
Project Implementation Organizations–Roles and Responsibilities 
Project  Steering  Committee.  The  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  established 
38. 
during the project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA) will continue during implementation 
stage. The PSC will provide oversight and policy guidance for the project, review progress, and 
make  key  decisions  for  the  project.  The  PSC  is  chaired  by  the  Additional  Chief  Secretary 
(development),  Planning  and  Development  Department  (P&DD)  and  include  Secretaries  of 
Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa 
(KPID),  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Agriculture 
Department (KPAD), Member Board of Revenue, the Project Coordinator, the Project Director, 
and the team leader of the project implementation consultant as members. As the water supply 
component had been removed from the project scope, PHED will no longer be a member of the 
PSC. One member of district administration will also be included for the implementation stage. 
Representatives of farmers will also be invited to participate in PSC as necessary. Organization 
structure of PSC is given in Figure 2. 
Irrigation  Department 
Project Coordinator: The Government of KPP will nominate a Project Coordinator who 
39. 
would be responsible for project oversight on behalf of the Government.9  
Executing  and  Implementing  Agencies.  KPID  will  be  the  executing  agency  (EA)  for 
40. 
the  project  and  thus,  will  be  responsible  for  management  and  implementation  of  the  entire 
project.  KPAD  responsible  for  OFWM  and  AEC  will  be  the  implementing  agency  (IA).  The 
project management office (PMO) will facilitate project steering Committee meetings by inviting 
representatives  from  the  EA  and  IA  to  report  implementation  status  and  seek  policy  and 
management guidance for the project.  
41. 
KPID  will  implement  Output  1(Available  water  for  agriculture-use  increased  in  project 
areas)  while  KPAD  will  be  responsible  for  implementation  of  Output  2  (Water-use  and  farm 
management  capacities  increased  in  project  areas).  Within  KPAD,  OFWM  Directorate  will  be 
responsible  for  organization  and  training  of  WUAs,  ACS  Directorate  for  training  of  farmers 
through  farmer  training  school  while  both  these  directorates  will  be  jointly  responsible  for 
selection, design, operation, and management of demonstration farms. 
Project  Management  Office  and  Project 
42. 
Implementation  Offices.  A  Project 
Management Office (PMO) and a Project Implementation Office (PIO) will be established in the 
field at Gohati, District Swabi in the existing buildings of KPID. Currently, the existing buildings 
of KPID in District Swabi are not in use and would require major renovation. The PMO will be 
headed by Project Director. Organization structure of PMO is given in Figure 3. 
The  PMO  will  be  responsible  for  (i)  management  of  overall  project  activities  in 
43. 
accordance  with  the  project  design;  (ii)  implementation  of  Output  1  activities,  (iii)  coordinating 
activities  between  the  KPID  and  KPAD,  PIO  and  other  agencies  concerned;  (iv)  ensuring 
compliance with environmental and social safeguard requirements; (v) maintaining appropriate 
accounts,  including  reports  on  withdrawal  applications  and  disbursement;  (vi)  carrying  out 
recruitment of consulting services and procurement activities; (vii) monitor, evaluate and report 
on  project  progress;  and  (viii)  preparing  quarterly  progress  and  other  reports  in  format 
acceptable to ADB. The PIO will be responsible for implementation of Output 2 activities which 
constitute  construction  of  watercourses  and  outlets,  establishment  of  demonstration  farms, 
9  It is highly likely that Chief Engineer (North), KPID will be the Project Coordinator. 
training of farmers, capacity development of KPAD field offices, and organization and training of 
WUAs. 
44. 
The detailed role and responsibilities of each organization are provided in Table 2. 
12 
Organization 
Economic 
Affairs 
Division, 
Ministry of 
Economic 
Affairs and 
Statistics 
Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa  
Finance 
Department 
(KPFD) 
KPID 
PMO (For 
overall project 
management 
and 
implementation 
of Output 1) 
Table 2: Roles and Responsibilities in each Organization 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Borrower: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Signing of loan agreement; 
Allocate and release counterpart funds; 
Endorse  to  ADB  the  authorized  staff  with  approved  signatures  for 
withdrawal applications (WAs) processing; and 
Process  and  submit 
reallocating the loan proceeds. 
to  ADB  any  request,  when  required, 
for 
(iv) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Timely  provision  of  land  acquisition  and  resettlement  budget  to KPID; 
and 
Timely  provision  of  operation  and  maintenance  budget  to  KPID  in 
accordance with loan covenant and PAM. 
Executing Agency: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
for 
(KPID 
responsibility 
responsibility 
for  managing  of  project  outputs 
Assign Directors (one for output 1 and another for output 2);  
Establish the PMO and PIOs with the required staffing; 
Overall 
responsible for the output 1, and KPAD responsible for outputs 2);  
Overall 
reporting  on  physical,  non-physical, 
procurement  and  financial  progress  for  project  activities  including  the 
development  of  the  government’s  project  completion  report  and  its 
submission to ADB;  
Timely  provision  of  agreed  counterpart  funds  for  project  activity  and 
PMO and PIO operations; 
Conduct  timely  financial  audits  as  per  agreed  timeframe  and  taking 
recommended actions; 
Comply with Loan Agreement covenants; and 
Public disclosure of project outputs. 
A: On Overall Project Management 
(i) 
Regularly  update  overall  implementation  plan,  prepare  annual  project 
budget, and request KPFD for operation budget; 
Establish imprest account and maintaining the project accounts; 
Prepare and submit withdrawal applications; 
Update procurement plan, as necessary; 
Recruit consultants and procuring works and goods; 
Coordinate  with  other  government  agencies,  departments  and  units, 
local  governments,  district  office,  union  councils,  communities  as 
necessary;  
Guide 
the  plans,  surveys,  studies,  detailed  designs,  capacity 
development  activities,  demonstration  activities,  workshops  to  be 
prepared or implemented by the consultants;  
(viii)  Monitor and supervise consulting services and PIO operations; 
(ix) 
Monitor  and  supervise  works  conducted  by  contractors,  and  the 
delivery  of  goods  procured  by  suppliers  with  the  support  of  the 
13 
Organization 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii) 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
consultants;  
Finalize,  disclose  and  implement  land  acquisition  and  resettlement 
plan; 
Implement gender action plan and updating the plan as necessary;  
Monitor project progress and evaluating project benefits and social and 
environmental impacts;  
Conduct  economic  analysis  at 
implementation; 
the  midterm  of 
the  project 
(xiv)  Manage loan disbursement and maintaining financial accounts;  
(xv) 
(xvi) 
(xvii)  Establish and implement an effective grievance redress mechanism for 
Prepare periodic implementation progress reports; 
Prepare and disclose safeguards monitoring reports; and 
the project. 
B: On Implementation of Output 1 
(i) 
PIO (For Output 
2)  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Day-to-day  field  level  implementation  of  the  respective  works  and 
activities for output 1;  
Conduct  inspection  of  the  quality  and  standard  of  works  and  goods, 
and provide feedback, guidance, and instruction to the contractors and 
suppliers;  
Supervise  the  performance  and  outputs  of  the  contractors,  suppliers 
and consultants;  
Prepare periodic progress reports and other required documents; and 
Coordinate 
governments, union councils, communities, and other PIO. 
implementation  activities  with  district  office, 
local 
Day-to-day  field  level  implementation  of  the  respective  works  and 
activities for output  2;  
Conduct  inspection  of  the  quality  and  standard  of  works  and  goods, 
and provide feedback, guidance, and instruction to the contractors and 
suppliers;  
Supervise  the  performance  and  outputs  of  the  contractors,  suppliers 
and consultants;  
Prepare  periodic  progress  reports  and  other  required  documents  for 
submission to the PMO; and 
Coordinate 
governments, union councils, communities, and other PIO. 
implementation  activities  with  district  office, 
local 
ADB  
Financier 
(i)  Assist the EAs and PMO by providing timely guidance at each stage of 
the project for smooth implementation;  
(ii)  Review  all  the  documents  submission  by  the  PMO  that  require  ADB 
approval;  
(iii)  Conduct  periodic  project  review  missions,  a  midterm  review,  and  a 
project completion mission;  
(iv)  monitor EAs’ compliance of all loan covenants 
(v)  Timely process withdrawal applications and release eligible funds;  
(vi)  monitor EAs’ compliance of financial audit recommendations; 
(vii) Regularly  update  the  project  performance  review  reports  with  the 
assistance of the EAs and PMO; and 
(viii) Regularly  post  on  ADB  website  the  updated  project  information 
documents for public disclosure, and the safeguards documents as per 
disclosure  provision  of  the  ADB  Safeguards  Policy  Statement  (2009), 
and ADB Public Communications Policy. 
Source: ADB.  
14 
B. 
Key Person Involved in Project Implementation 
1. 
Executing Agencies and ADB 
Executing Agency and Implementing Agency for Output 1 
KPID 
Engr. Syed Mujahid Saeed  
Chief Engineer North 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigation Department, 
Peshawar 
Telephone: +92-333-910-1017 
e-mail: mujahidsaeed@gmail.com 
Implementing Agency for Output 2 
OFWM Directorate 
Agriculture Extension Directorate 
ADB  
Environment, Natural Resources and 
Agriculture Division  
Mission Leader  
Resident Mission Focal  
Engr. Muhammad Khurshid Afridi  
Director General, OFWM Directorate 
19 Jamrud Road ATI Campus, Peshawar, 
Pakistan 
Telephone: +92 91 922 4308 
Iqbal Hussain  
Director General 
Jamrud Road, Peshawar, Pakistan 
Telephone: +92 91 9224223 
Akmal Siddiq 
Director  
Telephone No. +63 2 632 6748  
Email address: asiddiq@adb.org  
Ryutaro Takaku 
Senior Water Resources Specialist 
Tel (632) 632-5158 
Fax (632) 636-2017 
Email: rtakaku@adb.org 
Asad A. Zafar 
Senior Project Officer (Agriculture and Natural 
Resources),  
Level 8, North Wing, Serena Business Complex, 
Khayaban-e-Suhrawardy, G-5, Islamabad, 
Pakistan 
Telephone: +92 51 260 0351 to 69, 2087300 
Email:azafar@adb.org 
2. 
PMO and PIOs 
45. 
KPID  is  responsible  to  identify  PMO  staff  while  KPAD  will  nominate  staff  for  PIO  for 
Output  2.  Proposed  key  PMO  staff  would  require  ADB’s  approval.  The  roles  and  tasks  of  key 
PMO and PIO staffs are provided in Table 3. 
15 
Position 
Project 
Director 
Director 
Finance 
(PMO)  
Table 3: Roles and Responsibilities of Key PMO and PIO Staff 
Roles and Responsibilities 
(i)  Draft  annual  work  programs  for  each  output,  submit  them  to  the  project  director  and  its 
deputy and obtaining their agreements; 
(ii)  Consult  with  the  chief  accountant  to  monitor  budgetary  expenditure,  review  disbursement 
requests, prepare the annual budget and submit these the project director and its deputy for 
agreements; 
(iii)  Ensure  the  hiring  of  suitably  qualified  staff  to  implement  the  all  outputs  in  accordance  with 
ADB requirements; 
(iv)  Guide and collaborate with the relevant staff to monitor output implementation in accordance 
with the agreed work program; 
(v)  Attend, hold or participate in seminars, workshops, media events etc. to represent the project; 
(vi)  Conduct site visits as required to monitor and correct implementation of the project;  
(vii)  Develop and submit recommendations to the project director and its deputy to resolve issues 
which arise in the course of project implementation; 
(viii)  Support the project director and its deputy in the overall project management and preparation 
of reports for the Government and its relevant agencies; 
(ix)  Manage  all  staff  directly  working  on  the  project,  including  staff  grievance  procedures  and 
make recommendations to the project director and its deputy on hiring decisions; 
(x)  Coordinate with relevant key staff to maintain an overview of the day-to-day operations of the 
project; 
(xi)  Provide  operational  support 
to  key  staff  members 
in 
the 
implementation  of 
their 
responsibilities; 
(xii)  Draft  a  comprehensive  project  reporting  system,  submit  it  to  the  project  director  and  its 
deputy for agreements and implementations; 
(xiii)  Coordinate implementation of project outputs with the relevant project related agencies; 
(xiv)  Assist the project director and its deputy to coordinate interaction with relevant ministries and 
agencies, as may be required; 
(xv)  Liaise with local government administrations participating in the project to ensure successful 
implementation of project activities; 
(xvi)  Draft  project  implementation  reports  and  submit  to  the  project  director  and  its  deputy  for 
agreements and distributions; 
(xvii) Ensure quality, timely submission to ADB and disclosure of safeguards monitoring reports; 
(xviii) Ensure the establishment and effective implementation of a grievance redress mechanism for 
the project to deal with concerns from displaced persons, and communities; 
(xix)  Liaise with ADB staff and supervision missions to ensure successful completion of missions 
and ongoing project monitoring;  
(xx)  Implement recommendations of ADB supervision missions and associated aide-memoires, as 
agreed by the project director and its deputy; and 
(xxi)  Manage and supervise all activities for implementation of Output 1. 
(i)  Responsible for taking care of financing, funds flow arrangements, payments, recording, and 
monitoring  of  both  ADB  and  Government  funds;  establish  monitoring  and  management 
procedures for the imprest account and Statement of Expenditure (SOE) procedures; 
(ii)  Ensure  timely  preparation  of  the  annual  audited  project  accounts  and  submission  to  ADB 
within 6 months of financial year end; 
(iii)  Cooperate with the Project Manager and the PMO staff to develop a strategy for guiding and 
supporting purchase operations made by the PMO in regard to project components; 
(iv)  Maintain information  on ADB disbursement guidelines, and other resources needed by staff 
in carrying out disbursements, imprest account operation, SOE procedures; 
(v)  Negotiate  and  prepare  standard  bidding  packages  and  specifications  to  evaluate,  enter  into 
contracts, oversee delivery, issue invoices, inspect/test procured items, and make payments 
to suppliers/contractors; 
(vi)  Coordinate with the specialists of the PMO, to develop and implement payment mechanisms 
and  procedures  to  support  purchases  of  goods,  consulting  services,  and  construction 
services; 
(vii)  Communicate  through  the  Project  Director  information  and/or  documentation  to  the 
Government  or  ADB  for  their  inspection,  obtaining  comments  and/or  for  commencement  of 
funding.  
Deputy 
(i)  Develop an Operational Manual covering the procurement policies, procedures and standard 
16 
Position 
Director 
(Procurement, 
PMO) 
Roles and Responsibilities 
documents  in  order  to  minimize  cost  and  ensure  a  scheduled  carrying  out  of  procurement 
activities in line with the requirements of the Government and ADB; 
(ii)  Maintain  an  information  database  on  procurements  of  technical  services,  suppliers  of 
equipment, ADB procurement guidelines, standard and model bidding documents, and other 
resources needed by staff in carrying out project components; 
(iii)  Negotiate  and  prepare  standard  bidding  packages  and  specifications  to  evaluate,  enter  into 
contracts, oversee delivery, issue invoices, inspect/test procured items, and make payments 
to suppliers/contractors; 
(iv)  Establish a monitoring system within the procurement unit of the PMO for overseeing project 
procurement  actions  and  coordinating  necessary  approvals  or  correcting  shortcomings  in 
procedures; and 
(v)  Communicate to the Government or ADB for their inspection, obtaining comments and/or for 
commencement of funding. 
Deputy 
Director 
(Environment, 
PMO) 
(i)  Ensure that EMP will be updated during detailed design completed;  
(ii)  Ensure that bidding documents include all requirement to implement IEE and its EMP;  
(iii)  Ensure that the bidder selected will have adequate resources to implement and update EMP;  
(iv)  Undertake  environmental  safeguards  monitoring  activities  and  prepare  environmental 
safeguard reports to be submitted to ADB; and 
Deputy 
Director 
(Resettlement
, PMO) 
(v)  Ensure that the any works are implemented in accordance with ADB SPS 2009 as well as the 
government law and regulation related to environment;   
(i)  Ensure  that  the  LARP  will  be  updated  during  detailed  design  and  any  update  or  corrective 
actions as may be required during implementation; 
(ii)  Ensure that the final LARP is disclosed to DPs and implemented as per schedule; 
(iii)  Ensure that bidding documents, capacity building programs, any activity for output 1 include 
Deputy 
Director 
(Sociology, 
PMO) 
M&E Officer 
(PMO) 
all requirements relevant to implement the LARP;  
(iv)  Responsible for preparing the internal resettlement monitoring reports, with support from the 
Project Implementation Consultants, for submission to ADB; 
(v)  Oversee the conduct of consultations with DPs; 
(vi)  Ensure that DP concerns and complaints are resolved in a timely and effective manner, and 
report on emerging LAR issues during project implementation; 
(vii)  Follow-up on actions needed to address issues and recommendations raised in the internal 
and external resettlement monitoring reports; and 
(viii)  Ensure that the any works are implemented in accordance with ADB SPS 2009 as well as the 
government law and regulation related to resettlement. 
(i)  Ensure that LARP and GAP will be updated during detailed design and planning completed;  
(ii)  Ensure  that  bidding  documents,  capacity  building  programs,  demonstration  activities,  any 
activities for output 1, include all requirement to implement LARP and GAP;  
(iii)  Ensure that the bidder selected will have adequate resources to implement and update GAP;  
(iv)  Undertake gender monitoring activities and prepare gender reports to be submitted to ADB;  
(v)  Ensure  regular  and  effective  stakeholder  communication  and  engagement  throughout  the 
project implementation; and, 
(vi)  Oversee  the  conduct  of  consultations  with  stakeholders  and  formation  of  water  users 
associations. 
(i)  Ensure that appropriate M&E strategy and plans are developed to assess the achievement of 
each project output;  
(ii)  During  initial  phase  of  the  implementation  of  the  project,  reconfirm  and/or  update:  (a) 
activities with milestones, performance targets and indicators with baselines, all of which are 
defined in the Design and Monitoring Framework, (b) requirements indicated in the Summary 
Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy, and (c) Gender Action Plan; 
(iii)  Ensure  to  update  (a)  activities  with  milestones,  performance  targets  and  indicators  with 
baselines, all of which are defined in the Design and Monitoring Framework, (b) requirements 
indicated  in  the  Summary  Poverty  Reduction  and  Social  Strategy  at  the  project  completion, 
and (c) Gender Action Plan; and 
(iv)  Ensure  that  baseline,  intermediate  and  end-of  project  socio-economic  surveys  and  impact 
assessment in each output of the project are planned and conducted.  
PIO Output 2 
Director 
(i)  Serve  as  the  ‘Engineer’  and  ‘Coordinator’  for  all  activities  including  civil  works,  delivery  of 
goods, services, capacity building, demonstration activities for Output 2;  
(ii)  Oversee  all  activities  for  Output  2,  which  related  mainly  to  the  construction  of  the  water 
courses  and  its  outlets;  selection,  design,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  demonstration 
plots;  training  of  farmers  through  farmer  field  schools;  capacity  development  of  KPAD  field 
offices  in  the  project  area;  and  organization  and  training  of  WUAs.  Monitor  their 
17 
Position 
Roles and Responsibilities 
implementation in relation to the agreed work plan; 
(iii)  Coordinate with Agriculture Extension department for farmers training through demonstration 
plots and farmer field schools 
(iv)  Report any deviations from the work plan to the PMO Director; 
(v)  Establish monitoring and evaluation system for output implementation; 
(vi)  Support the PMO Director for the execution of the Output 2; 
(vii)  Identify any operational problems and raise them with the PMO Director; 
(viii)  Coordinate  with  local  KPID  office,  and,  local  governments  to  resolve  any  issues  in 
implementing Output 2, inform them of the outputs status; 
(ix)  Organize orientation or training programs to educate project participants; and 
(x)  Cooperate  with  the  PMO  Director,  to  draft  an  annual  work  plan  for  the  PIO,  which  will  be 
submitted to the Project Director for approval.   
C. 
Details of Cost for Project Management 
46. 
The  total  costs  of  project  management  are  estimated  at  PRs401  million  (Table  4). 
Details are given in Tables 5-8. All these costs except for duties and taxes will be fully financed 
by ADB.  
Table 4: Summary of Project Management Expenses 
Sr. No. 
1 
Description
Project Management Office (including PIO for Output 1)
i  Salary Costs 
ii  Direct Costs 
2 
Project Implementation Office for Output 2
i  Salary Costs 
ii  Direct Costs 
TOTAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT COSTS 
Amount (PRs) 
269,865,500
214,945,500 
  54,920,000 
131,429,000
79,440,000 
51,989,000 
401,294,500
18 
Table 5: Details of PMO Salary Costs 
Sr.# 
 Designation 
Project Director Unit
Man-
Months
Monthly 
Gross
Salary (Rs)
Total Amount
(Rs)
Total 
Amount
($)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
13
14
Total
Project Director
Engineering and Contracts
Director Technical / DPD
Dy Director Civil
Deputy Director Mechanical
A.D Engineering 
Dy. Director Contract
A.D Contract
Assistant Director Mechanical
62
62
48
48
54
54
54
48
285,000
17,670,000
168,286
250,000
185,000
185,000
150,000
185,000
150,000
150,000
15,500,000
147,619
8,880,000
8,880,000
8,100,000
9,990,000
8,100,000
7,200,000
84,571
84,571
77,143
95,143
77,143
68,571
Sub Engineers
144
75,000
10,800,000
102,857
Monitoring & Evaluation
M&E Specialist
Social & Environment
Director Social & Environment
Dy Director Environment
Dy Director Resettlement
Dy Director Social and Gender
Deputy Collector
Zilladar
Patwari
Administration and Finance
Manager Accounts
Accountant
Accountant
Office Support
Manager Admn.
Office Support Staff
Unallocated
Grand Total
62
62
62
62
62
36
36
36
62
48
48
62
8
200,000
12,400,000
118,095
250,000
185,000
185,000
185,000
125,000
75,000
35,000
15,500,000
11,470,000
11,470,000
11,470,000
4,500,000
2,700,000
1,260,000
185,000
11,470,000
75,000
75,000
3,600,000
3,600,000
85,000
5,270,000
14,880,000
147,619
109,238
109,238
109,238
42,857
25,714
12,000
109,238
34,286
34,286
50,190
141,714
204,710,000
1,949,619
10,235,500
97,481
214,945,500
2,047,100
19 
Table 6: Details of PMO Non-Salary Costs and Operational Expenses 
Sr. No.
Description
Unit
Quantity
Amount (Rs.)
Unit Rate 
(R )
1260             5,500       6,930,000 
1
Refurbishment of Office 
Building
Purchase of Furniture
sq.m
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Office Tables
Office Chairs
Visitor Chairs
Conference Table
Conference Chairs
Computer Tables
Computer Chairs
Support Staff Tables
Support Staff Chairs
Drawing Cabinets
Filing Cabinets
Side rack
Almirahs
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
Curtains for windows
Electric fixtures like bulbs, fans 
etc.
Pedestal/ Bracket fans
Total: -
Purchase of Equipment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Computers with UPS
No.
B/W Printer / Scanner / 
Photocopier (A3)
Printer (A-4, Black and White) No.
No.
Laptop
Colour Printer / Scanner / 
Photcopier (A-3, Coloured 
Laser)
Scanner (A-4)
Networking Hub
Networking of Computers
Multimedia
Fax Machine
Telephone Exchange
Telephone Sets and networking
Heater (Gas)
Air Conditioner Split Unit (1.5 
ton)
Generator 
Refrigerator
Spiral Binding Machine
Lamination Machine
Digital Camera
Crockery/Cutlery/Water 
Cooler/Oven etc.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No
No
No
Total:
Office Supplies
1
2
3
Stationery
Maintenance and Supplies for 
Printer & Photocopy Machine
Miscellaneous Items 
Months
Months
Months
Total:
Printing and Binding of Reports
12           10,000 
       120,000 
12             3,500 
         42,000 
72             1,500 
       108,000 
1           25,000 
         25,000 
12             1,500 
         18,000 
24             7,000 
       168,000 
12             2,000 
         24,000 
10             7,000 
         70,000 
10             1,500 
         15,000 
10           10,000 
       100,000 
10             8,000 
         80,000 
15             5,000 
         75,000 
5             8,000 
         40,000 
LS
LS
                - 
                - 
LS           20,000 
         20,000 
       905,000 
18           85,000       1,530,000 
2          250,000 
       500,000 
3           50,000 
       150,000 
6          125,000 
       750,000 
1          750,000 
       750,000 
1           30,000 
         30,000 
1           50,000 
         50,000 
LS          150,000 
       150,000 
1          100,000 
       100,000 
1           25,000 
         25,000 
1          100,000 
       100,000 
LS          150,000 
       150,000 
15             3,000 
         45,000 
15           60,000 
       900,000 
1       1,000,000       1,000,000 
1           50,000 
         50,000 
1           20,000 
         20,000 
1           15,000 
         15,000 
5           30,000 
       150,000 
LS          100,000 
       100,000 
     6,565,000 
62           25,000       1,550,000 
62           25,000       1,550,000 
62           10,000 
       620,000 
     3,720,000 
1
Printing and Binding of Reports
LS          800,000 
       800,000 
Total:
Field Allowances
1
Daily Allowances for field 
visiting staff
Total:
Purchase of Vehicles
1
2
Cars (Sedan)
Double Cabin
Total:
No.
No.
Telephone/Fax, Postage and Courier charges
1
2
Telephone Calls/ Fax
Postage/ Couriers
Months
Months
Total:
Miscellanious
       800,000 
LS       1,000,000       1,000,000 
     1,000,000 
1       2,250,000       2,250,000 
4       3,000,000  12,000,000
   14,250,000 
62           20,000       1,240,000 
62           10,000 
620,000
     1,860,000 
Utility bills (Electricity, Water anMonths
62           40,000       2,480,000 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
POL for vehicles
Maintenance of vehicles
V. Months
V. Months
Insurance and Registration of Vehicals
Operation & Maintenance of 
Generator
Internet / Email connection 
charges
Miscellaneous Office Expenses Months
Months
Months
Total
Grand Total:
250           30,000       7,500,000 
250           20,000       5,000,000 
LS
62           30,000       1,860,000 
500,000
500,000
62             5,000 
       310,000 
62
20,000
1,240,000
   18,890,000 
   54,920,000 
20 
Table 7: Details of Salary Costs of PIO for Output 2 
Position 
Man-months Gross Sallary
Total amount 
Total amount ($)
ON FARM WATER 
MANAGEMENT. 
Director PIO
OFWM
D. Director OFWM
Water Management Officer 
(2)
48
48
96
175,000.00
8,400,000.00
80,000.00
150,000.00
7,200,000.00
68,571.43
150,000.00
14,400,000.00
137,142.86
Sub Engineers (4)
192
75,000.00
14,400,000.00
137,142.86
Agriculture Extension
D. Director Agriculture 
Extension
Agriculture Officer
Social Mobilizer (3)
Accountant
Female Extension Workers 
(2)
Office Support Staff 
(Several) 
24
24
72
48
48
150,000.00
3,600,000.00
34,285.71
150,000.00
150,000.00
3,600,000.00
10,800,000.00
34,285.71
102,857.14
75,000.00
3,600,000.00
34,285.71
150,000.00
7,200,000.00
68,571.43
6,240,000.00
59,428.57
Total Sub (A) 
600
79,440,000.00
756,571.43
21 
Table 8: Details Non-Salary Costs and Operational Costs of PIO for Output 2 
Quantity
Unit Rate (Rs.) Amount (Rs.) Amount (S)
75,000
3,600,000
34,286
Sr. No.
Description
1
Rental of Office Building
Purchase of Furniture
Unit
Month
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Office Tables
Office Chairs
Visitor Chairs
Conference Table
Conference Chairs
Computer Tables
Computer Chairs
Support Staff Tables
Support Staff Chairs
Drawing Cabinets
Filing Cabinets
Side rack
Almirahs
Pedestal/ Bracket fans
Total: -
Purchase of Equipment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Computers with UPS
B/W Printer / Scanner / Photocopier (A3)
Printer (A-4, Black and White)
Laptop
Colour Printer / Scanner / Photcopier (A-
3, Coloured Laser)
Networking Hub
Networking of Computers
Multimedia
Fax Machine
Spiral Binding Machine
Lamination Machine
Digital Camera
Telephone Exchange
Telephone Sets and networking
Heater (Gas)
Air Conditioner Split Unit (1.5 ton)
Generator 
Refrigerator
Crockery/Cutlery/Water Cooler/Oven etc.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Total:
Office Supplies
1
2
3
Total:
Stationery
Maintenance and Supplies for Printer
& Photocopy Machine
Miscellaneous Items 
Months
Months
Months
Printing and Binding of Reports
48
6
6
36
1
8
24
18
6
6
5
5
6
3
LS
21
1
3
3
1
1
LS
1
1
1
1
5
1
LS
6
6
1
1
LS
48
48
48
10,000
3,500
1,500
25,000
1,500
7,000
2,000
7,000
1,500
10,000
8,000
5,000
8,000
10,000
85,000
250,000
50,000
125,000
500,000
50,000
150,000
100,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
30,000
75,000
75,000
3,000
60,000
500,000
50,000
100,000
25,000
25,000
5,000
1
Printing and Binding of Reports
LS
400,000
Total:
Telephone/Fax, Postage and Courier charges
1
2
Telephone Calls/ Fax
Postage/ Couriers
Months
Months
48
48
20,000
10,000
Total:
Field Allowances
1
Daily Allowances for field visiting staff
LS
1,000,000
Total:
Purchase of Vehicles
1
2
Double Cabin
Motorcycles
Total:
Miscellaneous
No.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total
Utility bills (Electricity, Water and Gas)
Months
POL for vehicles
Maintenance of vehicles
Insurance and Registration of Vehicals
Operation & Maintenance of Generator
Internet / Email connection charges
Miscellaneous Office Expenses
V. Months
V. Months
Months
Months
Months
Grand Total:
3
4
48
340
340
LS
48
48
48
3,000,000
85,000
40,000
45,000
25,000
600,000
20,000
5,000
15,000
60,000
21,000
54,000
25,000
12,000
571
200
514
238
114
168,000
1,600
36,000
42,000
9,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
24,000
10,000
343
400
86
476
381
286
229
95
581,000
5,533
1,785,000
17,000
250,000
150,000
375,000
500,000
50,000
150,000
100,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
2,381
1,429
3,571
4,762
476
1,429
952
238
190
143
150,000
1,429
75,000
75,000
18,000
360,000
500,000
50,000
100,000
714
714
171
3,429
4,762
476
952
4,748,000
45,219
1,200,000
11,429
1,200,000
11,429
240,000
2,640,000
400,000
400,000
960,000
480,000
1,440,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
9,000,000
340,000
9,340,000
1,920,000
15,300,000
8,500,000
600,000
960,000
240,000
720,000
28,240,000
51,989,000
2,286
25,143
3,810
3,810
9,143
4,571
13,714
9,524
9,524
85,714
3,238
88,952
18,286
145,714
80,952
5,714
9,143
2,286
6,857
268,952
495,133
22 
Figure 2: Organization of Project Steering Committee 
Additional Chief Secretary  
Planning & Development Department 
Secretary KPID 
Secretary KPAD 
Project Coordinator 
Member Board 
of Revenue 
Director General 
On Farm Water 
Management 
Director 
PIO  
Output 2 
PMO 
Project Director / Project 
Steering Committee (PSC) 
Consultant Team 
Leader (Member PSC) 
Office Support  
Consultant 
Support  
23 
Figure 3: Organization of Project Management Organization 
Project Coordinator 
Head PMO / Project 
Social & 
Environment 
Engineering & 
Procurement
Monitoring & 
Evaluation 
Accounts 
Office Supporting 
Staff 
Director Social & 
Environment
Director Technical / 
Dy. Project Director 
Accounts Officer 
Dy. Director 
Resettlement 
Dy.Director 
Sociology  
Dy. Director 
Environmen
M&E Specialist 
Accounts 
t
A i t
Dy. Director  
Mechanical 
Dy. Director  
Civil
Dy. Director 
Procurement/Contr
Assistant Director  
Mechanical 
Assistant Director  
Engineering
Assistant Director  
Procurement
24 
Figure 4: Organization Structure of PIO for Output 2 
Director PIO Output 2 
Deputy Director  
(OFWM) 
Deputy Director  
(Agriculture Extension) 
Water Management Officers 
(Agriculture / Engineering) 
Agricultural Officers 
Social Mobilizers and Female 
Extension Workers 
Sub-Engineers 
Field Assistants 
Support Staff 
Support Staff 
25 
A. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
IV.  COST AND FINANCING 
47. 
Expenditure accounts project cost summary will be developed in Table 9.1 below. 
Table 9.1: Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
($ million)  
Items
A.
Investment Cost
1
3 Mechanical and Equipment
Civil Works
Indus Ambar
Janda Boka
Vehicles
Equipment
Supplies, Others
a
b
c
Social Mitigation
a
b
Environmental Mitigation
Survey, Study and Design
Training and Workshops
Consulting Services
a
b
Project Management
Capacity Developemnt
4
5
6
7
8
B. Project Managent and Operation
1
2
3
4
5
6
PMO and PIO Salaries
Office Accommodation/Renovation
Vehicle and motorcycle
Equipment
Suppliers, Others
Office/Vehicle O&M
Subtotal
Subtotal
Local 
Currency
Foreign 
Exchange
Total
 % of 
Base 
Costs
32.624
1.588
16.004
-
1.432
0.156
15.666
12.759
2.907
0.095
0.010
0.325
5.298
4.974
0.325
55.606
2.829
0.101
0.180
0.098
0.086
0.468
3.761
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.525
0.525
-
16.529
-
-
0.045
0.024
-
-
0.069
48.628
1.588
1.432
0.156
15.666
12.759
2.907
0.095
0.010
0.325
5.823
5.499
0.325
72.135
2.829
0.101
0.225
0.122
0.086
0.468
3.831
64.0
2.1
1.9
0.2
20.6
0.1
0.0
0.4
7.7
7.2
0.4
95.0
3.7
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.6
5.0
Total Base Cost
59.368
16.598
75.966
100.0
C. Contingencies
Physical
Price
1
2
D. Financing Charges During Construction
1
2
Interest
Commitment
2.990
9.220
12.209
2.624
-
2.624
0.826
0.637
1.464
4.018
0.323
4.340
3.816
9.857
13.673
6.642
0.323
6.964
5.0
13.0
18.0
8.7
0.4
9.2
Subtotal
Subtotal
22.402
In addition, $0.353 million is estimated as farmers' contribution to construct watercourse.
PIO = project implementation office, PMO = project management office.  
Source: ADB estimates. 
TOTAL
74.201
96.603
127.2
26 
B. 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
48. 
The  government  has  requested  a  loan  of  $86.405  million  from  ADB’s  Ordinal  Capital 
Resources to help finance the project. The loan will have a 25-year term, including a grace period of 
5 years, custom-tailored repayment method, an annual interest rate determined in accordance with 
ADB’s London interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility, a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per  year  (interest  and  other  charges  during  construction  to  be  capitalized  in  the  loan),  and  such 
other terms and conditions as set forth in the draft loan and project agreements. Based on this, the 
average  loan  maturity  is  15.99  years  and  the  maturity  premium  payable  to  ADB  is  0.10%  per 
annum. Tables for allocation and withdrawal of Loan proceed, detailed cost estimate by financier will 
be provided. 
Table 9.2: Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Category 
1  Civil Works 
2 
Mechanical  and  Equipment;  and  Consulting 
Services   
3  Social Mitigation for Janda Boka 
4 
5 
6 
Social  Mitigation  for  Indus  Ambar;  Environmental 
Mitigation;  Survey,  Study  and  Design;  and 
Training and Workshops  
Project  Management  and  Operation 
(Office 
Accommodation / Renovation and O&M of Office 
and Vehicle) 
Project  Management  and  Operation  (PMO  /  PIO 
Vehicles  &  Motorcycles,  Equipment,  Supplies, 
Others) 
Amount 
Allocated for 
OCR Financing   
[$] 
Category 
41,966,000 
6,670,000 
1,701,000 
Percentage  and  Basis 
for  Withdrawal  from  the 
Loan Account 
86.3  % 
of 
total 
expenditure claimed 
90%  of  total  expenditure 
claimed 
58.5% 
of 
total 
expenditure claimed 
13,189,000 
100  % 
of 
total 
expenditure claimed 
568,000 
100  % 
of 
total 
expenditure claimed* 
390,000 
90 % of total expenditure 
claimed* 
7  PMO and PIO (Salaries) 
Interest and Commitment Charge 
8 
9  Unallocated 
Total 
Source: ADB estimates. 
2,651,000 
6,964,000 
12,306,000 
86,405,000 
of 
93.7% 
expenditure claimed* 
100% of amount due 
total 
C. 
Detailed Cost Estimate by Financier 
Table 10: Detailed Cost Estimate by Financier 
 ($ million) 
Item
ADB OCR Loan
Government
Amount
 % of Cost 
Category
Amount
 % of Cost 
Category
Total Costs
27 
A.
B.
C.
D.
Investment Cost
1
2
Civil Works
Mechanical and Equipment
Vehicles
a
Equipment
b
c
Supplies, Others
Social Mitigation
a
b
Environmental Mitigation
Survey, Study and Design
Training and Workshops
Consulting Services
a
b
Indus Ambar
Janda Boka
Project Management
Capacity Developemnt
3
4
5
6
7
Project Managent and Operation
PMO and PIO Salaries
1
Office Accommodation/Renovation
2
Vehicle and motorcycle
3
Equipment
4
Suppliers, Others
5
Office/Vehicle O&M
6
Subtotal
Subtotal
41.966
1.429
-
1.289
0.140
14.459
12.759
1.701
0.095
0.010
0.325
5.241
4.949
0.292
63.525
2.651
0.101
0.203
0.110
0.077
0.468
3.610
86.3
90.0
90.0
90.0
90.0
92.3
100.0
58.5
100.0
100.0
100.0
90.0
90.0
90.0
88.1
93.7
100.0
90.0
90.0
90.0
100.0
94.2
6.662
0.159
-
0.143
0.016
1.206
-
1.206
-
-
-
0.582
0.550
0.032
8.609
0.178
-
0.023
0.012
0.009
-
0.221
Total Base Cost
67.135
88.4
8.831
Contingencies
1
2
Physical
Price
Financing Charges During Construction
1
2
Interest
Commitment
3.434
8.871
12.306
6.642
0.323
6.964
90.0
90.0
90.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
0.382
0.986
1.367
-
-
-
Subtotal
Subtotal
13.7
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
7.7
-
41.5
-
-
-
10.0
10.0
10.0
11.9
6.3
-
10.0
10.0
10.0
-
5.8
11.6
10.0
10.0
10.0
-
-
-
48.628
1.588
-
1.432
0.156
15.666
12.759
2.907
0.095
0.010
0.325
5.823
5.499
0.325
72.135
2.829
0.101
0.225
0.122
0.086
0.468
3.831
75.966
3.816
9.857
13.673
6.642
0.323
6.964
86.405
In addition, $0.353 million is estimated as farmers' contribution to construct watercourse.
PIO = project implementation office, PMO = project management office.  
Source: ADB estimates. 
TOTAL
89.4
10.198
10.6
96.603
28 
D. 
Detailed Cost Estimate by Outputs/Components 
Table 11: Project Cost Summary by Outputs/Components 
($ million) 
Output 1
Output 2
Amount
 % of Cost 
Category
Amount
 % of Cost 
Category
Total Costs
Investment Cost
1
2
Civil Works
Mechanical and Equipment
Vehicles
a
Equipment
b
c
Supplies, Others
Social Mitigation
a
b
Environmental Mitigation
Survey, Study and Design
Training and Workshops
Consulting Services
a
b
Indus Ambar
Janda Boka
Project Management
Capacity Developemnt
3
4
5
6
7
Subtotal
Project Managent and Operation
PMO and PIO Salaries
1
Office Accommodation/Renovation
2
Vehicle and motorcycle
3
Equipment
4
Suppliers, Others
5
Office/Vehicle O&M
6
Subtotal
45.447
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
15.666
12.759
2.907
0.095
0.000
0.000
5.499
5.499
0.000
66.707
2.062
0.066
0.136
0.071
0.043
0.198
2.576
Total Base Cost
69.283
Contingencies
1
2
Physical
Price
Financing Charges During Construction
1
2
Interest
Commitment
Subtotal
Subtotal
TOTAL
3.464
8.948
12.412
6.029
0.293
6.322
88.018
93.5
-
#DIV/0!
-
-
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
-
-
94.4
100.0
-
92.5
72.9
65.8
60.4
58.4
50.2
42.4
67.2
91.2
90.8
90.8
90.8
90.8
90.8
90.8
91.1
3.181
1.588
0.000
1.432
0.156
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.010
0.325
0.325
0.000
0.325
5.428
0.768
0.034
0.089
0.051
0.043
0.270
1.255
6.683
0.352
0.909
1.261
0.612
0.030
0.642
8.585
6.5
100.0
100.0
100.0
-
-
-
-
100.0
100.0
5.6
-
100.0
7.5
27.1
34.2
39.6
41.6
49.8
57.6
32.8
8.8
9.2
9.2
9.2
9.2
9.2
9.2
8.9
48.628
1.588
0.000
1.432
0.156
15.666
12.759
2.907
0.095
0.010
0.325
5.823
5.499
0.325
72.135
2.829
0.101
0.225
0.122
0.086
0.468
3.831
75.966
3.816
9.857
13.673
6.642
0.323
6.964
96.603
In addition, $0.353 million is estimated as farmers' contribution to construct watercourse.
PIO = project implementation office, PMO = project management office.  
Source: ADB estimates. 
29 
E. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
49. 
Accumulative by year project expenditures is given in Table 12. 
Table 12: Project Components by Year, Including Contingencies 
 ($ million) 
Items
Total Costs Year-1
Year-2
Year-3
Year-4
Year-5
Year-6
Year-7
A.
Investment Cost
1
2 Mechanical and Equipment
Civil Works
Indus Ambar
Janda Boka
Vehicles
Equipment
Supplies, Others
a
b
c
Social Mitigation
a
b
Environmental Mitigation
Survey, Study and Design
Training and Workshops
Consulting Services
a
b
Project Management
Capacity Developemnt
3
4
5
6
7
Subtotal
B. Project Managent and Operation
1
2
3
4
5
6
PMO and PIO Salaries
Office Accommodation/Renovation
Vehicle and motorcycle
Equipment
Suppliers, Others
Office/Vehicle O&M
Subtotal
48.628
1.588
-
1.432
0.156
15.666
12.759
2.907
0.095
0.010
0.325
5.823
5.499
0.325
72.135
2.829
0.101
0.225
0.122
0.086
0.468
3.831
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.582
0.550
0.032
0.582
0.204
0.066
0.136
0.071
0.009
0.047
0.533
9.726
0.079
-
0.072
0.008
0.783
0.638
0.145
0.005
0.001
0.016
1.165
1.100
0.065
11.774
0.350
0.034
0.089
0.051
0.017
0.094
0.635
17.020
0.429
-
0.387
0.042
4.230
3.445
2.762
0.026
0.003
0.088
1.165
1.100
0.065
22.959
0.650
-
-
-
0.017
0.094
0.761
12.157
0.445
-
0.401
0.044
4.386
8.676
-
0.027
0.003
0.091
1.165
1.100
0.065
18.273
0.650
-
-
-
0.017
0.094
0.761
4.863
0.476
-
0.430
0.047
4.700
-
-
0.029
0.003
0.097
1.165
1.100
0.065
11.333
0.650
-
-
-
0.017
0.094
0.761
4.863
0.159
-
0.143
0.016
1.567
-
-
0.010
0.001
0.022
0.382
0.350
0.032
7.003
0.225
-
-
-
0.005
0.030
0.260
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.010
0.200
0.200
0.210
0.100
-
-
-
0.003
0.017
0.120
Total Base Cost
75.966
1.116
12.410
23.720
19.034
12.093
7.264
0.330
C. Contingencies
Physical
Price
1
2
Subtotal
D. Financing Charges During Construction
1
2
Interest
Commitment
Subtotal
3.816
9.857
13.673
6.642
0.323
6.964
0.056
0.145
0.201
-
0.100
0.100
0.620
1.610
2.231
0.544
0.090
0.634
1.186
3.078
4.264
2.625
0.050
2.675
0.952
2.470
3.421
2.619
0.020
2.639
0.605
1.569
2.174
0.791
0.020
0.811
0.347
0.965
1.313
0.033
0.043
0.075
0.050
0.020
0.070
0.030
-
0.030
TOTAL
96.603
1.416
15.274
30.658
25.094
15.078
8.652
0.430
In addition, $0.353 million is estimated as farmers' contribution to construct watercourse.
PIO = project implementation office, PMO = project management office.  
Source: ADB estimates. 
30 
F. 
Contract Awards and Disbursement Projection 
50. 
Projections  of  contract  awards  and  disbursements  will  be  confirmed  with  the  executing 
agencies  (EAs)  during  ADB  inception  mission  and  the  PAM  will  be  updated  accordingly.  The 
forecasted contract award and disbursement profile at project design stage is shown in Table 13. 
Table 13: Ordinary Capital Resources (Loan) 
 ($ million) 
Projections for Contract Award 
Projections for Disbursement  
 Q1  
 Q2  
Q3  
 Q4  
 Total  
 Q1  
 Q2  
 Q3  
 Q4  
 Total 
0.00 
0.47 
46.28 
0.42 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
17.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.59 
0.00 
0.00 
6.74 
0.00 
5.55 
0.89 
4.13 
0.89 
0.89 
1.49 
0.00 
5.55 
1.36 
69.06 
1.31 
0.89 
8.23 
0.00 
86.40 
0.07 
7.02 
0.42 
0.00 
0.00 
0.12 
0.08 
2.64 
0.89 
0.46 
0.46 
0.12 
0.08 
0.32 
0.42 
0.00 
6.74 
0.12 
0.84 
1.91 
16.07 
15.86 
15.76 
15.86 
0.14 
0.84 
2.14 
26.05 
17.59 
16.22 
23.06 
0.50 
86.40 
Year 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Total 
Source: ADB estimates. 
Figure 5: Contract and Disbursement S-curve  
($ million) 
100.00
90.00
80.00
70.00
60.00
50.00
40.00
30.00
20.00
10.00
0.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
Contract Awards
Disbursement
Source: ADB estimates. 
31 
G. 
Fund Flow Diagram 
51. 
The fund-flow arrangement is depicted in Figure 6. 
Figure 6: Funds Flow Diagram 
ADB 
EAD 
                                                                Advance 
GoKP 
                        Direct Payment 
PMO / KPID 
(Imprest Account) 
PIO / 
KPAD
Consultants 
Output 1  
Contractors 
Suppliers 
Outputs 2 
Contractors 
Suppliers 
Documents for disbursement (Withdrawal Application / Invoice) 
ADB Funds 
                        Lending 
                        Loan repayment 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  EAD  =  Economic  Affairs  Division;  GoKP  =  Government  of  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa; 
KPID  =  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Irrigation  Department;  KPAD  =  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Agriculture  Department;  PIO  = 
Project Implementation Office; PMO = Project Management Office. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
A. 
Financial Management Assessment 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
The country public financial management (PFM) system was assessed by reviewing a public 
52. 
expenditure  and  financial  accountability  (PEFA)  assessment  completed  in  June  2012.  Financial 
Management assessments (FMA) have been performed on executing and implementing agencies 
(EA/IA) with reference to the Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects,10 
and  Financial  Management Technical  Guidance  Note.11 The  assessments focus on accountability 
and transparency, and covers (i) internal controls, (ii) funds flow arrangements, (iii) accounting and 
financial reporting, and (iv) independent audit. 
PFM system Assessment. The latest PEFA report indicates that overall only 13 indicators, 
53. 
about 42% of total indicators for PFM system of Pakistan score well. Relatively strong performance 
was  found  for  budget  credibility,  for  comprehensiveness  and  transparency,  and  for  Policy-Based 
Budgeting,  but  weak  in  most  of  other  dimensions.  Areas  which  were  found  to  be  weaker  include 
overall internal control, accounting, recording and reporting, and external scrutiny and audit.  
54. 
Implementation Arrangement. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) established during the 
PPTA  will  continue  to  provide  oversight  and  policy  guidance  for  the  project,  review  progress  and 
make  key  decisions  for  the  project.  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  Irrigation  Department  (KPID)  is  the 
executing  agency  (EA)  for  the  entire  project  and  Implementing  Agency  (IA)  for  Output  1  of  the 
project. A Project Management Office (PMO) under KPID will be established in Swabi to supervise 
the  entire  project  design  and  implementation,  and  implement  Output  1.  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa 
Agriculture Department (KPAD) will be the IA for Output 2. A Project Implementation Office (PIO) 
under KPAD will be established in Swabi to implement the Output 2. 
55. 
Experiences with Donors. Both KPID and KPAD have received international development 
financing resources in the past, including USAID, JICA, WB, and ADB. Although some staff would 
be experienced, accounting and finance personnel are subject to transfer every 3 to 5 years with a 
high probability of whole institutional memory is gone with the staff being transferred.  
Staffing.  To  ensure  a  strong  and  capable  workforce  in  place,  the  Government  and  ADB 
56. 
Fact-Finding Mission agreed to strengthen PMO’s financial management by filling three positions in 
the  PMO,  including  one  Manager  Accountant  and  two  accountants.  The  PIO  will  also  recruit  one 
accountant. The PMO Manager Accountant is responsible for the planning, financial reporting, and 
funds flow arrangements. The Manager Accountant will be responsible for general supervision over 
its  accounting  and  administrative  functions,  verification  of  the  payment  supporting  documentation 
and withdrawal application (WA), and preparation of project financial statements according to cash-
based  IPSAS  or  NAM.  All  accountants  will  be  trained  with  ADB  policies  and  procedures  on 
disbursement, and financial reporting and auditing by ADB’s RETA. 
57. 
Planning  and  Budgeting.  The  PMO  will  prepare  the  project’s  annual  budgets  for 
Government  approval.  During  project  implementation  the  actual  expenditures  are  compared  with 
planned  budgeted  expenditures  on  a  monthly  and  quarterly  basis,  and  reports  on  an  analysis  of 
variations is prepared.  Significant  variations in  budgeted  expenditure need  to  be  approved  by the 
Project Director prior to actual expenditure. 
10 ADB. 2005. Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Project. Manila. 
11 ADB. 2015. Financial Management Technical Guidance Note. 
33 
Internal  Audit.  Internal  Audit  Sections  are  available  and  operational  in  KPID  and  KPAD. 
58. 
Their  duty  is  to  support  the  secretaries  in  verifying  and  controlling  all  the  financial  transactions 
occurred within the Departments. PEFA report assessed internal audit as weak and not effective in 
all dimensions. There is lack of use of professional audit methods and compliance with ISPPIA or 
any other national/international standards. 
59. 
Information  Systems.  As  information  systems  in  government  departments  and  agencies 
are not fully computerized, all financial information required under the General Financial Rule and 
Delegation  of  Powers  notified  by  the  GoKP  cannot  be  generated  through  these  computerized 
accounting  systems.  However,  the  reporting  mechanism  and  prescriptions  are  available  and 
operational although some reports are prepared manually. Financial statements of all projects EA/IA 
are prepared on Excel speadsheets on monthly basis, and generally prepared in a timely manner. 
60. 
Project Financial Reporting. All financial statements including mandatory monthly reports 
for  submission  to  the  Department  of  Finance  will  be  prepared  by  respective  EA/IA  through  the 
Budget  and  Accounting  Systems.  Financial  Statements  are  being  prepared  under  cash  basis  of 
accounting  and  are  compliant  with  the  format  given  by  the  cash  basis  IPSAS.  New  Accounting 
Model (NAM) was developed using modified cash basis of accounting, which required recording and 
reporting of liabilities and assets as notes to the financial statements. The financial statements are 
yet not fully compliant with cash basis IPSAS or NAM. The PMO will prepare annual project financial 
statements (APFS) consolidating both Output 1 and 2. The APFS for audit and submission to ADB 
will be prepared in line with cash basis IPSAS or NAM. 
61. 
External Audit. The Director General, Audit of the KPP audits all the provincial government 
departments, autonomous agencies and donor funded projects in the Province. The audit is based 
on  risk  and materiality  assessments in line  with the  new Financial  Audit Manual  (FAM).  INTOSAI 
auditing standards are adopted but some aspects are only partially implemented. All donor-funded 
projects  are  audited  within  the  time  frame  stipulated  in  the  project  document  subject  to  the 
submission of project financial statements within a reasonable period of time. 
Risk  Assessment  and  Risk  Mitigation  Measures.  The  assessments  and  proposed 
62. 
measures are shown in Table 14.  
Table 14: Financial Management Risk 
Risk 
Ratinga 
Risk Mitigation Measures 
H 
Capacity  building 
improve internal control.  
is  essential 
to 
Risk Type 
Risk Description 
Inherent Risk 
1. Internal 
controls 
Internal  control 
effective. 
Internal  control 
expenditure is less effective.  
for  payroll  controls 
is 
for  non-salary 
Procurement related internal control is weak. 
It is strong in legal and regulatory framework, 
but  weak  in  use  of  competitive  procurement 
methods, public access to complete, reliable 
and  timely  procurement  information,  and 
existence  of  an  independent  administrative 
procurement complaint system.  
Internal  audit  is  not  effective,  lack  of  use  of 
professional  audit  methods  and  compliance 
with 
/ 
international standards.  
ISPPIA  or  any  other  national 
34 
Risk Type 
Risk Description 
2. Accounting 
and financial 
reporting 
Accounts reconciliation is weak. 
Quality  and  timeliness  of  in-year  budget 
reports  is  weak  due  to  non-recording  of 
expenditure  at  commitment  level,  although 
GFMIS  generates  high  quality information  at 
all level of the budget.  
Risk 
Ratinga 
S 
3. External audit 
and 
assets 
Quality and timeliness of annual cash FS was 
weak  due  to  lack  of  full  information  on 
no 
liabilities, 
financial 
of 
consolidated 
information 
financial 
independent  departments,  and  not 
fully 
compliant with cash basis IPSAS or NAM. 
AGP  is  empowered  to  audit  the  accounts  of 
the  Federation  and  of  the  Provinces  and  of 
anybody  or  authority  established  by  the 
Federation  or  a  Province.  INTOSAI  auditing 
standards are adopted but some aspects are 
only partially implemented.  
Risk Mitigation Measures 
the 
A  PMO  will  be  established  to  ring-
fence 
the 
Project 
international 
standards  on  accounting,  reporting, 
and auditing. 
implementation  of 
applying 
Training  on  financial  reporting  and 
auditing  should  be  provided  by  ADB 
RETA.b 
S 
Capacity  building  on  auditing  should 
be provided by ADB RETA. 
Both legislative scrutiny of the annual budget 
law and external audit reports are weak.   
Overall inherent risks 
Control risks 
1. Staffing 
Lack  of  capacity  for  the  PMO  to  manage 
ADB funds. 
2. Funds flow 
3. Accounting 
and financial 
reporting 
4. Internal 
Controls 
internal audit 
5. External Audit 
and 
The  fund  flow  risks  concerns  the  delays  of 
payments  to  contractors,  which  will  delay 
project implementation activities. 
PMO  accountants  may  prepare  project  FS 
not fully compliant with cash basis IPSAS or 
NAM. 
Internal control environment in PMO and PIO 
needs strengthening.  
INTOSAI auditing standards are adopted but 
some aspects are only partially implemented. 
S 
S 
M 
M 
H 
M 
The  Government 
recruit 
accounting  staff  to  strengthen  PMO  / 
PIO capacity.  
will 
Training on disbursement policies and 
procedures,  and  consultant  support 
should be provided. 
Funds  for  the  Project  will  be  under 
control of PMO to avoid delays.  
ADB  RETA  will  provide  training  for 
PMO  to  prepare  project  FS  following 
cash basis IPSAS. 
Establishing 
and 
resourced  internal  control  system  is 
recommended. 
ADB RETA will help build capacity for 
AGP. 
a  well-staffed 
Overall control risks 
Overall risks 
a  H = High, S = Substantial, M = Moderate, L = Low. 
b   ADB.  2014.  Regional  Technical  Assistance  (8697):  Improving  the  Financial  Management  Capacity  of  Executing 
S 
S 
Agencies in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Manila 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  AGP  =  Auditor  General  of  Pakistan;  FS  =  financial  statements;  GFMIS  = 
Government  Financial  Management  Information  System;  INTOSAI  =  International  Organization  of  Supreme  Audit 
Institutions;  IPSAS  =  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards;  ISPPIA  =  International  Standards  for  the 
Professional  Practice  in  Internal  Audit;  NAM  =  new  accounting  model;  PIO  =  project  implementation  office;  PMO  = 
project management office. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
35 
B. 
Disbursement 
63. 
The  loan  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB's  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time) 12  and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between  the  government  and  ADB.  Online  training  for  project  staff  on  disbursement  policies  and 
procedures  is  available  at:    http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning.  Project  staffs  are 
encouraged to avail of this training to help ensure efficient disbursement and fiduciary control. 
No  withdrawals  shall  be  made  from  the  Loan  Account  until  a  qualified  accounting 
64. 
manager and two qualified accountants are hired and deployed at the PMO. Further, prior to the 
first  disbursement,  the  accounting  manager  and  two  qualified  accountants  and  key  PMO  staff 
will  be  trained  by  an  ADB  individual  consultant  on:  (i)  International  Public  Sector  Accounting 
Standards,  (ii)  preparation  of  guidelines  on  disbursements,  (iii)  installation  of  new  accounting 
system, (iii) setting-up books including chart of accounts. 
Direct  payment.  The  procedures  will  generally  be  used  for  civil  works  contracts  and 
65. 
consulting services, subject to the minimum value per withdrawal application (see para 68). 
66. 
Imprest account. The PMO shall establish an imprest account in US Dollars for the projects 
at  a  bank,  either  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  or  National  Bank  of  Pakistan.  The  request  for  initial 
advance  to  the  imprest  account  should  be  accompanied  by  an  Estimate  of  Expenditure  Sheet13 
setting  out  the  estimated  expenditures  for  the  first  six  (6)  months  of  project  implementation. 
Supporting documents should be submitted to ADB or retained by the PMO in accordance with the 
Loan Disbursement Handbook when liquidating or replenishing the imprest account. 
The  total  outstanding  advance  of  the  imprest  account  will  not  at  any  time  exceed  the 
67. 
estimated ADB financed expenditures to be paid from the imprest account for the next 6 months. 
The  statement  of  expenditure  (SOE)  procedure,  as  described  in  the  Loan  Disbursement 
68. 
Handbook, will be used to reimburse eligible expenditure and to liquidate and replenish the imprest 
account for individual payments of up to $100,000 equivalent. SOE records should be maintained 
and made readily available for review by ADB’s disbursement and review mission or upon ADB’s 
request for submission of supporting documents on a sampling basis, and for independent audit.14 
Individual  payments  in  excess  of  the  SOE  ceiling  should  be  accompanied  by  full  supporting 
documents when submitting the withdrawal application to ADB. 
Before  submitting  the  first  withdrawal  application,  the  Government  must  submit  to  ADB 
69. 
sufficient  evidence  of  the  authority  of  the  person(s)  who  will  sign  the  withdrawal  applications  on 
behalf  of  the  borrower,  together  with  the  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of  each  authorized 
person.  The  minimum  value  per  withdrawal  application  is  set  in  accordance  with  the  Loan 
Disbursement Handbook. Individual payments below the amount should be paid (i) by the PMO and 
subsequently claim to ADB through reimbursement or (ii) through the imprest account procedure, 
unless otherwise accepted by ADB.  
12 Available at: http://www.adb.org/documents/loan-disbursement-handbook. 
13 Available in Appendix 10B of the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
14 Checklist  for  SOE  procedures  and  formats  are  available  at:  http://www.adb.org/documents/loan-disbursement-
handbook. 
36 
C.        Project Financial Reporting, Auditing, and Public Disclosure 
70. 
The PMO shall (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the project by funding source 
for all expenditures incurred on the project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the project in 
accordance with cash-based International Public Sector Accounting Standard; (iii) have such project 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or 
the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare 
a  report  which  includes  the  auditors’  opinions  on  the  financial  statements  and  use  of  the  Loan 
proceed,15 and  a  management  letter  which  sets  out  the  deficiencies  in  the  internal  control  of  the 
project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any; and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 
months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited project financial statements, 
audit  report  and  management  letter,  all  in  the  English  language,  and  such  other  information 
concerning  these  documents  and  the  audit  thereof  as  ADB  shall  from  time  to  time  reasonably 
request. 
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by review 
71. 
missions  and  during  normal  program  supervision,  and  followed  up  regularly  with  all  concerned, 
including the external auditor. 
The  Government,  EA/IA,  PMO  have  been  made  aware  of  ADB’s  approach  to  delayed 
72. 
submission,  and  the  requirements  for  satisfactory  and  acceptable  quality  of  the  audited  project 
financial statements.16 ADB reserves the right to require a change in the auditor, or for additional 
support  to  be  provided  to  the  auditor,  if  the  audits  required  are  not  conducted  in  a  manner 
satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits are substantially delayed. ADB reserves the right to verify the 
project's financial accounts to confirm that the share of ADB’s financing is used in accordance with 
ADB’s policies and procedures.  
ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the project and the opinion of 
73. 
the auditors on the financial statements no later than 14 calendar days of ADB’s confirmation of their 
acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website. The management letter will not be disclosed. 
15 Auditor’s  opinions  shall  cover  (i)  whether  the  project  financial  statements  present  a  true  and  fair  view  or  are 
presented  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  financial  reporting  framework;  and  (ii) 
whether  loan  proceeds  were  used  only  for  the  intended  purposes  of  the  project  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan 
Disbursement Handbook and the loan and project agreements. 
16 ADB approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited project financial statements:  
(i)  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  by  the  due  date,  ADB  will  write  to  the  executing 
agency advising that (a) the  audit documents are overdue; and (ii) if they  are not received  within the  next six 
months, requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of imprest accounts, 
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
(ii) When  audited  project  financial  statements  have  not  been  received  6  months  after  the  due  date,  ADB  will  (a) 
inform the executing agency of ADB’s actions to withhold processing of requests for new contract awards and 
disbursement such as new replenishment of imprest accounts, processing of new reimbursement, and issuance 
of  new  commitment  letters;  and  (b)  advise  that  the  loan  may  be  suspended  if  the  audit  documents  are  not 
received within the next 6 months. 
(iii) When  audited  project  financial  statements  have  not  been  received  12  months  after  the  due  date,  ADB  may 
suspend the loan. 
37 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting and Retroacting Financing 
All  packages  under  advance  contracting  will  be  procured  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
74. 
Procurement Guidelines (April 2015, as amended from time to time) and the Guidelines on the Use 
of Consultants (March 2013, as amended from time to time). The issuance of invitations for bids, 
preparation and use of bidding documents under advance contracting will be subject to ADB prior 
review  and  approval.  The  EA  has  been  advised  that  approval  of  advance  contracting  does  not 
commit ADB to finance the project. Advance contracting will be used for recruitment of consulting 
services.  The  retroactive  financing  is  envisaged  relating  to  project  implementation  consultants 
package.  Necessary  processing  to  recruit  the  project  implementation  consultant  (PIC)  will 
commence by ADB on behalf of the KPID while the EA retains the responsibility for negotiating and 
signing  the  contract  with  the  consultant,  issuing  the  notice  to  proceed,  and  supervising  the 
consultant’s  services  to  enable  KPID  to  start  implementing  the  project  immediately  after  the  loan 
signing. 
B. 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
75. 
A project procurement risk assessment of KPID was undertaken and acknowledged that the 
EA  does  not  have  a  dedicated  procurement  section  with  a  permanent  cadre  of  procurement 
practitioners. The procurement officials are not familiar with conducting procurement activity under 
ADB procurement guidelines. However, they are familiar with applying the provincial procurement 
rules  only.  The  assessment  further  concluded  the  project  procurement  risk  as  High.  However,  in 
fully  staffed  with 
order 
professionals/specialist  will  be  established  for  the  project  and  all  contracts  under  ICB  and  NCB 
procurement methods will be subject to prior review by ADB. In addition, ADB will engage upfront 
one individual consultant (procurement) to support the EA/IAs in capacity building in procurement. 
risk  a  project  management  office 
to  mitigate 
(PMO) 
the 
76. 
 The procurement of goods, works and consultant selection will be carried out in accordance 
with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (April 2015, as amended from time to time) and the Guidelines 
on  the  Use  of  Consultants  (March  2013,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).  The  initial  procurement 
plan has been prepared for the project and is set out in Part B (below) of this section. It indicates 
contract  packages  for  goods,  works  and  consulting  service  contract  packages  including  review 
requirements. ADB bidding document for large works will be used  for the only ICB contract. ADB 
bidding  document  for  small  works  will  be  used  for  all  NCB  contracts.  One  consulting  services 
package of project implementation consultants (PICs) valuing $5.24 million will be procured through 
QCBS (90:10) method as advance contracting using retroactive financing. 
C. 
Procurement Plan 
Basic Data 
Project Name: Pehur High Level Canal Extension Project (PHLCEP) 
Project Number: 47024-001 
Country:  PAKISTAN  
Project Procurement Classification: B 
Procurement Risk: High 
Project Financing Amount: $ 96.60 million  
   ADB Financing: $ 86.40 million  
Approval Number: 
Executing  Agency:  KPP 
Department (KPID) 
Implementing  Agency:  KPP 
Department, KPP Agriculture Department 
Project Closing Date: 30 June 2022  
Irrigation 
Irrigation 
38 
   Cofinancing (ADB Administered): NA 
   Non-ADB Financing: $ 10.20 milliona 
Date of First Procurement Plan : 17 October 2016 
Date  of 
October 2016 
this  Procurement  Plan:  17 
a  The government’s contribution of $8.99 million by way of taxes and duties in the form of cash and of $1.21 million 
for part of land acquisition and resettlement cost. In addition, the beneficiaries’ in-kind contribution is estimated at 
$0.35 million through provision of unskilled labor force. 
1. 
Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan 
a. 
Procurement  and Consulting Methods and Thresholds 
Except  as  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following 
77. 
process thresholds shall apply to procurement of goods and works.  
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Method 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) for Works  $15,000,000 
International Competitive Bidding for Goods 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) for Works 
National Competitive Bidding for Goods 
Shopping for Works 
Shopping for Goods 
Comments 
Prior Review 
$2,000,000 
Prior Review 
Beneath that stated for ICB, Works  Prior Review 
Beneath that stated for ICB, Goods  Prior Review 
Below $100,000 
Below $100,000 
Threshold 
Method 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) 
Individual Consultant Selection (ICS) 
(90:10) Prior Review (International) 
Comments 
Consulting Services 
b. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More 
The following table lists goods and works contracts for which the procurement activity is 
78. 
either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
ICB-01 
Civil and 
Mechanical 
Works of 
Pehur High 
Level Canal  
Extension 
(PHLCE) 
NCB-01  Construction 
of Water 
Courses and 
Farm turnouts 
Estimated 
Value 
($ M)a 
45.45 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date  
Comments 
ICB 
Prior 
1S2E 
Q2/2017 
3.53b 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q2/2018 
ADB bidding 
documents for 
large works 
ADB bidding 
documents for 
small works 
a include duties and taxes and not include contingencies. 
b include farmers’ in-kind contribution equivalent to estimated $0.35 million. 
39 
c. 
Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost $100,000 or More 
The following table lists consulting services contracts for which the recruitment activity is 
79. 
either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
PIC-1 
Project 
Implementation 
Consultantsa 
Estimated 
Value  
($ M)b 
5.24 
Recruitment  
Method 
QCBS 
(90:10) 
Review
Advertisement  
Date 
Type of 
Proposal 
Comments 
Prior 
Q2/2016 
FTP 
International 
a  ADB  will  take  responsibility  for  selecting  the  project  implementation  consultant  on  behalf  of  the  EA  while  the  EA 
retains the responsibility for negotiating and signing the contract with the consultant, issuing the notice to proceed, 
and supervising the consultant’s services.   
b Include duties and taxes and not include contingencies. 
d. 
Goods  and  Works  Contracts  Estimated  to  Cost  Less  than  $1  Million  and 
Consulting Services Contracts Less than $100,000 (Smaller Value Contracts) 
The following table groups smaller-value goods, works and consulting services contracts 
80. 
for which the activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Estimated 
Value 
($ M)a 
1.43 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
1 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date  
Comment 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q1/2018 
Goods and Works 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
NCB-02  Supply and 
Installation 
of high 
efficiency 
irrigation 
systems 
NCB-03  Precise 
Land 
Leveling 
0.1 
1 
1 
1 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q1/2018 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q4/2016 
Shopping 
Post 
RFQ 
Q4/2016 
NCB-04  Vehicles 
0.250 
Shop-01  Office 
0.07 
Renovation 
Shop-02  Agricultural 
0.130 
multiple 
shopping 
Post  
RFQ 
Q1/2018 
inputs 
(commoditi
es) 
Shop-03  Equipment/
0.124 
multiple 
shopping 
Post 
RFQ 
Q4/2016 
Furniture 
a include duties and taxes and not include contingencies. 
ADB 
bidding 
documen
ts for 
Goods 
ADB 
bidding 
documen
ts 
ADB 
bidding 
documen
ts 
ADB 
RFQ 
template 
ADB 
RFQ 
template 
ADB 
RFQ 
template 
40 
D. 
Consultant’s Terms of Reference 
Detailed terms of reference for the project implementation consultant are provided in Annex 
81. 
1.   
A. 
Environmental Safeguard 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
82. 
The  project  is  categorized  A  for  environment.  The  KPID  shall  ensure  that  the  design, 
construction, operation and maintenance of project’s facilities to be financed under the PHLCE are 
carried out in accordance with Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS, 
2009), the applicable laws and regulations in Pakistan, and the environmental impact assessment 
(EIA)  and  its  environmental  management  plan  (EMP).  KPID  shall  ensure  that  potential  adverse 
environmental impacts arising from the project are minimized by implementing all the mitigation and 
monitoring measures in the EMP. KPID shall ensure that:  
(i)  The EMP is to be updated into a site specific EMP based on surveys of the alignment 
once the detailed design is available and prior to the implementation of civil works;  
(ii)  KPID has sufficient resources to implement and record the implementation of the EMP;  
(iii)  The  contractor  prepares  and  submits  to  KPID  and  ADB  a  site  specific  environmental 
management plan (SSEMP) prior to commencing any construction works. The SSEMP 
will be tailored to the environmental impacts of the site and the specific project activities 
as planned by the contractor; 
(iv)  The  contractor  is  responsible  for  the  day  to  day  implementation  of  the  SSEMP  with 
KPID’s PMU Environment Specialists visiting regularly to confirm implementation; 
(v)  KPID, with the help of a construction supervision consultant, will submit to ADB semi-
annual environmental reports for the project within 1 month of the close of each half of 
the calendar year during project implementation, and the reports will include a review of 
the  progress  on  environmental  measures  in  the  EIA  and  EMP,  monitoring  of  such 
measures, problems encountered and remedial measures taken;  
(vi)  The  detailed  engineering  design  and  civil  works  and  other  contracts  for  the  project 
incorporate applicable environmental measures identified in the EIA and the EMP; 
(vii)  The  KPID  PMU  will  establish  and  implement  the  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism, 
(GRM) as described in the EIA, prior to construction. All complaints will be recorded in 
the complaints register on site and will be addressed through the procedures set up in 
the GRM; 
83. 
Should  any  change  in  scope  take  place  KPID  will  inform  ADB  and  a  due  diligence  on 
environment will be carried out.  Should any additional study be required it will be conducted, or the 
EIA updated as required by SPS 2009.  If there are any unanticipated environmental impacts, they 
would be reviewed and a corrective action plan will be prepared by the contractor for implementation 
under  the  supervision  of  KPID  PMU’s  Environment  Specialist  with  assistance,  as  required  by  the 
supervision consultant.   
B. 
Social Safeguards 
84. 
The project is categorized A for involuntary resettlement. A draft LARP has been approved 
by  ADB  and  disclosed. The  KPID  shall  ensure that  the draft  LARP  will  be  updated  based  on the 
detailed design and approved final alignment in accordance with Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) 
Involuntary  Resettlement  Safeguards,  and  the  Pakistan  Land  Acquisition  Act,  following  the 
41 
notification under Section 4 of the LAA. KPID shall ensure that the updated LARP will not involve 
any lowering of the standards and entitlements provided in the approved draft LARP and is based 
on an updated assessment of impacts, follow-up meaningful consultation with DPs, and valuation of 
affected assets. 
85. 
Preparation  and  disclosure  of  a  final/  implementation-ready  LARP  approved  by  ADB  and 
reflecting final impacts, DP list and official compensation rates; and (b) mobilization of the External 
Resettlement Monitor (ERM) are conditions for the civil works contract award. Likewise, KPID will 
ensure that notice-to-proceed with civil works in the irrigation section with LAR impacts will only be 
issued after full implementation of the compensation program described in the final LARP including 
the full delivery of compensation to the DPs and (b) preparation/submission of a compliance report 
by  the  external  resettlement  monitor.  The  PMO  will  be  responsible  for  the  preparation, 
implementation  and  monitoring  of  the  final  LARP,  with  support  from  its  Project  Implementation. 
Specifically, the PMO will: 
(i)  Coordinate  with  the  BOR  in  the  conduct  of  detailed  measurement  surveys  (DMS)  and 
oversee the conduct census of all DPs and socioeconomic surveys; 
(ii)  Ensure that calculation of compensation and assistance follows the policy provisions in the 
LARP; 
(iii)  Conduct of regular consultations with DPs in preparing and implementing the LARP; 
(iv)  Prepare  the  final  LARP  for  ADB  review,  including  any  subsequent  update  or  corrective 
actions in case of emerging or unforeseen impacts, as required; 
(v)  Disclose  the  final  LARP  to  the  DPs  after  translating  the  summary  of  LARP  in  local 
language (Urdu/ Pashtu) to make it more understandable. 
(vi)  Ensure the formation and orientation of the Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) for the 
community complaints resolution, and help facilitate the resolution of grievances; 
(vii) Effectively implement the LARP, including the livelihood restoration activities;  
(viii) Explore the possibility and facilitate land swapping and land consolidation to assist DPs in 
improving the viability of their remaining plots; 
(ix)  Ensure the submission of semi-annual internal and external monitoring reports to ADB for 
review  and  disclosure  and  follow-up  on  issues  noted  and  recommendations  in  the 
monitoring reports; 
(x)  Inform ADB of any change in scope and alignment that would involve a change in the land 
acquisition and resettlement impacts or any emerging LAR issues during construction and 
propose the necessary corrective actions for ADB review; 
The project is screened as category C project for indigenous peoples planning requirement 
86. 
under  SPS  2009.  KPID  shall  ensure  that  project  does  not  have  any  indigenous  peoples’  impacts 
within  the  meaning  of  the  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009).  And  if  during  design  review  or 
implementation, any change to the scope, location with prior approval of ADB, causes to have any 
such  impacts,  KPID  shall  take  all  steps  required  to  ensure  that  the  Project  complies  with  the 
applicable laws and regulations of Pakistan and the ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement 2009.  
C. 
Prohibited Investment Activities 
Pursuant  to  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009)  (SPS),17 ADB  funds  may  not  be 
86. 
applied  to  the  activities  described  on  the  ADB  Prohibited  Investment  Activities  List  set  forth  at 
Appendix 5 of the SPS. EAs will ensure that the Project is in compliance with applicable national 
17 Available at: http://www.adb.org/documents/safeguard-policy-statement. 
42 
laws and regulations and will apply the prohibited investment activities list to the Project financed by 
ADB. 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
Social  and  gender  dimensions  as  detailed  in  the  attached  summary  of  social  and  poverty 
87. 
reduction (Attachment 9) will include (i) preference to local labour during construction work through 
instructions  in  contracts  and  bidding  documents;  (ii)  participation  of  small  farmers  and  access  to 
project benefits will be ensured through the formation of WUAs, membership criteria of WUAs will 
ensure  equal  opportunity  for  the  small  farmers  to  participate.  WUAs  will  also  ensure  equitable 
distribution of water and that the concerns of marginalized farmers are addressed; (iii) to address 
the  mobility  concerns  of  the  local  people  design  canal  construction  work  will  include  features  like 
foot and road bridges etc.; and (iv) gender action plan (in Table 15) ensuring women’s participation 
and  benefits  has  also  been  developed.  All  these  provisions  will  be  tracked  through  the  project’s 
monitoring and evaluation system.  
88. 
Targets/indicators highlighted in the GAP and other social/pro-poor provisions will be part of 
project’s regular monitoring and reporting systems developed by PMO. Deputy Director Social and 
Gender hired at PMO will be responsible for the implementation of GAP, monitoring and reporting 
against  social  and  gender  targets.  Female  Extension  Workers  hired  at  the  PIO  level  will  work  in 
close coordination with the Deputy Director Social and Gender and will be responsible for imparting 
training to female farmers and documenting the social and gender impacts. Deputy Director Social 
and Gender will also assist in conducting consultations and interaction with the civil society and local 
community organizations as and when required. 
Project Outputs 
Actions 
Indicators 
Timeline  Responsibility 
Table 15: Gender Action Plan 
Output 1: 
Available water 
for agriculture-
use increased 
in project areas 
Conduct separate consultations 
with women groups  during the 
design stage of the sub-projects to 
address their concerns (related to 
mobility, privacy, access to water 
and other gender impacts) 
Output 2: 
Water-use skill 
and farm 
management 
capacity 
increased in 
project areas 
Impart skill training to women 
farmers in improved agriculture 
techniques for increased food 
security and income generation. 
For example: 
Off-season vegetables; 
kitchen gardening, tunnel farming 
and;  
advance agriculture technologies 
Provide free inputs like plants,  
seeds  and fertilizers to women for 
practicing their skills   
Hire female staff (as extension 
workers/trainers) at PIO for 
imparting training to women 
Conduct pre and post training 
20% of the 
total 
consultations 
are carried out 
with women 
groups 
One Over 
2,500 
households 
(about 30% of 
total estimated 
number of 
beneficial 
households) 
trained in 
profitable 
farming 
system with at 
least 10% 
women 
beneficiaries ( 
baseline 2014: 
0) 
Yr-I-II 
Yr II-V 
Director Social 
Safeguards and 
Deputy Direction 
Social and 
Gender at PMO 
On-farm 
agriculture 
extension 
Department with 
the support of 
Deputy Director 
Social and 
Gender at PMO  
and female 
extension 
workers at PIO 
assessments to assess the level of 
knowledge and skills of women  
Document case studies on good 
practices and gender impacts 
Gender –
inclusive 
resettlement  
land  
acquisition and 
compensation 
plans  
Establishment 
of Project 
Management 
Office 
Facilitate women specifically 
(elderly, single and women without 
male support) in preparation of 
requisites for compensation 
Open bank accounts of women in 
their name and ensure 
transparency of transferring 
compensation allowance 
Provide priority to vulnerable 
women/women headed families in 
compensation provision 
Ensure that women are aware 
about the amount of compensation 
provisions 
Include gender disaggregated data 
in the monitoring and evaluation 
system  
Ensure that women specific 
concerns and priorities are 
considered in resettlement process. 
 Placement of Deputy Director 
Social and Gender at  PMO   
Incorporate gender-disaggregated 
data and reporting in PPMS  
Encourage employment 
opportunities for women in the 
project 
     43 
Yr I-II 
Social 
Safeguards Unit 
established at 
PMO with the 
support of 
Deputy Director 
Social and 
Gender and 
Female Social 
Organizers 
Yr I-V 
EAs and IAs 
Two female 
extension 
workers hired 
to impart 
training to 
women 
farmers 
(baseline: 0)  
Case studies 
prepared on 
good practices 
and gender 
impacts 
No. of women 
facilitated (in 
preparing 
documents 
such as ID 
cards and 
opening of 
bank accounts 
etc.) 
One Deputy 
Director Social 
and gender 
hired in PMO 
Project reports 
include 
updates on 
GAP indicators 
No. of women 
staff hired by 
the project 
44        
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
89. 
The EA will be responsible for monitoring project progress and evaluating project outputs. 
Monitoring and evaluation shall be in accordance with the design and monitoring framework (DMF) 
and EA will be responsible for regular reporting both to the Project Steering Committee and ADB.  
A. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Table 16: Design and Monitoring Framework 
Impacts the Project is Aligned with: Irrigated agriculture area increased in KPP, and food security ensured for the 
decade 2010–2020 in KPP.a 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Increased agricultural 
production in the 
project areas 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
By December 2023: 
a. Cropping intensities increased to 
151% (2014 baseline: 52%) in total 
project area of over 8,727 ha 
Outputs 
1. Available 
agricultural water in 
project areas 
increased 
2. Water-use skill and 
farm management 
capacity improved in 
project areas 
b. Crop yield increased by 222% 
(maize), 139% (oilseeds), 145% 
(rapes and mustard), and 166% 
(wheat) (2014 baseline)b in total 
command area 
By December 2022: 
1a. Water availability in IAA (7,411 
ha) increased to 119 million m3 per 
year (2014 baseline: 51 million m3)c 
1b. Water availability in the JBMA 
(1,316 ha) increased to 20 million m3 
per year (2014 baseline: 9 million 
m3)c 
1c. M&E system using satellite 
remote-sensing technology to assess 
irrigation efficiency, crop growing, 
water productivity, and abiana fully 
operational (2014 baseline: 0) 
1d. A guideline and sustainable plan 
for PHLCE O&M fully operational 
(2014 baseline: 0) 
By December 2022, 
2a. 100% of project areas fully 
irrigated (2014 baseline: 0%) 
2b. 100% of on-farm irrigation canals 
fully operated and maintained by 
WUAs (2014 baseline: 0%) 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
a.–b. KPAD district 
agricultural 
statistics through 
PMO 
complemented by 
M&E systems 
Risks 
Increases in 
agricultural water 
demand and flood 
risk due to climate 
change impact.  
1a.–c. PMO and 
KPID data 
2a.–d. Project 
implementation 
office through PMO 
and KPAD data 
Internal control for 
non-salary 
expenditure is less 
effective, internal 
audit is not 
effective, and lack 
of use of 
professional audit 
methods and 
compliance with 
international 
standards for 
internal audit.  
Lack of experience 
of agency in 
international 
competitive 
bidding contracts. 
No dedicated 
procurement unit 
and insufficient 
staff, and no fully 
functional PMO. 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
Risks 
45 
2c. Over 4,000 households (about 
50% of total estimated number of 
beneficial households) trained in 
improved water-use skills (2014 
baseline: 0) 
2d. Over 2,500 households (about 
30% of total estimated number of 
beneficial households) trained in 
profitable farming system with at 
least 10% women beneficiaries 
(2014 baseline: 0) 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1. Available agricultural water project areas increased 
1.1  Construct JBMA irrigation system (Q1 2018–Q3 2019). 
1.2  Construct IAA irrigation system (Q1 2018–Q4 2020). 
1.3  Develop M&E system for JBMA and IAA irrigation system (Q2 2021). 
1.4  Complete training of KPID and KPAD staff on the use of the M&E system (Q4 2021). 
1.5  Complete PHLCE asset inventory (Q4 2020). 
1.6  Develop a guideline and sustainable plan for PHLCE O&M (Q2 2021). 
1.7  Complete training to KPID on the use of the rule and O&M plan (Q4 2022). 
2. Water-use skill and farm management capacity improved in project areas 
2.1  Establish 20 WUAs in JBMA (Q1 2018–Q1 2019). 
2.2  Establish 86 WUAs in IAA (Q1 2019–Q3 2020). 
2.3  Construct 20 watercourses with farmers’ participation in JBMA (Q4 2018–Q3 2019). 
2.4  Construct 86 watercourses with farmers’ participation in IAA (Q1 2019–Q4 2020). 
2.5  Undertake WUAs training for efficient O&M and their organizations (Q1 2018–Q4 2022). 
2.6  Establish 100 demonstration plots (Q3 2019–Q4 2020). 
2.7  Conduct farmer field schools and farmers’ training in demonstration plots (Q3 2019–Q4 2022). 
Procurement management 
3.1 Mobilization of the project implementation consultant (Q1 2017). 
3.2 Complete detailed engineering design for the major civil works contract (Q3 2017). 
3.3 Initiation of the bid process of the major civil works contract (Q3 2017). 
3.4 Contracts for the major civil works contract (Q1 2018). 
Inputs:  Asian  Development  Bank:  (ordinary  capital  resources  loan)  $86.405  million,  Government: 
$10.198 million Beneficiaries: $0.353 million (in-kind) 
Assumptions for Partner Financing not applicable 
ha  =  hectare,  IAA  =  Indus  and  Ambar  area,  JBMA  =  Janda  Boka–Malikabad  area,  KPAD  =  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa 
Agriculture Department, KPID = Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Irrigation Department, M&E = monitoring and evaluation, m3 = 
cubic  meter,  O&M  =  operation  and  maintenance,  PHLCE  =  Pehur  High  Level  Canal  Extension,  PMO  =  project 
management office, Q = quarter, t = ton, WUA = water users’ association. 
a  Government of KPP. 2009. Comprehensive Development Strategy 2010–2017. Peshawar. 
b  Wheat (1.384 t/ha), maize (1.058 t/ha), oilseeds: karif season (1.436 t/ha), and rapes and mustard (0.768 t/ha) in 
2014. 
c  Baseline data include effective rainfall only. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
46        
B. 
Monitoring 
90. 
Project Performance Monitoring. The EA will develop comprehensive project performance 
monitoring  system  and  closely  monitor  the  progress  of  project  activities,  outputs,  and  outcomes 
based on the project performance monitoring system in accordance with the DMF. In particular, the 
project performance monitoring system will assess the following outputs and indicators (i) progress 
of planned activities according to the milestones; (i) progress in achieving each project output and 
project outcome according to the performance targets and indicators indicated in the DMF, and (iii) 
social and economic benefits with focus on the poor and women.  
Information  and  data  gathered  during  project  implementation  period  will  be  analyzed  and 
91. 
measured against the targets, and published regularly on the project website.  
(i) 
(ii) 
Submit  quarterly  progress  reports,  covering  progress  and  achievements  during 
the period against millstones and indicators in the DMF; and 
Produce  a  project  completion  report  at  the  last  year  of  project  implementation, 
outlining the achievements and lessons learned.  
92. 
All  project  assurances  including  policy,  legal,  financial,  economic,  physical,  environmental, 
gender, and other safeguard measures will be monitored through a quarterly progress reports, and 
twice a year, during ADB loan review missions. 
93. 
ADB will also monitor the progress of achievement of each output and outcome based on 
performance  indicators  with  targets,  and  each  activity  based  on  milestones  indicated  in  the  DMF 
through a project management information system (i.e., e-Ops).   
94. 
Compliance monitoring. All project assurances including policy, legal, financial, economic, 
physical, environmental, gender, and other safeguard measures will be monitored through quarterly 
progress reports and twice a year during ADB loan review missions.  
95. 
Safeguards monitoring. The PMO will submit to ADB an Environmental monitoring report 
that will provide an overview of the implementation of the EMP and the Site Specific EMP. The PMO 
environment  specialist  (deputy  director)  will  prepare  the  biannual  environmental  monitoring  report 
with  the  assistance  of  the  national  and  international  Environmental  Specialists  of  the  PMO.  The 
consultants will supervise functioning of the project’s Environmental Management System including 
implementation of the EMP and inputs into quarterly progress reports that will be submitted to ADB. 
The contractor’s environment specialist will be responsible for the day to day implementation of the 
EMP  and  SSEMP  in  the  field,  the  contractor  will  prepare  monthly  environmental  reports  for 
submission to the PMO environment deputy director.     
The PMO Deputy for Resettlement will oversee the internal resettlement monitoring of the 
96. 
LARP  implementation,  with  support  from  the  PIC  Safeguards  Team.    External  resettlement 
monitoring  and  compliance  reporting  will  be  conducted  by  an  independent  external  monitoring 
agency  (EMA)  or  individual  external  monitor  to  be  hired  by  the  PMO.  Internal  and  external 
resettlement  monitoring  reports  will  be  submitted  on  a  semi-annual  basis  to  ADB  for  review  and 
disclosure.  All  monitoring  reports  will  also  be  disclosed  to  the  displaced  persons  including  the 
preparation of corrective action plan (s).   
Gender  and  social  dimensions  monitoring.  The  Deputy  Director  Social  and  Gender  at 
97. 
the PMO will be responsible for monitoring the implementation of the gender action plan and for the 
preparation of the semi-annual monitoring reports that will be submitted to ADB.  
47 
C. 
Evaluation 
98. 
Inception  Mission.  ADB  will  conduct  an  inception  mission  within  three  months  of  loan 
signing  to  assess  project  readiness  and  implementation  arrangements  including  establishment  of 
PMO,  PIOs,  opening  of  an  imprest  account,  progress  of  recruitment  of  three  consulting  services, 
status of the development of the project performance monitoring system, and progress of advance 
procurement actions.  
Review  Mission.  ADB  will  field  review  missions  at  least  once  a  year  to  (i)  assess  the 
99. 
progress  of  project  activities  and  outputs  and  effectiveness  of  implementation  arrangements,  (ii) 
monitor  the  implementation  of  GAP  and  safeguard  compliance  with  ADB  Safeguard  Policy 
Statement (2009), (iii) review compliance with loan agreements and related matters, (iv) follow up on 
decisions  and  actions  agreed  during  previous  review  missions,  and  (v)  resolve  any  project 
implementation issues that may arise.  
100.  Midterm  Review  Mission. ADB will conduct a midterm review in the third year of project 
implementation.  The  midterm  review  will  (i)  assess  the  project  performance  and  achievement 
against targets and milestones in the DMF; (ii) review the initial outcomes, benefits, and impact of 
the  project,  and  (iii)  identify  gaps,  if  any,  and  recommend  necessary  changes  to  strengthen 
implementation arrangements or modify project design.   
101.  Project  Completion  Review  Mission.  ADB  will  field  a  project  completion  review  mission 
upon  physical  completion  of  the  project  to  commence  preparation  of  ADB’s  project  completion 
report.  The  mission  will  (i)  assess  the  project  performance  against  all  targets,  indicators,  and 
benchmarks (including any revised at the midterm review); (ii) evaluate initial benefits and outcome 
of the project across outputs, and (iii) identify any incomplete activities and agree on the necessary 
actions.  
D. 
Reporting  
102.  The  EA  through  the  PMO  will  submit  to  ADB  the  following  reports:  (i)  quarterly  progress 
reports  in  a  format  consistent  with  ADB's  standards;  (ii)  consolidated  annual  reports  including  (a) 
progress  achieved  by  output  as  measured  through  the  indicator's  performance  targets,  (b)  key 
implementation  issues  and  solutions;  (c)  updated  procurement  plan,  (d)  progress  of  the  gender 
action  plan;  (e)  issues  concerning  environment  and  social  safeguards;  and  (f)  updated 
implementation plan for next the 12 months.  
103.  The  EA,  through  the  PMO  shall  submit  a  government’s  project  completion  report  within  6 
months  of  physical  completion  of  the  project.  The  government’s  project  completion  report  will 
evaluate the performance and achievements of the project against the indicators, expected benefits, 
and outcome, and should include information on (i) project implementation, and (ii) the use of loan 
fund to ADB.18   
E. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
104.  Project  information  will  be  strategically  disseminated  through  media  at  main  milestones 
including loan signing, contract awards and project completion. Grievance redress mechanism will 
be established at the PMO, by phone and email, and through public consultation events. 
18 Project  completion  report  format  is  available  at:  http://www.adb.org/Consulting/consultants-toolkits/PCR-Public-
Sector-Landscape.rar. 
48        
Table 17: ADB Public Communications Strategy 
Project Documents 
Project data sheet (PDS) 
Means of 
Communication 
ADB’s website 
Responsible 
Party 
ADB 
Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Draft Land Acquisition and 
Resettlement Plan 
ADB’s website 
brochures 
ADB 
Final Land Acquisition and 
Resettlement Plan 
ADB’s website 
brochures 
ADB 
KPID 
Reports and 
Recommendations of the 
President 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Legal Agreement 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Initial Poverty and Social 
Assessment 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Summary of Poverty 
Reduction and Social 
Strategy 
Project  Administration 
Memorandum 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Social and Environmental 
Safeguard Monitoring Reports 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Audited project financial 
statements and the auditors’ 
report 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Project Completion Report 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Evaluation Report 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Frequency
Audience(s)
General Public 
Initial PDS posted on the 
website no later than two 
weeks after approval of 
the concept paper; 
updated at least twice a 
year 
Post fact-finding mission 
and 120 days before 
Board Approval of the 
project  
Post fact-finding mission  General Public, 
project-affected 
people in particular 
General Public 
Project-affected 
people 
General Public 
General Public, 
project-affected 
people in particular 
After detailed design and 
approval by ADB 
Posted on the website 
within two weeks of 
Board approval of the 
loan 
Within two weeks of loan 
signing (early disclosure 
unless Borrower agrees 
to)  
within 2 weeks of 
approval of Concept 
Paper 
Within two weeks of loan 
signing (early disclosure 
unless Borrower agrees 
to)  
Posted on the website 
within two weeks of 
Board approval of the 
loan 
Within 1 month after 
each 6 month monitoring 
period 
No later than 14 
calendar days of ADB’s 
confirmation of their 
acceptability 
Within two weeks of 
circulation to the Board 
for information 
Within two weeks of 
circulation to 
Management and the 
Board 
General Public 
General Public 
General Public  
General Public 
General Public, 
project-affected 
people in particular 
General Public 
General Public 
General Public 
49 
X.  Guidance Note to Develop Plan for Sustainable O&M of PHLCE 
A. 
GENERAL 
105.  The PHLCE system will require O&M arrangements with sustainable O&M plan and its 
operational  guideline.  The  Janda  Boka  canal  is  a  contour  canal  which  irrigates  area  to  its  left 
side. The Indus-Ambar canal mostly runs along the ridge line. Both systems are lined irrigation 
system  and  will  require  routine  maintenance  and  inspection  of  canal  lining  and  associated 
structures.  In  addition,  the  system  includes  syphons  and  cross-drainage  structures.  Proper 
inspection  and  maintenance  of  these  structures  and  performance  assessment  of  the  PHLCE 
system  will  need  to  be  carried  out  based  on  the  proper  asset  inventory  and  sustainable  O&M 
plan  and  its  guideline.  Moreover,  the  O&M  arrangements  need  to  incorporate  the  monitoring 
and  evaluation  (M&E)  system  to  be  developed  using  satellite  remote  sensing  technology  to 
assess irrigation performance, agriculture production, and abiana (water-use charges).  
B. 
MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY 
106.  Currently  two  modes  of  Irrigation  System  O&M  are  in  vogue  in  Pakistan:  (i)  Systems 
managed by Irrigation Department; and (ii) Systems managed by Farmer’s Organization under 
supervision  of  Area  Water  Board  and  the  Provincial  Irrigation  and  Drainage  Authority.  The 
above  systems  differ  in  institutional  aspects  of  operation  as  to  who  will  operate,  maintain  the 
system  and  who  will  collect  abiana.  However,  the  main  operational  requirements  for  the 
successful implementation of the irrigation project remain the same. In addition to the problems 
arising  from  the  security  situation,  the  main  operational  constraints  facing  O&M  of  water 
resources infrastructure in KPP are associated with lack of funding, inadequate cost recovery, 
capacity constraints, limited stakeholder participation, poor awareness and information. 
107.  The institutional arrangement for O&M of PHLCE is expected to be consistent with that 
of the adjoining PHLC irrigation System. It was originally planned in 1997-1998 to shift KPID’s 
responsibility  for  O&M  of  all  main  irrigation  and  drainage  schemes  to  the  newly  established 
North Western Frontier Province Irrigation and Drainage Authority. At the main canal level, self-
accounting Area Water Boards (AWB) was to be formed and Farmer Organizations (FOs) were 
to  be  formed  at  distributary/minor  canals  level.  It  was  agreed  that  initially  a  pilot  system 
approach  will  be  followed  and  based  on  its  success  the  system  would  be  extended  to  other 
areas.  In  KPP,  Swat  Canal  AWB  was  formed  while  FOs  were  to  manage  infrastructure  at 
distributary  and  minor  level.  However,  the  management  of  distributaries  and  minors  in  PHLC 
command  was  not  transferred  to  the  FOs  and  the  PHLC  is  operated  and  maintained  by  the 
Swabi Irrigation Circle of KPID.  
108. 
Irrigation  management  and  abiana  collection  was  transferred  to  6  distributaries.  The 
arrangement  did  not  prove  successful  and  the  performance  of  FOs  was  poor  due  to  lack  of 
training  and  capacity  building,  transforming  of  official  records,  poor  performance  of  FOs  in 
recovery  of  water  charges  and  maintenance  of  channels  under  their  jurisdiction  together  with 
limited  support  of  Government  in  empowering  the  FOs.  Due  to  these  reasons  the  model  of 
reforms  implemented  under  Frontier  Irrigation  and  Drainage  Authority  Act  1997  is  heading 
towards failure. Accordingly there is a need to revisit the original model and amend the same in 
consultation with KPID, farmer’s community and other stakeholders. 
 
50        
109.  As  per  Comprehensive  Development  study  (CDS)  the  minimum  requirements  for 
maintenance of the KPP irrigation system ranged between PRs600 million and PRs900 million 
per  year  in  the  five  years  prior  to  2008-2009.    The  budget  allocation  in  the  five  year  period 
varied  between  PRs160  million  and  PRs300  million.  Against  this,  the  abiana  collection  is 
reported to have ranged between PRs170 million to PRs205 million, which shows a big gap in 
O&M expenditure and revenue from abiana collection.19 Because of the shortfall in funding for 
routine  maintenance,  the  KPID  relies  on  funding  from  the  development  budget  for  large 
rehabilitation  projects,  to  rescue  the  infrastructure  from  disrepair.  This  is  an  unsustainable 
situation  and  the  gap  between  expenditure  on  O&M  and  revenue  collections  needs  to  be 
narrowed  down.  CDS  recognizes  that  this  is  not  usually  the  most  efficient  way  of  keeping  the 
system in operation. 
110.  The Swat Canal AWB is the only AWB in KPP established in 2000 for the O&M of the 
main irrigation and drainage schemes covering the irrigated area of 180,000 ha as a pilot case. 
Similarly, Swabi Irrigation Division was declared as pilot project in the jurisdiction of Swat Canal 
AWB Mardan. It was to become financially self-sufficient in about 7 years, which did not happen 
and Swat Canal AWB is financially and institutionally still dependent on the KPID. Depending on 
its  success,  other  AWBs  were  to  be  created.  The  chairman  of  the  Swat  Canal  AWB  is  the 
Superintending Engineer Northern Irrigation Circle Mardan of the KPID.  
111.  The performance of the FOs in terms of O&M of the irrigation system as well as revenue 
collection had been poor. The FOs were required to deposit 60% of the abiana with the AWB 
and retain 40% for O&M of the distributary canals, which did not happen. The six FOs had not 
deposited  65.37  %  of  the  AWB  share.  Also  the  FOs  did  not  carry  out  proper  O&M  of  their 
distributaries/minor canals. 
112.  The  KPID  is  also  responsible  for  the  collection  of  abiana  in  the  remaining  part  of  the 
province.  The  flat  rate  abiana  is  fixed  according  to  area;  PRs250/acre  for  food  crops  (wheat, 
maize  and  rice)  and  PRs300/acre  for  non-food  crops  (PRs  617.5/ha  for  food  crops  and 
PRs741/ha  for  non-food  crops).  As  per  CDS  total  assessment  value  increased  from  about 
PRs200 million in 2002-2003 to PRs341 million in 2007-2008, an increase of 20% in real terms. 
The actual collection of abiana has however varied from 50% to 60% of the assessed value. 
113.  Considering  above,  the  PHLCE  project  needs  to  be  managed  by  KPID  as  the  AWB  is 
not functioning well. Due to current weak capacity of existing FOs the construction and O&M of 
distributaries  and  minor  levels  of  the  PHLCE  also  need  to  be  executed  by  KPID  because  it  is 
unlikely that FO(s) can take up the responsibility of construction of distributary/minor canals and 
conduct  proper  O&M  of  newly  constructed  PHLCE  distributaries  and  minors.  Considering  the 
foregoing,  farmer’s  management  of  irrigation  system  is  not  envisaged  for  PHLCE  project. 
However,  farmers’  WUAs  will  be  formed  at  water  course  level  which  will  be  responsible  for 
participation in construction and maintenance of watercourses. Formation of these WUAs will be 
facilitated by KPAD (OFWM Directorate). The abiana will be collected by KPID and the WUAs 
will provide support in abiana collection. 
19 It  should  be  noted  that  collected  abiana  are  to  be  transferred  to  KPP  Revenue  Department  and  all  collected 
revenues from various sectors are redistributed to required expenditures including O&M budget allocation for KPP 
irrigation systems. 
51 
C. 
STAFFING REQUIREMENTS 
114.  Staff Requirements for KPID. KPID already has staff and an office place in the Swabi 
District  to  manage  irrigation  schemes  under  PHLC  and  Upper  Swat  Canal.  For  the  PHLCE 
project, following additional staff is envisaged under Executive Engineer Swabi Irrigation Circle. 
Table 18: Staff Requirement for irrigation Department 
Staff Category 
Estimated No. 
Executive Engineer Swabi 
Irrigation Circle (Existing post) 
SDO PHLCE 
SEN  I.Ambar 
SEN J.Boka 
SEN Mechanical 
Zilladar 
Partwari 
Beldar 
Gauge Readers 
Draftsman 
Clerk 
Assist. Revenue Clerk 
Driver 
Office Boy / Messenger 
SDO = Sub-Divisional Officer, SEN = Sub-Engineer. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
9 
15 
7 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
115.  Staff Requirement Watercourse Level. Watercourses are farmer’s property and would 
be maintained by famer’s themselves through WUAs.  
116.  Staff  Requirements  of  KPAD.  Field  studies  reveal  that  presently  limited  agriculture 
extension  services  are  available  in  the  district. The  un-irrigated  areas  are  rarely  visited  by  the 
extension  staff.  Therefore,  recommendations  are  made  to  enhance  agriculture  extension 
activities  as  soon  as  the  irrigated  agriculture  is  developed  in  the  PHLCE  command  area. 
Information  regarding  agricultural  research,  extension,  input  supply  centers  and  marketing 
facilities  accessible  to  the  farming  communities  in  the  project  area  have  been  collected.  It  is 
recommended to improve agriculture extension services for transfer of technology to the farming 
communities  especially  in  the  new  command  area  for  achieving  the  projected  agriculture 
production in command area. 
117.  The  executive  district  officer,  Agriculture,  with  the  help  of  district  directors  of  different 
fields  of  agriculture  is  responsible  for  managing  the  extension  activities  in  the  district.  The 
district  directors  are  responsible  at  district  level.  Other  specialists  provide  technical  guidance. 
Agriculture officer is responsible at Circle, while field assistant is responsible at Union Council 
level.  Estimated  staffing  required  for  mobilization  of  farmer’s  in  the  command  areas  and 
supervising construction of on farm works is proposed in the table below.  
 
 
 
 
52        
Table 19: Estimated Staffing for Agriculture Department  
Position 
Agricultural Extension 
Agriculture Officer 
Social Mobilizer  
Field Assistant  
Computer Operator  
Non-Technical Support Staff 
On Farm Water Management 
Water Management Officer 
Agriculture engineers 
Agronomist 
Social Mobilizers  
Sub Engineers 
Work Supervisors 
Non-Technical Support Staff 
Number 
of Staff 
1 
1 
3 
1 
Several 
1 
2 
1 
3 
3 
2 
Several 
118.  The agriculture officer will be a regular employee of the Agriculture Extension Services 
whereas the remaining staff will be recruited through Project Implementation Consultants (PIC). 
Similarly,  the  water  management  officer  will  be  a  regular  employee  of  the  OFWM  Directorate 
and the remaining staff will be recruited through the PIC out of the provisional sum for capacity 
building.  For the implementation phase, 30 person-months of input of each of above staff are 
estimated.  After  completion  of  project  implementation  the  Agriculture  Extension  Services  in 
KPAD will provide the extension services in the project Area. 
D. 
MAINTENANCE STANDARD 
119.  The KPID estimates the O&M requirements of different systems either on need basis or 
at  1.50%  of  the  project  cost.  However,  budgetary  releases  by  KPP  Finance  Department  for 
O&M are often less than the demands. Similar is the case with PHLC and the O&M allocations 
were  less  than  the  demand/requirement.  As  per  PC-1  for  PHLC  Project,  annual  O&M 
requirements  were  PRs10.5  million  for  PHLC  and  Topi  Area  at  1993  price  levels.  The  O&M 
budget releases for PHLC have varied from PRs7.8 million in 2005 to PRs8.60 million in 2015. 
In real terms the budget releases have significantly declined and are not adequate for desired 
level  of  O&M  of  the  System  while  it  was  confirmed  that  the  O&M  of  the  PHLC  has  been 
somewhat carried out with reasonable manner. Reasonable O&M with limited fund was realized 
mainly because of the canal design with less O&M requirement and considerably less sediment 
load along canals as source of water is Tarbela Dam compared to other systems where water is 
drawn from rivers. 
120.  Based  on  experience  of  consultants  engaged  under  the  project  preparatory  technical 
assistance, following maintenance standards are recommended. 
Embankment 
Inspection  
Embankment Slope, 
Repair at least 20% of service road up to designed level. 
Grade road surface 6 times per year.  
Prohibit public access to non-paved inspection roads (the Highway 
Department must provide alternate roads or take over maintenance). 
Repair at least 20% of total length up to design level. 
53 
Outside (includes 1.2 m 
of road shoulders). 
Embankment Slope, 
Inside 
Structures  
Lined Canals 
Valves and 
Accessories 
Cross Drainage 
Watercourses 
Fill all rain cuts before start of rainy season. 
Remove all trees and bushes, establish turfing where feasible and control 
weed growth to facilitate inspection of seepage on outside slopes. 
Cut weeds as necessary to allow visual inspection of canal prism. 
Remove all trees and bushes interfering the waterway 
Inspect all gates, gate hoists and steel accessories annually and repaint, 
repair or replace as needed during the canal closure period.  
Inspect lining and repair wherever required. Remove all weeds and bushes.  
Inspect all valves and accessories along pressure pipe for proper 
functioning. Repair or replace as needed during canal closure period 
Inspect all cross-drainage points of pressure-pipe and irrigation network 
during canal closure and also before the arrival of flood season. Repair 
damaged stone apron, check drainage culverts and remove obstructions 
where required before the next flood season. 
Inspect all watercourses during closure and perform maintenance of lining 
and repair any damages.  
121.  Based on above recommended maintenance standard, the maintenance cost of PHLCE 
excluding establishment cost (i.e. salary cost of O&M staff and other costs including running and 
maintenance  of  office  and  other  related  expenses)  is  estimated  at  about  Rs  53.2  million  ($ 
506,959) per year. After adding the cost of establishment the total O&M budget for PHLCE will 
be Rs 65.5 million ($623,810). 
E. 
COST RECOVERY 
122.  Cost recovery for O&M is desired to be based partially on abiana collection. However, it 
is recognized that the current rate of abiana is too low for meeting the O&M costs. Thus besides 
increasing the abiana, the government will need to further allocate sufficient funds for O&M of 
the  system  as  part  of  annual  budget  (i.e.  Annual  Development  Program).  As  provided  in  the 
loan  covenants  for  PHLCE  project,  adequate  funds  satisfactory  to  ADB  will  be  allocated  for 
O&M of the PHLCE irrigation system. The current estimate of the O&M requirement is $630,000 
in 2016. The EA assured to reassess and reconfirm the adequacy of the amount of O&M fund to 
be allocated by the KPP Government during the project implementation based on the estimated 
amount,  and  its  results  will  be  reviewed  by  ADB  during  its  midterm  review  mission.  The 
government of KPP also assured to fully implement O&M plan to be developed after completion 
of physical works. 
123.  The  current  level  of  recovery  of  abiana  in  PHLC  command  is  less  than  50%  of  the 
assessed amount. There is a need to increase the recovery of abiana. The increase in abiana 
collection is possible if KPID has full support of the Swabi district admiration. In Punjab during 
Development Policy Loan of the World Bank the abiana collection in non-FO areas for 2005-06 
was  47%  in  Kharif  and  58%  of  the  assessed  amount  in  Rabi.  On  intervention  by  the  Chief 
Secretary  who  instructed  the  district  administration  to  assist  in  abiana  collection  the  abiana 
collection performance in non FO areas improved to 70%20 of the assessed amount in 2006-07. 
While in the FO areas there was a downward trend. Collection performance of FOs for Rabi21 
2005 was 78%, and 79% in Kharif22 2006 which declined to 63.6% in Kharif 2007 and 63.56% 
for Rabi 2007-08 it was 59.02%.   
20 Ref Implementation Completion Report of Punjab Irrigation Sector Development Policy Loans December 25, 2010. 
21 Winter crop season (November – March). 
22 Summer crop season (April–October). 
54        
XI.  ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
124.  ADB  reserves  the  right  to  investigate,  directly  or  through  its  agents,  any  violations  of  the 
Anticorruption Policy relating to the project.23 All contracts financed by ADB shall include provisions 
specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the  executing 
agencies  and  all  project  contractors,  suppliers,  consultants  and  other  service  providers. 
Individuals/entities  on  ADB’s  anticorruption  debarment  list  are  ineligible  to  participate  in  ADB-
financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project.24 
125.  To  support  these  efforts,  relevant  provisions  are  included  in  the  loan  agreement  and  the 
bidding  documents  for  the  project.  The  Government,  through  KPID  will  ensure  that  the 
anticorruption  provisions  acceptable  to  ADB  are  included  in  all  bidding  documents  and  contracts 
including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of 
the  executing  agencies  and  all  contractors,  suppliers,  consultants,  and  other  service  providers  as 
they relate to the project.  
126.  The  EA  will  provide  updated  information  on  the  project  on  their  websites,  including 
information  on  the  performance  of  the  project,  business  opportunities,  bidding  process  and 
guidelines, outcome of biddings and summary progress reports of the project.  
XII. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
127.  People  who  are,  or  may  in  the  future  be,  adversely  affected  by  the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  accountability  mechanism  provides  an 
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects can 
voice,  and  seek  a  resolution  of  their  problems,  as  well  as  report  alleged  violations  of  ADB’s 
operational policies and procedures. Before submitting a complaint to the accountability mechanism, 
affected  people  should  make  a  good  faith  effort  to  solve  their  problems  by  working  with  the 
concerned ADB operations department. Only after doing that, and if they are still dissatisfied, should 
they approach the accountability mechanism.25 
XIII. 
RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
128.  All revisions/updates during course of implementation should be retained in this Section to 
provide a chronological history of changes to implemented arrangements recorded in the PAM. 
23 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf. 
24 ADB's Integrity Office web site is available at: http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp.   
25 For further information see: http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp. 
