Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 47084 
Grant Number: G0501 
September 2016 
Republic of Indonesia: Community-Focused 
Investments to Address Deforestation and Forest 
Degradation Project 
ADB 
BAPPENAS 
BPK 
BUPSHA 
CBFM 
CMEA 
DMF 
EA 
EARF 
FIP 
FMU/KPH 
GAP 
GHG 
GOI 
GRM 
IA 
IEE 
IP 
IPP 
M&E 
MHA 
MOEF 
MOF 
MRV 
KPHP 
PISU 
RAN GRK 
RAPBN 
REDD+ 
RF 
RKA 
RPKPHJP 
SFM 
UKL-UPL/ SPPL 
UPT 
WA 
ABBREVIATIONS 
-  Asian Development Bank 
-  National Development Planning Agency (Badan Perencanaan 
Pembangunan Nasional)  
-  BadanPengawasKeuangan 
-  Directorate of Business Development for Social Forestry and 
design and monitoring framework 
executing agency 
environmental assessment review framework 
Customary Forest 
- 
community-based forest management 
-  Coordinating Ministry of Economic Affairs 
- 
- 
- 
-  Forest Investment Program 
forest management unit  
- 
gender action plan 
- 
- 
greenhouse gas 
-  Government of Indonesia 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  monitoring and evaluation 
-  masyarakat hukum adat (customary communities) 
-  Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
-  Ministry of Finance 
-  monitoring, reporting and verification 
-  Directorate of Production Forest Management Unit 
- 
-  Rencana Aksi Nasional Gas Rumah Kaca (National Action Plan 
grievance redress mechanism 
implementing agency 
initial environmental examination 
indigenous peoples 
indigenous peoples plan 
project implementation supporting unit 
for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions) 
-  Rencan Apenda Patan Belanja Negara (Expenditure budget plan) 
- 
reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, 
conservation, sustainable management of forests, and forest 
carbon stock improvement 
resettlement framework 
- 
-  Rencanakegiatananggaran (Budget plan) 
- 
rencanapengelolaan KPH jangkapanjang (long term KPH 
management plan)  
sustainable forest management 
environmental management and monitoring plan 
technical implementing units 
- 
- 
- 
-  withdrawal application 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
CONTENTS 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Project Rationale, Location and Beneficiaries 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Project Readiness Activities 
Project Readiness Filters 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Project Organization Structure 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
Investment and Financing Plans 
Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds ($ Million) 
Cost Estimates by Financier ($ Million) 
Cost Estimates by Outputs ($ Million) 
Cost Estimates by Year ($ Million) 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
Fund Flow Diagram 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Advance Contracting 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
Consultant's Terms of Reference 
SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Environment 
Involuntary Resettlement 
Indigenous Peoples 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
1 
1 
4 
4 
10 
10 
11 
13 
14 
14 
16 
18 
19 
19 
20 
20 
20 
21 
21 
22 
23 
24 
24 
25 
26 
26 
28 
28 
28 
29 
35 
37 
37 
38 
39 
40 
45 
45 
47 
49 
D. 
E. 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
X. 
XI. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
A. 
B. 
Environment 
Affected Persons (AP) 
XII. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
ANNEXES 
49 
50 
52 
53 
53 
53 
55 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes 
the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with policies and procedures of the government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The PAM 
should  include  references  to  all  available  templates  and  instructions  either  through  links  to 
relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM. 
The Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MOEF) and its Directorates [(i) Directorate General 
of  Social  Forestry  and  Environmental  Partnerships  (Direktorat  Jenderal  Perhutanan  Sosialdan 
Kemitraan Lingkunganor - PSKL in Bahasa), (ii) Directorate of Business Development for Social 
Forestry  and  Customary  Forest  (Direktorat  Bina  Usaha  Perhutanan  Sosialdan  Hutan  Adat  - 
BUPSHA  in  Bahasa),  (iii)  Directorate  of  Environmental  Services  of  Conservation  Forest 
(Direktorat  Pemanfaatan  Jasa  Lingkungan  Hutan  Konservasi  -  PJLHK  in  Bahasa),  and  (iv) 
Directorate  of  Production  Forest  Management  Unit  (Direktorat  Kesatuan  Pengelolaan  Hutan 
Produksi  -  KPHP  in  Bahasa)]  are  wholly  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  this  Strategic 
Climate  Fund-financed  and  ADB-administered  project,  as  agreed  jointly  between  the  recipient 
and ADB, and in accordance with the policies and procedures of the government and ADB.ADB 
staff  is  responsible  for  supporting  implementation  including  compliance  by  MOEF,  PSKL, 
BUPSHA, PJLHK and KPHP of their obligations and responsibilities for project implementation 
in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures.  
At  grant  negotiations,  the  recipient  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  the  PAM  and  ensure  consistency 
with  the  grant  agreement.  Such  agreement  shall  be  reflected  in  the  minutes  of  the  grant 
negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the grant 
agreement, the provisions of the grant agreement shall prevail. 
After the President’s approval of the financing project, changes in implementation arrangements 
are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to relevant government and ADB administrative 
procedures  (including  the  Project  Administration  Instruction)  and  upon  such  approval  they  will 
be subsequently incorporated in the PAM.  
1 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. 
Project Rationale, Location and Beneficiaries 
1. 
Rationale 
1. 
Deforestation,  forest  degradation  and  peat  decomposition  account  for  up  to  15%  of 
greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions  globally  and  up  to  60%  in  Indonesia.1  Reducing  emissions 
from  deforestation  and  forest  degradation,  conservation  and  sustainable  management  of 
forests,  and  enhancement  of  forest  carbon  stocks  (REDD+)  is  critical  to  address  climate 
change.  As  forests  cover  70%  of  Indonesia’s  land  area,  the  Government  of  Indonesia’s  (the 
“government”) intended nationally determined contribution (INDC) to reduce GHG emissions by 
29%  from  business  as  usual  levels  by  2030  with  its  own  funds  and  by  41%  with  international 
support and can be achieved only by protecting its forests. Based on satellite imagery of 2009, 
forests accounted for 89.64 million hectares (68.4% of total area). However, it is estimated that 
an additional 8.07 million hectares of forests exist outside the land classified as forest, including 
peat land.2 The government pledged to protect the remaining natural forests and to restore all 
degraded forest land. 
2. 
West  Kalimantan  is  one  of  the  top  five  provinces  in  Indonesia  contributing  to  GHG 
emissions, with an average annual deforestation of 132,500 ha. The key drivers of deforestation 
and  forest  degradation  are:  (i)  commercial  logging;  (ii)  conversion  of  forest  to  agriculture; 
(iii) mining (primarily coal and gold); and (iv) uncontrolled fires. The underlying causes include: 
(i) inconsistent and inadequate spatial planning (due to limited accurate data to inform regional 
spatial  plans),  (ii)  unclear  land  ownership  and  land  conflicts,  and  (iii)  weak  governance 
(including  uncoordinated  sectoral  development  planning,  overlapping  permits  in  forest  areas, 
weak  spatial  planning  capacity,  limited  site  level  forest  management  oversight,  contradictory 
regulations  and  laws,  perverse  fiscal  incentives,  inadequate  law  enforcement,  and  lack  of 
inclusive and participatory processes).  
land  use  planning,  community-led 
3. 
The  project  is  part  of  Indonesia’s  forest  investment  plan  supported  by  the  Forest 
Investment  Program  (FIP)  and  will  complement  other  FIP  projects  administered  by  the  World 
Bank and International Finance Corporation (IFC) in addressing the drivers of deforestation and 
forest  degradation.  The  project  will  invest  in  community-focused  REDD+  activities  (e.g., 
community-based 
fire 
management, community-assisted forest regeneration and maintenance, and community-based 
ecotourism) in four forest management units (FMUs) in two districts (Kapuas Hulu and Sintang) 
of  West  Kalimantan  province.  The  project  will  strengthen  the  capacity  of  FMUs,  districts  and 
province, provide support to harmonize subnational policies for carbon stock enhancement with 
national  policies,  and  establish  non-monetary  incentives  and  implement  monitoring,  safeguard 
systems  and  equitable  and  gender-responsive  benefit  sharing  arrangements.  By  promoting 
sustainable  forest  management  (SFM),  the  project  will  not  only  reduce  GHG  emissions  and 
enhance  carbon  stocks  but  also  provide  livelihood  co-benefits  such  as  poverty  reduction, 
improved livelihood for forest communities, strengthened land management rights of customary 
forest  monitoring  and 
forest 
1  Ministry  of  Environment.  2010.  Jakarta,  Indonesia.  Land  Use,  Land  Use  Change  and  Forestry,  and  peat  lands 
accounted  for  as  much  as  60%  of  total  GHG  emissions  (1.4  GtCO2e)  of  Indonesia  in  2000.  The  National  Action 
Plan to reduce  GHG emissions (released as a Presidential decree no.  61/2011 in September 2011) projects that 
LULUCF  and  peatlands  would  account  for  53%  of  total  annual  GHG  emissions  by  2020  (3.0  GtCO2e).  Average 
annual forest loss varied from 1.87 million hectares (1990-1996) to 0.8 million hectares (2007-2014). 
2  Ministry of Forestry. 2011. Jakarta, Indonesia. 
2 
communities (Masyarakat Hukum Adat, MHA) over their adat lands, and enhanced conservation 
of biodiversity and ecosystem services. 
4. 
The  project  will  build  on  lessons  from  other  REDD+  initiatives  by  the  government  and 
development  partners  such  as  Australia, Germany,  Japan,  Norway,  and  USA,  and establish a 
sound base for results-based REDD+ payments, such as those provided by the Forest Carbon 
Partnership  Facility  (FCPF)  Carbon  Fund,  and  Green  Climate  Fund  (GCF).  The  project  will 
collaborate  with  these  initiatives  in  replicating  and  scaling  up  successful  experiences.  For 
example,  the  project  can  collaborate  with  GIZ  and  FCPF  in  improving  REDD+  Safeguards 
Information  System,  and  with  REDD+  support  facility  by  Denmark  and  Norway  in  providing 
advisory services for West Kalimantan province.   
The  project  will  contribute  to the  objectives  of the master  plan for  the  acceleration  and 
5. 
expansion  of  Indonesia’s  economic  development  2011–2025,  national  action  plan  to  reduce 
GHG  emissions,  national  REDD+  strategy3  and  West  Kalimantan’s  provincial  action  plan  to 
reduce emissions. The project’s objectives are closely  aligned with the National Medium Term 
Development  Plan  2015-2019,  Long-term  Forest  Management  Plan  2015-2019,  National 
REDD+  Strategy,  West  Kalimantan  REDD+  Strategy,  and  Heart  of  Borneo  National  Strategic 
Plan of Action 2015-2019.4 
The project is aligned with (i) the priorities of ADB’s  Midterm Review of Strategy 2020; 
6. 
(ii)  ADB’s  interim  country  partnership  strategy,  2015  for  Indonesia,  which  has  two  strategic 
pillars: (a) inclusive growth, and (b) environmental sustainability with climate change adaptation 
and  mitigation;  (iii)  ADB’s  climate  change  priorities;  and  (iv)  ADB’s  Operational  Plan  for 
Agriculture and Natural Resources, 2015–2020 which identifies management and resilience of 
natural resources as one priority. 5 
2. 
Location 
7. 
The  project  will  be  implemented  in  Sintang  and  Kapuas  Hulu  districts,  which  hold  the 
second  and  third  largest  state  forest  area  in  West  Kalimantan  province  (Figure  1).  Direct 
interventions  of  the  project  will  be  implemented  in  17  villages,  including  in  Betung  Kerihun 
National  Park.  In  addition,  community  based  forest  fire  management  activities  will  be 
implemented in Danau Sentarum National Park (Figure 2). In view of high potential for reducing 
GHG emissions and poverty, the province of West Kalimantan and the districts of Kapuas Hulu 
and Sintang have been selected as target areas. 
3  Indonesian REDD+ Task Force. 2012. REDD+ National Strategy, Jakarta, Indonesia. 
4 The Heart of Borneo (HOB) Initiative is a trans-boundary effort between Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia to enable 
conservation  and  sustainable  development  that  improves  the  welfare  of  those  living  on  the  island  of  Kalimantan 
while minimizing deforestation, forest degradation and the associated loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services. 
5  ADB. 2014. Midterm Review of Strategy 2020: Meeting the Challenges of a Transforming Asia and Pacific. Manila.; 
ADB.  2015.  Interim  Country  Partnership  Strategy:  Indonesia,  2015.  Manila.;  ADB.  2010.  Addressing  Climate 
Change in Asia and the Pacific: Priorities for Action. Manila.; ADB. 2015. The Operational Plan for Agriculture and 
Natural Resources: Promoting Sustainable Food Security in Asia and the Pacific in 2015–2020. Manila.  
Table 1: Villages in Kapuas Hulu and Sintang included in the Project 
3 
SN 
Village 
Kapuas Hulu District 
FMU Model Kapuas Hulu 
1  Banua Tengah 
2  BatuLintang 
3  Nanga Nyabau 
4  Padua Mendalam 
5  RantauPrapat 
6  SibauHilir 
7  Sibau Hulu 
8  Sungai Uluk Palin 
9  Tanjung Lasa 
FMU block XXI 
10  Bunut Hulu 
11  Nanga Tuan 
FMU National Park Betung Kerihun 
12  Bunjun Jaya 
13  Tanjung Lokang 
FMU National Park Danau Sentarum 
Sintang District 
FMU Model Sungai Meraka 
Population  Households  Area (ha) 
7,106 
9,608 
2,713 
574 
326 
365 
292 
422 
2,439 
1,090 
363 
574 
1,149 
838 
 691 
485 
100 
145 
100 
179 
89 
 610 
365 
157 
124 
322 
197 
199 
126 
119 
175 
143 
240 
381 
550 
1,399 
128 
385 
78 
75 
2,468 
 965 
4,070 
1,022 
248 
14  KayuDujung 
15  Radin Jaya 
16  Senangan Kecil 
17  Tanjung Sari 
Total 
1,898 
915 
442 
815 
13,678 
502 
214 
107 
199 
3,735 
66 
 123 
 21 
38 
7,354 
Figure 1: Project Location 
4 
3. 
Beneficiaries 
8. 
The project will focus on customary communities or MHA in four FMUs that rely on forest 
as  source  of  economic  benefits,  cultural  values  and  environmental  goods.  In  2013,  the 
percentage  of  people  living  under  the  poverty  line  in  Kapuas  Hulu  and  Sintang  districts  was 
higher than the provincial average (10.09% of poor people).6 There are two predominant groups 
of  MHA  communities,  the  Dayak  and  the  Melayu.  Most  Dayaks  live  in  villages  and  hamlets, 
while  the  Melayu  mostly  are  concentrated  along  rivers  and  around  Danau  Sentarum  National 
Park. These groups generally lack livelihood opportunities and resources that would allow them 
to escape from poverty. These groups suffer disproportionately from food insecurity, insecurity 
of land tenure, and low levels of education and organization. 
The  project  will  directly  benefit  about  10,000  villagers  participating  in  various  income 
9. 
generating  non-timber  forest  products  (NTFP)  activities  including  improved  production  and 
processing of wood and non-wood products. In addition, local FMU staff and provincial forestry 
staff  will  participate  in  communication  and  training  program  on  REDD+  processes,  and  in  the 
development of forest management plans. 
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
The impact will be environmental and livelihood benefits increased. The outcome will be 
10. 
REDD+ implementation in project areas of West Kalimantan province improved.  
C. 
Outputs 
11. 
Output  1:  Community-focused  and  gender  responsive  REDD+  pilot  projects  in 
Kapuas  Hulu  and  Sintang  districts  implemented.  The  project  will  implement  REDD+  pilot 
projects  in  17  villages  of  four  FMUs,  including  Betung  Kerihun  and  Danau  Sentarum  national 
parks. The focus is  on  conserving  areas  with  high carbon stocks  and restoring forest  cover  in 
areas with the  highest  potential for maximizing  climate  and  development  benefits from  carbon 
sequestration and soil, water, and biodiversity conservation in the project area. Activities include 
(i)  rehabilitating  6,000  ha  of  degraded  land  through  community-based  assisted  natural 
regeneration;  (ii)  bringing  1,880  ha  of  deforested  land  under  improved  community-based 
agroforestry  systems; 
(CBFM)  
agreements  between villages and FMUs  to  cover  about  17,000 ha;  (iv)  protecting  5,000 ha of 
natural  forests  directly  and  91,000  ha  indirectly  from  fire  via  community-based  forest  fire 
management; (v) strengthening REDD+ monitoring and safeguards information systems at the 
district level; (vi) developing spatial and business plans for FMUs, in line with CBFM plans; and 
(vii)  strengthening  the  capacity  of  FMU  staff  and  local  communities,  including  women,  on 
REDD+  safeguards,  SFM,  conflict  mediation,  and  payment  for  ecosystem  services.  The 
activities  will  reduce  pressure  on  forests  by  providing  alternative  livelihoods  to  local 
communities, contributing to their economic resilience. 
formulating  community-based 
forest  management 
(iii) 
6  BPS  Kapuas  Hulu.  2013.  Kabupaten  Kapuas  Hulu  dalamAngka  2013;  BPS  KabupatenSintang. 
KabupatenSintangdalamAngka 2013. 
Figure 2: REDD+ Pilot Activities per Village in Kapuas Hulu District 
5 
Figure 3: REDD+ Pilot Activities per Village in Sintang District 
6 
Project  implementation  will  ensure  strong  participation  and  consultation  with  local 
12. 
communities,  with  special  attention  to  women.  The  output  will  contribute  to  enhance  carbon 
sequestration  and  reduce  GHG  emissions.  It  includes  livelihood  activities  to  MHA  to  provide 
additional income contributing to their economic resilience and food security. 
1. 
Carbon Sequestration (Enhanced Removals) 
Agroforestry.  The  project  will  establish  agroforestry  systems  involving  coffee,  rubber, 
13. 
and gaharu (a native species from which incense is produced and is found to be a product with 
good  economic potential  in  the  project  area),  and  rubber  plantations  on 1,880 ha  of  degraded 
land.  Local  communities  often  extract  gaharu  from  natural  forests.  However,  due  to 
unsustainable  practices,  gaharu  trees  are  being  depleted  while  natural  forests  are  degraded 
simultaneously. To reduce the pressure on natural forest, the project will support pilots to grow 
gaharu in agroforestry system with coffee.  
Assisted  natural  regeneration.  Natural  forest  restoration  will  be  supported  in  about 
14. 
6,000 ha. Activities include identification of suitable areas to restore as per FMU management 
plan,  identification  of  native  species  to  be  planted,  establishment  of  nurseries  in  three  FMUs 
(Sungai  Merakai,  Kapuas  Hulu and  Block  XXI)  and  planting  of  about  1.5  million  native  plants. 
Nursery design will follow best local practices.  
2. 
Reducing Emissions 
15. 
Greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions  will  be  reduced  mainly  through  community-based 
forest  fire  management,  and  disseminating  fire-free  practices  for  honey  collection  and  fish 
drying.  
Community-based forest fire management. The project will support community-based 
16. 
forest  fire  management  in  the  Danau  Sentarum  National  Park  (seven  villages)  and  in  three 
villages  outside  the  park  in  Kapuas  Hulu  (Bunut  Hulu,  Nanga  Tuan,  and  Sibau  Hilir).  Even 
though there are fire patrol groups in the national park, due diligence revealed that the current 
level  of  support  is  not  adequate  to  control  forest  fires.  In  view  of  increasing  temperatures  in 
summer,  forest  fires  are  becoming  more  frequent.  The  project  will  support  activities  such  as 
training  of  patrol  groups,  providing  them  with  equipment  for  fire  suppression  and  using 
geospatial  systems  to  detect  fire.  Increasing  the  people  involved  in  patrolling  is  expected  to 
reduce  the  probability  of  fire.  The  project  will  also  strengthen  early  warning  system  for  forest 
fires.  Each  patrol  group  will  have  around  15  persons  and  cover  an  area  of  500  ha.  on  an 
average.  A  total  of  5,000  ha  of  forests  will  be  directly  protected  in  these  10  villages.  It  is 
important to note that forest fire management in these areas can indirectly protect nearly 91,000 
ha of national park.  
Honey production and fish drying. Traditionally local communities collect honey from 
17. 
honeycombs  in  the  forest  using  fire  and  smoke.  Often,  this  practice  leads  to  local  forest  fires 
leading to degradation of natural forests. In a few cases, small fires even turn into uncontrollable 
forest  fires.  To  reduce  such  fires,  the  project  will  promote  beekeeping  in  cages  and  honey 
harvesting techniques that do not use fire. Local communities commonly use fire for fish drying. 
Uncontrolled  forest  fires  occur  sometimes  due  to  such  practices.  The  project  will  support 
production of freshwater fish and disseminate new practices for drying fish that do not use fire.  
7 
3. 
Community Livelihood Interventions  
18. 
The project will support efforts to improve livelihood of local communities with a view to 
reduce pressure on natural forests and enhance ecosystem services. The community livelihood 
interventions are intended to serve as incentive for the villages to enter into forest management 
agreements  with  the  FMUs,  and  commit  the  communities  to  protect  the  forest.  Such  activities 
include  (i)  development  of  community-based  forest  management  (CBFM)  agreements,  (ii) 
production and commercialization of non-timber forest products (NTFPs), including cultivation of 
local tree species such as Philippine Tung (Reutelaistrispermaorkemirisunan in Bahasa), Durian 
(Durio  Zibethinus)  and  dragon  fruit  (Hylocereus  spp.)  in  home  gardens,  and  (iii)  promoting 
community-based  ecotourism,  fresh  water  fish  production  and  handicrafts.  In  addition,  limited 
rural infrastructure such as micro-hydro and solar panels for power generation and water supply 
facilities  will  be  provided  in  selected  villages  as  incentive  for  local  communities  to  conserve 
forests as part of the CBFM agreements. 
19. 
Community-based forest management agreements. Ten CBFM agreements to cover 
an area of 17,000 ha will be prepared so that local communities enter into a partnership with the 
FMU. Land boundaries and rights to use of forest resources will be defined jointly by community 
members and FMU staff. Clear land boundaries and rights to use forest land are important tools 
to restrict the conversion of land categorized as forest into other land uses. CBFM agreements 
are expected to restrict agricultural expansion. Close involvement of communities is expected to 
increase their ownership to land and care for natural resources.  
20. 
Home gardens. The project will help in production and commercialization of Philippine 
Tung, durian and dragon fruit in home gardens to reduce dependence of local communities on 
forest resources. There is a growing demand for the Philippine Tung as a source of biodiesel in 
West  Kalimantan,  as  part  of  reforestation  and  rehabilitation  program  supported  by  national 
government.  The  project  will  support  its  establishment  and  facilitate  partnerships  of  project 
beneficiaries  with  local  industries that  produce  biodiesel.  The  waste  from  biodiesel  generation 
can be used as fertilizer, cattle feed or bio pesticide.7 The establishment of the Philippine Tung 
will support its conservation and increase biodiversity as it is a 15 meter tree with large canopy. 
Durian is a large fruit tree that can reach 30 meters high, and is native to Indonesia. Dragon fruit 
grows in dry soils with little inputs. Both durian and dragon fruits are in high demand locally. 
21. 
Community-based  ecotourism.  Community  groups  will  be  trained  in  ecotourism  and 
provide  ecotourism  facilities  (e.g.,  hiking  trails,  tourist  information  kiosks,  toilets)  for  tourists  in 
two  villages  in  the  Betung  Kerihun  National  Park.    Besides  increasing  income  for  local 
communities, ecotourism will foster a sense of belonging and awareness of local communities 
on the need to conserve natural forests.  
Handicrafts.  The  project  will  support  production  and  commercialization  of  handicrafts 
22. 
and other products to cater to growing number of tourists.  Weaving tools will be provided and 
handicraft galleries will  be established in each  district.  In addition, three exhibition fairs will be 
organized  in  Jakarta  to  facilitate  long-term  commercial  agreements  with  potential  buyers. 
Sustainable  use  of  raw  materials  for  weaving  will  be  an  incentive  for  local  communities  to 
protect the natural forest.  
7   http://www.slideshare.net/bram1811/kemiri-sunan-the-renewable-energy-sources-cheaper-cleaner-and-greener- 
than-palm-oil. 
8 
Community-focused  infrastructure  (micro-hydro,  solar  and water  supply  facilities 
23. 
and road rehabilitation). As the project area includes communities with limited access to basic 
infrastructure such as water supply, electricity and roads, the project will improve access to such 
facilities as an  incentive to protect forests. Small ponds  will be constructed to store water and 
provide  for  consumption  through  building  a pipe  system  to  be  managed  by communities.  Two 
community-managed micro-hydro power schemes will be installed, with capacity to generate 40 
KVA  along  with  an  aerial  power  network,  benefitting  approximately  200  households. 
Establishing micro-hydro facilities will be based on experiences in other villages in Kapuas Hulu 
district, where communities have agreed to take responsibility for protection of forest around the 
watershed.  As  Radiin  Jaya  village  of  Sintang  district  is  far  from  any  significant  water  source, 
solar  panels  will  be  installed  to  supply  power  to  about  200  households.  In  addition,  rural 
pathways of up to 2 km per village with a maximum road width of 2 meters will be rehabilitated. 
This  will  facilitate  access  of  communities  to  the  main  road  in  order  to  improve  market 
opportunities and reduce transportation time and cost for trading agroforestry products.  
4. 
Capacity Building  
24. 
Communities.  The  project  will  strengthen  REDD+  awareness  and  capacity  of  local 
communities to manage forests sustainably  through community-focused workshops and green 
school  development.  The  latter  consists  of  designing  a  curriculum  on  sustainable  forest  and 
natural  resource  management  to  be  adopted  by  two  local  schools.  In  addition,  small  scale 
machinery for coffee drying, latex processing, and weaving will be provided to enhance income 
for local communities. Training will be provided on use of processing machinery, value addition, 
marketing  and  business  development  of  products  such  as  high  quality  honey  with  low  water 
content,  dragon  fruit  jams  or  desserts,  or  biodiesel  from  the  Philippine  Tung.  At  least  three 
grants will be given to local women groups for the development of small businesses. 
25. 
Government staff. The project will enhance capacity of FMUs and district staff on SFM 
through training on business plans development, REDD+ safeguards information system, free, 
prior  and  informed  consent  (FPIC)  procedures,  conflict  mediation,  and  landscape  level 
management.  The  project  will  support  the  development  of  a  system  for  monitoring,  reporting 
and  verification  (MRV),  including  measurement  protocols  on  forest  characteristics  with  spatial 
data.  This  MRV  system  at  the  FMU  level  will  be  linked  with  the  provincial  REDD+  activity 
registry and the MRV system at the national level.   
5. 
Forest Protection at FMU and District Level  
26. 
The project will support forest protection at the landscape level through activities such as 
(i)  refinement  of  the management  plan  in Kapuas  Hulu FMU,  and (ii)  preparation  of the forest 
management plan for Sintang and Block XXI FMUs. Additional support will be given to the Block 
XXI  FMU  in  order  to  finalize  its  establishment  and  operationalization.  Multi-stakeholder 
consultations  will  be  used  to  develop  the  forest  management  plans  of  FMUs  to  ensure  that 
village  forest  management  plans  and  local  needs  are  duly  considered.  Field  facilitators  and 
FMU staff will be trained in participatory and gender integrated planning.  
27. 
The  project  will  integrate  land  use  classification,  socio-economic  and  environmental 
variables in FMU plans and identify potential activities that will increase forest cover and protect 
existing  natural  forest.  The  project  will  only  select  those  activities  that  are  aligned  with  district 
development plans and respect local socio-economic and environmental characteristics. 
9 
Output 2. Provincial REDD+ Strategy in West Kalimantan effectively implemented. 
28. 
This  output  will  address barriers  to  effective implementation  of  the  provincial  policy  framework 
and strategy for REDD+ in West Kalimantan. Key activities include (i) strengthening the capacity 
of provincial staff to understand REDD+ concepts, monitor and report on REDD+, prepare FMU 
business plans, draft REDD+ regulations, and perform carbon accounting; (ii) establishing and 
linking  province-wide  grievance  and  benefit  sharing  mechanisms  with  FMUs  and  national 
systems;  (iii)  creating  a  provincial  REDD+  monitoring  and  safeguards  information  system, 
including  a  REDD+  activity  registry;  and  (iv)  establishing  a  grievance  redress  mechanism  on 
tenure and REDD+ activities. 
29. 
It  focuses  on  strengthening  capacity  of  staff  at  provincial  level  to  implement  provincial 
REDD+  strategy  and  its  processes  effectively  and  link  them  with  processes  at  FMUs  and  the 
national level. Specific activities include (i) improve coordination and information dissemination 
on  forestry  planning  and  policy  between  national  and  subnational  agencies,  (ii)  establish  a 
provincial REDD+ MRV system, REDD+ safeguards information system (SIS), and a grievance 
redress mechanism (GRM); and (iii) conduct provincial training programs on REDD+ processes 
and tools, including REDD+ SIS, GHG accounting and SFM.  
30. 
The project will ensure close coordination between provincial agencies and the FMUs so 
that the provincial registry on REDD+ activities is updated on a real time basis. Ongoing efforts 
by other development partners will be considered. Special attention will be given to the results 
of the Indonesia National Carbon Accounting System (INCAS) and pilots in central Kalimantan. 
Likewise, the design of the provincial REDD+ SIS will build on experiences from REDD+ SIS at 
the national level. Lessons learnt from other countries will also be considered.  
31. 
The  REDD+  GRM  will  include  tenure  conflict  management  guidelines,  which  are 
culturally  appropriate.  MHA  community  members  and  representatives  as  well  as  local  NGOs 
and other relevant stakeholders will be actively involved in designing the GRM. Local staff will 
be trained on tenure conflict management. 
32. 
Output  3:  Subnational  Fiscal  Policies  on  REDD+  Harmonized  with  National 
Policies.  Key  activities  include  (i)  analyzing  fiscal  policies  for  integration  of  natural  capital 
considerations  to  provide  policy  guidance  to  national  and  subnational  governments;  (ii) 
conducting  policy  dialogues  to  assess  gaps  in  fiscal,  monitoring,  and  benefit  sharing  policies 
and  West  Kalimantan  forest  industry  strategy,  and  identifying  measures  for  effective 
harmonization  of  policies;  and  (iii)  identifying  funding  sources  for  REDD+  implementation  and 
conducting  training  to  prepare  proposals  to  extend  the  scope,  area  and/or  time  frame  of  the 
current project. 
33. 
This  output  focuses  on  harmonization  of  REDD+  related  policies  at  FMU,  district  and 
provincial levels with those at national level, in line with national REDD+ strategy. Key activities 
include (i)  assessment  of fiscal  policies  affecting  emission  reduction performance  of forests  at 
national  and  sub-national  levels,  (ii)  improve  coordination  and  information  dissemination  on 
REDD+  planning  and  policy  between  national  and  subnational  agencies,  (iii)  conduct  policy 
dialogues  to  assess  gaps  and  identify  remedial  measures  on  fiscal,  monitoring  and  benefit 
sharing mechanisms, and (iv) identify relevant funding sources for REDD+ implementation and 
conduct training to prepare proposals to extend the scope, area and/or time frame of the current 
project.  Attention  will  be  paid  to  harmonize  the  forestry  industry  strategy  in  West  Kalimantan 
with the national forestry industry strategy. 
10 
Effective communication among different levels is critical as each output corresponds to 
34. 
different  levels  of  administration  (district,  provincial  and  national).  Activities  for  improving 
communication,  including  provision  of  communication equipment,  and training  in production of 
communication materials to disseminate project related information are provided in the project. 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
Project Readiness Activities 
Indicative activities 
Advance contracting actions 
Establish project implementation 
arrangements 
FIP Sub-Committee Approval 
Grant negotiations 
ADB’s President’s approval 
Grant signing 
Legal opinion provided 
Government budget inclusion (DIPA) 
Grant effectiveness 
2016 
2017  Responsible Agency 
A  M  J 
J  A  S  O  N  D 
J 
MOEF and ADB 
MOEF 
SCF 
MOF and ADB 
ADB 
ADB and MOF 
MOEF, MOF 
MOEF, MOF and  
BAPPENAS 
ADB and MOEF 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DIPA = handover of budget execution document, MOEF = Ministry of Environment 
and Forestry, MOF = Ministry of Finance, SCF = Strategic Climate Fund.  
Sources: ADB and GOI 
Stage 1  
Draft Concept Paper 
Identification/Preparation 
Confirmed 
On-granting  
Confirmed 
1 Province, 2 Districts, 4 FMUs 
Confirmed 
Not applicable 
The project will not finance 
activities that require AMDAL  
B. 
Project Readiness Filters 
Filters 
Government8 
Match with RPJMN 
Include need for on-granting 
Confirmed by line agency/EA 
Project locations identified 
Capacity of line agency to implement 
project confirmed 
Included in Green Book (Grant book) 
Project implementation plan confirmed 
Performance indicators identified and 
monitoring and evaluation approach 
confirmed 
Detailed engineering design  
Land acquisition/resettlement plan 
prepared 
AMDAL approved 
Counterpart funds 1st year confirmed 
Organization and project implementation 
management confirmed 
PAM prepared 
Procurement plan confirmed 
Financing plan and fund flow arrangements 
confirmed 
Grant negotiation readiness document 
prepared 
Grant Legal Opinion 
11 
Stage 4 
Grant 
Negotiations  
Stage 5 
Grant 
Effectiveness 
Stage 2 Appraisal/                    
Stage 3  
Before MRM 
Fact-finding 
Confirmed. 
Confirmed.9 
Confirmed; Memo 
issued by MOEF 
Reconfirmed 
Reconfirmed 
Prepared 
Orally confirmed for 
central agencies 
Counterpart staff 
identified 
Drafted 
Confirmed 
Confirmed 
Counterpart staff 
designated 
Confirmed 
Reconfirmed 
Reconfirmed 
Confirmed 
Confirmed 
Reconfirmed 
Completed 
legal 
Sample 
opinion  shared 
to Government 
8 As per Government Regulation No. 10/2011 Articles on Project Readiness Criteria. 
9 Grant Book entry reference: GB-12-4-0http://pendanaan.bappenas.go.id/index.php?option=com_rubberdoc&view=doc&id=109&format=raw&Itemid=113. 
12 
ADB 
Project design completed 
Advance  actions  reflected  in 
project documents 
the  ADB 
Completed 
Included in concept paper  
Procurement assessment ready 
Financial management assessment ready 
Consulting services and procurement are 
packaged into few and large contracts 
Confirmed 
Included in MOU, 
PAM, and 
procurement plan 
Confirmed 
Confirmed 
Reconfirmed 
Agreed 
Reconfirmed 
Reconfirmed 
Reconfirmed 
Reflected in the 
procurement 
plan  
Start-up 
consultant 
mobilized 
Memo approved. 
Project start-up consultant TORs funded by 
PPTA to help advertising grant 
implementation support consulting firm 
PPTA period must cover the period until at 
least grant effectiveness 
Evidence  of  provision  of 
counterpart funding is shown to ADB 
Evidence 
received  
[to follow] 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, MOEF = Ministry of Environment and Forestry, MOF = Ministry of Forestry, RPJMN = Rencana Pembangunan Jangka 
Menengah Nasional (national long term development plan), SCF = Strategic Climate Fund.  
first  year 
C. 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
13 
14  
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
35. 
The  FIP  Steering  Committee  is  headed  by  the  Secretary  General  of  MOEF  and 
comprises  members  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MOF),  National  Development  Planning 
Agency  (BAPPENAS),  Coordinating  Ministry  of  Economic Affairs (CMEA),  Directorate General 
of  Rural  and  Human  resource  Development,  FIP  Focal  Point,  SCF  Focal  Point,  and  a 
representative  of 
the  Dedicated  Grant  Mechanism  Steering  Committee.  Multilateral 
development  banks  (ADB,  WB  and  IFC)  participate  in  committee  meetings  as  observers. 
Detailed roles and responsibilities are described below. 
A. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Project Implementation Organizations 
FIP Steering committee 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
  Oversight  of  all  activities  administered  by  ADB,  World 
Program Coordination Unit (PCU) 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) 
Directorate General of Social Forestry 
and Environmental Partnerships of 
MOEF  (Direktorat Jenderal Perhutanan 
Sosialdan Kemitraan Lingkungan - 
PSKL) – executing agency (EA) 
Project Management Unit (PMU) in the 
EA 
Bank and IFC under FIP in Indonesia 
  Serves as the Project Steering Committee 
  Coordination  of  REDD+  policy  priorities  across  various 
ministries and donor agencies 
  Hold semi-annual meetings or as required 
  Supports  the  FIP  steering  committee  in  oversight  of  FIP 
projects in Indonesia 
  Coordinate  activities  administered  through  ADB,  World 
Bank and IFC.  
  Establishment and administration of the imprest account. 
  Allocation and timely release of counterpart funds 
  Communicate with ADB for any amendments in the 
allocation of the grant amount 
  Overall coordination, implementation, administration and 
monitoring of the project activities as per requirements of 
the “planned grant” modality  
  Ensure fund flow arrangements in cooperation with the 
MOF and ADB 
  Approves annual work plans, financial management and 
procurement plans 
  Ensure compliance with grant covenants 
  Create a technical consultative group at the national level 
and technical committee at subnational level 
  Day to day project implementation, planning and 
budgeting, disbursement, monitoring and reporting. 
  Facilitate disbursement and withdrawal applications 
  Coordinate activities and report progress to the FIP 
Steering Committee 
  Coordinate and provide guidance on project 
implementation to local governments, other relevant 
agencies and PISU 
  Consolidate annual work plans, financial management 
and procurement plans 
  Conduct monitoring and compliance of environmental 
and social safeguards  
  Carry-out administrative, technical and financial 
management and reporting at central level 
  Seek guidance from the technical consultative group at 
the national level 
Project Implementation Organizations 
Implementing Agencies (IAs) (3) 
  Coordinate and monitor project activities under respective agencies 
  Provide technical advice to the project through UPTs 
  Guide PISU in implementation of project activities  and in the maintenance of procurement, financial 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
and accounting records of the project 
15 
  Guide capacity development programs for FMUs, districts, province staff, and communities 
  Obtain necessary environmental approvals from the respective departments 
  Oversee regular reporting by PISU on implementation to EA 
  Undertake quality control inspections of the project facilities. 
  Manage the handover of project facilities to the agencies responsible for operation and maintenance. 
IA1:Directorate of Business 
Development for Social Forestry and 
Customary Forestry  (Direktorat Bina 
Usaha Perhutanan Sosial dan Hutan 
Adat - BUPSHA) 
IA2:Directorate of Environmental 
Services of Conservation Forest 
(Direktorat Pemanfaatan Jasa 
Lingkungandan 
Hutan Konservasi - PJLHK) 
IA3:Directorate of Production Forest 
Management Units (Direktorat Kesatuan 
Pengelolaan Hutan Produksi - KPHP) 
  Implement REDD+ investments through partnership 
between FMUs and local communities, including 
livelihood options (e.g., promotion and commercialization 
of NTFP). 
  Recruitment of PISU  
  Implement REDD+ investments in Danau Sentarum 
National Park and Betung Kerihun National Park. 
  Implement project activities other than those related to 
social forestry in production forests of FMUs in Kapuas 
Hulu and Sintang. 
Forest Management Units (FMUs) 
  Implement activities in the field for output 1 in 
coordination with PISU 
Technical Committee 
  Provide technical guidance on project implementation at 
Technical Implementing Units (UPT): 
  Social Forestry and Environmental 
Partnerships Office, Kalimantan 
(BPSKL) 
  Production Forest Utilization Control 
Office, Pontianak (BPHP) 
  Betung Kerihun and Danau Sentarum 
National Park Office (BBTNBKDS) 
Project Implementation Supporting Unit 
(PISU) (consulting firm) 
provincial, district, and FMU level 
  Facilitate implementation of the project at the provincial, 
district, and FMU level 
  Provide guidance to PISU and FMU staff in project 
activities. 
  Organize technical committee meetings at regular 
intervals to seek guidance on the implementation of the 
project activities 
  Communicate with related directorates at the national 
level. 
  Guide PISU for implementation support, coordination of 
administrative activities such as procurement, capacity 
development and awareness raising. 
  Work closely with PISU to manage finance and 
accounting details of the project. 
  Supervise contractors for REDD+ activities. 
  Undertake day to day management of the project 
activities in the field in close collaboration with the MOEF 
entities at different levels. 
  Prepare and submit withdrawal applications and retain 
supporting documents. 
  Submit regular (quarterly and annual) project reports to 
ADB upon endorsement by MOEF. 
  Implement gender action plan, stakeholder participation 
plan, and stakeholder communication strategy. 
  Assist the EA to prepare the annual contract awards and 
16 
Project Implementation Organizations 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
disbursement projections, and submit request for 
budgetary allocations for counterpart funds. 
  Village coordinator and Village facilitators will be part of 
the PISU and will be in charge of the direct 
communication with local communities in the villages. 
  Liaise with Strategic Climate Fund and CIF Admin Unit in 
administration of the FIP grant  
  Review and approve procurement and disbursement 
documents 
  Conduct semi-annual reviews, midterm  reviews, project 
completion review and if necessary a special 
administration review mission  
  Regularly update the project performance review reports 
with the assistance of EA. 
  Ensure compliance to the financial audit 
recommendation. 
  Regularly post on ADB website the updated project 
information documents for public disclosure and the 
Safeguards documents as per disclosure provision of the 
ADB Safeguards Policy Statement. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EMP = environmental management plan, IEE = initial environmental examination.  
B. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Executing Agency  
Directorate General of Social 
Forestry and  
Environmental Partnership 
Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry 
Implementing Agencies 
Directorate Business 
Development for Social forestry 
and Customary Forest 
Directorate of Environmental 
Services of Conservation Forest 
Dr. Apik Karyana, 
Position: Secretary of Directorate General of Social 
Forestry and Environmental Partnership 
Email address: akaryana@yahoo.com 
Office Address: GedungManggalaWanabakti, Jl. 
GatotSubroto, Blok 1 
Ir. Masyhud, M.M, 
Position: Director of Business Development for Social 
forestry and Customary Forest 
Email:  masyhud2008@gmail.com 
Office Address: GedungManggalaWanabakti, Jl. 
GatotSubroto, Blok 1 
Ir. Is Mugiono, MM 
Position: Director of Environmental Services of 
Conservation Forest 
Email:  n.bambang_w@yahoo.com 
Office Address: GedungManggalaWanabakti, Jl. 
GatotSubroto, Blok 1 
17 
Directorate of Production Forest 
Management Unit 
Ir. Drasospolino, MSc 
Position: Director, Directorate of Production Forest 
Management Unit 
Email:  sospolino@yahoo.com 
Office Address: GedungManggalaWanabakti, Jl. 
GatotSubroto, Blok 1, 5th floor 
Asian Development Bank 
Environment, Natural Resources 
and Agriculture Division, 
Southeast Asia Department 
Mission Leader 
Dr. Jiangfeng Zhang 
Position: Director 
Telephone: +63 2 632 6234 
Email:  jzhang@adb.org 
Office Address: 6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City, 1550 
Metro Manila Philippines 
Dr. Ancha Srinivasan  
Position:Principal Climate Change Specialist 
Telephone: +632 632 4786 
Email: asrinivasan@adb.org 
Office Address: 6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City, 1550 
Metro Manila Philippines 
18 
C. 
Project Organization Structure 
BBTNBKDS  =  Betung  Kerihun  and  Danau  Sentarum  National  Park  Agency/Balai  Besar  Taman  Nasional  Betung 
Kerihundan  Danau  Sentarum;  BPHP  =  Production  Forest  Utilization  Control  Office,  Pontianak/Balai  Pengelolaan 
Hutan Produksi; BPSKL = Social Forestry and Environmental Partnership Office, Kalimantan/Balai Perhutanan Sosial 
dan  Kemitraan  Lingkungan;  BUPSHA=  Bina  Usaha  Perhutanan  Sosial  dan  Hutan  Adat;  FIP  =  forest  investment 
program  being  administered  with  World  Bank  and  IFC;  KPHP  =  Directorate  of  Production  Forest  Management 
Unit/Direktorat Kesatuan Pengelolaan Hutan Produksi; PSKL = Direktorat Jenderal Perhutanan Sosial dan Kemitraan 
Lingkungan; UPT = technical implementation unit. 
* Under a different directorate general office under the MOEF. 
Sources: ADB and GOI. 
19 
A. 
Investment and Financing Plans 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
The project is estimated to cost $18.7 million. The Strategic Climate Fund10 will provide a grant 
not  exceeding  the  equivalent  of  $17  million,  to  be  administered  by  ADB.  This  grant  will  fund 
consulting  services,  vehicles,  equipment,  civil  works,  training,  coordination  and  community 
livelihood activities. The government will cover taxes and duties through exemption.  
Table 2: Project Investment Plan 
($ million) 
Item 
A. 
Base Costb 
1. Community-focused and gender-responsive REDD+ pilots 
2. Provincial REDD+ strategy in West Kalimantan effectively implemented 
3.Sub-national fiscal policies on REDD+ harmonized with national policies 
B. 
Subtotal (A) 
Contingenciesc 
Total (A+B) 
Amounta 
15.35 
1.27 
1.07 
17.69 
1.01 
18.70 
REDD+ = reducing emissions from deforestation and degradation, conservation, sustainable management of forests 
and forest carbon stocks improvement. 
a  Includes taxes and duties of $1.7 million to be financed from government resources through exemption. 
b  In mid-2016 prices. 
c  Physical contingencies computed at 10% for civil works; 3% for consulting services, and 8% for community driven 
development activities, training, surveys, and studies. Price contingencies computed at 1.5% on foreign exchange 
costs  and  5.1%  on  local  currency  costs;  includes  provision  for  potential  exchange  rate  fluctuation  under  the 
assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
Sources: Asian Development Bank and the Government’s staff estimates. 
Source 
Strategic Climate Funda 
Government 
Total 
Table 3: Financing Plan 
Amount ($ million) 
17.0 
  1.7 
18.7 
Share of Total (%) 
90.9 
9.1 
100.0 
a Under the Forest Investment Program financed by the Strategic Climate Fund. Administered by the Asian 
Development Bank. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
10 Under the Forest Investment Program. 
20 
B. 
Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category ($ Million) 
Item 
Base cost* 
1 
2 
Good, Works and Others  
1A. Goods (Equipment and Vehicles) 
1B. Works 
1C. Others 
1C.1 Livelihood Improvement** 
1C.2 Workshops, Training and Studies 
1C.3 Project Management  
Consulting Services 
Total Base Cost 
Contingencies 
Total Project Cost  
Amount 
% Total 
 1.67  
 1.58 
 7.44  
 2.12  
 0.72  
 4.16  
17.69 
1.01 
18.70 
8.9 
8.4 
39.8 
11.3 
3.9 
22.2 
  94.6 
5.4 
100.0 
* Taxes and duties to be financed from government resources through exemption. 
** Includes community services and materials. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
C. 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds ($ Million) 
CATEGORY 
1. Goods, Works and Others* 
2. Consulting Services 
Total  
Total 
Amount 
Allocated 
13.03 
3.97 
17.00 
Percentage and Basis for 
Withdrawal from the Grant 
Account 
100% of Total Expenditure 
claimed** 
* Others mean livelihood improvement activities, workshops, training, studies and project management. 
** Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed with the territory of the Recipient 
Source: ADB estimates. 
D. 
Cost Estimates by Financier ($ Million) 
Item 
A.  Base Cost 
1  Good, Works and Others  
1A. Goods (Equipment and Vehicles) 
1B. Works 
1C. Others 
2  Consulting Service 
Total Base Cost 
B.  Contingencies 
Total Project Cost  
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
ADB            % 
GOI  % 
Total               % 
1.52 
1.44 
9.34 
3.78 
 16.08  
 0.92  
 17.00  
91.0 
91.1 
90.9 
90.9 
91.1 
90.9 
0.15  9.0 
0.14  8.9 
0.93  9.1 
0.38  9.1 
 1.61  
 0.09   8.9 
 1.70   9.1 
 1.67  
 1.58  
8.9 
8.4 
 10.27   54.9 
 4.16   22.2 
17.69   94.6 
5.4 
 1.01  
 18.70   100.0 
E. 
Cost Estimates by Outputs ($ Million) 
Item 
Base cost* 
1  Good, Works and Others  
1A. Goods (Equipment and Vehicles) 
1B. Works 
1C. Others 
1C.1 Livelihood Improvement** 
1C.2 Workshops, Training and Studies 
1C.3 Project Management  
Consulting Services 
2 
Contingencies 
Total Base Cost 
Total Project Cost 
21 
Output 1   Output 2   Output 3   Total 
 1.67  
 1.57  
 7.10  
 1.64  
 0.61 
 2.16 
 14.77  
 1.48  
 15.61  
0.00 
 0.00  
0.00 
0.24 
 0.04 
 0.94 
 1.21  
 0.12  
 1.40  
0.00 
 0.00  
0.00 
0.12 
 0.03 
 0.87 
 1.02  
 0.10  
 1.68  
 1.67  
 1.57  
 7.10  
 2.00  
 0.68  
 3.97 
 17.00  
 1.70  
 18.70  
* Taxes and duties to be financed from government resources through exemption. 
** Includes community services and materials. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: ADB estimates 
F. 
Cost Estimates by Year ($ Million) 
Base Costa 
1  Good, Works and Others  
1A. Goods (Equipment and Vehicles) 
1B. Works 
1C. Others 
1C.1 Livelihood Improvement** 
1C.2 Workshops, Training and Studies 
1C.3 Project Management  
2  Consulting Services 
Total Base Costs 
Contingenciesb 
Taxes and Dutiesc 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Total 
0.12 
0.06 
1.34 
0.19 
0.05 
0.73 
0.00 
0.43 
0.00 
0.02 
0.00 
0.00 
1.52 
1.44 
0.00 
0.24 
0.09 
0.73 
1.23 
0.07 
0.13 
1.51 
0.70 
0.14 
1.20 
5.08 
0.32 
0.54 
1.64 
0.58 
0.14 
0.51 
3.66 
0.22 
0.39 
1.54 
0.27 
0.11 
0.52 
2.07 
0.10 
0.11 
0.44 
0.00 
0.04 
0.07 
0.38 
6.76 
1.92 
0.66 
3.78 
2.87 
2.75 
0.48 
16.08 
0.16 
0.30 
0.14 
0.29 
0.02 
0.05 
0.92 
1.70 
Total Project Cost * 
1.42 
5.95 
4.26 
3.34 
3.18 
0.56 
18.70 
a In mid-2016 prices. 
b Physical contingencies computed at 10% for civil works; 3% for consulting services, and 8% for community driven 
development activities, training, surveys, and studies. Price contingencies computed at 1.5% on foreign exchange 
costs  and  5.1%  on  local  currency  costs;  includes  provision  for  potential  exchange  rate  fluctuation  under  the 
assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
c Taxes and duties of $1.7 million to be financed from government resources through tax exemption. 
* Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
** Include community services and materials. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
22 
G. 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
n
o
i
l
l
i
M
D
S
U
 18.0
 16.0
 14.0
 12.0
 10.0
 8.0
 6.0
 4.0
 2.0
 -
Disbursement
Contract Award
Y1
Y2
Y3
Y4
Y5
Y6
H. 
Fund Flow Diagram 
23 
Legend: 
Request of funds 
Flow of funds (Grant proceeds) 
Coordination 
Liquidation 
BBTNBKDS  =  BetungKerihun  and  DanauSentarum  National  Park  Agency/Balai  Besar  Taman  Nasional  Betung 
Kerihundan  Danau  Sentarum;  BPHP  =  Production  Forest  Utilization  Control  Office,  Pontianak/Balai  Pengelolaan 
Hutan Produksi; BPSKL = Social Forestry and Environmental Partnership Office, Kalimantan/Balai Perhutanan Sosial 
dan Kemitraan Lingkungan; BUPSHA = BinaUsaha Perhutanan Sosial dan Hutan Adat; FMU = forest management 
unit; KPPN = Treasury Offices/Kantor Pelayanan Perbendaharaan Negara; KPHP = Directorate of Production Forest 
Management Unit/Direktorat Kesatuan Pengelolaan Hutan Produksi; NGO = non-government organization; PJLHK = 
Environmental Services Management of Conservation Forest/Pemanfaatan Jasa Lingkungan Hutan Konservasi; UPT 
= technical implementation unit. 
Sources: ADB and GOI. 
24 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
Financial Management Assessment 
36. 
A financial management assessment (FMA)  was undertaken in accordance with ADB’s 
Guidelines  for  the  Financial  Management  and  Analysis  of  Projects  and  the  Financial  Due 
Diligence: a Methodology Note and risk mitigation actions have been identified. The FMA report 
incorporates  the  Financial  Management  Internal  Control  and  Risk  Management  Assessment 
required by the Guidelines.  
37. 
The  FMA  determined  the  robustness  of  the  accounting,  financial  controls  and  internal 
audit arrangements, and the capability of the EA and IAs to meet all the fiduciary requirements 
set out in the grant agreement and other project documents. The assessments indicate that as a 
whole, the prevailing government financial, accounting, and auditing rules and systems meet the 
generally  acceptable  international  accounting  and  auditing  standards.  The  government  has 
adequate internal control systems and financial reporting arrangements. It is important to note 
that  the  merger  of  the  Ministries  of  Environment  and  the  Ministry  of  Forestry  into  a  single 
ministry have increased the number of staff familiar with ADB procedures in both EA and IAs. 
38. 
Overall, the FMA is rated as “moderate” and is expected to become “low” with mitigating 
measures.  The  environment  for  public  financial  management  is  generally  satisfactory  largely 
due  to  the  standardized  policies  and  guidelines  which  are  generally  implemented  for  all 
externally financed projects and programs. The FMA concluded that EA and IAs have sufficient 
capacity  to  properly  administer  the  imprest  account  and  sub-accounts.  Training  on  ADB’s 
disbursement  procedures  and  advanced  financial  management  will  be  conducted  to  ensure 
successful  implementation  of  the  project.  The  financial  management  specialist  of  PISU  will 
support the administration of the procedures until sufficient capacity exists in the IAs.  The key 
risks,  activities  to  be  undertaken  at  project  start-up  to  mitigate  risks,  and  responsibilities  to 
address these risks are summarized in the Table 4 below. 
Table 4: FMA Risks and Mitigation Actions  
Key Risks 
Country level weaknesses 
identified by the PEFA Report 
such as the PFM program on 
accrual-based accounting which 
may impact the preparation of 
financial management reports. 
With the recent merger of the 
Ministry of Environment and 
Ministry of Forestry, there is 
unclear delineation of tasks which 
would provide clear accountability 
for the project and a few positions 
for FM are yet to be identified 
Inadequate capacity, weak 
coordination among audit 
institutions and lack of uniform 
audit-planning framework 
Risk 
Assessment 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Mitigation Actions 
Responsibility 
Strengthening of EA and IAs capacity in 
preparing the financial management report 
will be provided through the project 
management consultant and ADB resident 
mission specialist in coordination with 
MOF. 
Update the organizational structure of the 
EA, IAs, and other implementing units and 
TOR with clear delineation of tasks for the 
project. 
EA/IA together 
with ADB 
resident 
mission 
specialist. 
EA/IA/ADB 
EA, IA, together 
with ADB 
project officer 
Discuss with Badan Pemeriksa Keuangan 
(BPK) and finalize the TOR for the external 
audit; discuss and agree with BPKP and IG 
the scope of the internal audit; in 
coordination with BPK and IG, work closely 
with EA/IAs to improve the internal control 
system specific for the project and engage 
financial management consultants and 
provide guidance to improve project staff 
capacity 
Key Risks 
Limited experience in ADB-funded 
projects 
Risk 
Assessment 
Moderate 
25 
Mitigation Actions 
Responsibility 
EA/IA/ADB 
Training programs on financial 
management, disbursement, procurement 
and reporting will be provided to EA and 
IAs through the PISU and ADB resident 
mission specialist. 
Compliance with financial covenants will be 
monitored  
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DP = development partners, EA = executing agency, FMA = Financial Management 
Assessment, FMIS = FM information system, MOF = Ministry of Finance, PFM = public financial management, PISU 
= project implementation supporting unit,   SNA = sub-national authorities 
Source: ADB 
B. 
Disbursement 
The  grant  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement 
39. 
Handbook  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),11  and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between the government and ADB. Online training for project staff on disbursement policies and 
procedures  is  available  at  http://wpqr44.adb.org/disbursement_elearning.  Project  staffs  are 
encouraged to avail of this training to help ensure efficient disbursement and fiduciary control.  
Imprest  fund  procedure.  Immediately  after  the  grant  is  declared  effective,  the 
40. 
government  will  open  an  imprest  account  in  US  Dollars,  in  the  name  of  MOF  at  the  Bank 
Indonesia, the central bank. ADB will channel the grant fund to the imprest account which is to 
be used exclusively for ADB’s share of eligible expenditures. 
The government may request for initial and additional advances12 to the imprest account 
41. 
based  on  its  estimate  of  ADB’s  share  of  eligible  project  expenditures  for  the  forthcoming  six 
months which are to be paid through the imprest account. The total outstanding advance, in any 
event,  should not  exceed the  estimate  of  ADB’s  share of  expenditures  to be  paid  through  the 
imprest account for the forthcoming six months. 
42. 
 Before the submission of the first withdrawal application, the government should submit 
to  ADB  sufficient  evidence  of  the  authority  of  the  person(s)  who  will  sign  the  withdrawal 
applications on behalf of the government, together with the authenticated specimen signatures 
of  each  authorized  person.  The  minimum  value  per  WA  is  US$100,000  equivalent.  Individual 
payments below this amount should be paid: (i) by the EA/IA and subsequently claimed to ADB 
through reimbursement, or  (ii)  through the  imprest fund  procedure,  unless  otherwise  accepted 
by ADB. 
Statement  of  expenditures  (SOE)  procedure.13  The  SOE  procedure may  be  used  to 
43. 
reimburse,  replenish,  and liquidate  eligible  expenditures  to the  imprest  account. The  ceiling  of 
the  SOE  procedure  is  equivalent  of  $100,000  per  individual  payment.  Supporting  documents 
and  records  for  the  expenditures  claimed  under  the  SOE  should  be  maintained  and  made 
readily  available  for  review  by  ADB's  disbursement  and  review  missions,  upon  ADB's  request 
for  submission  of  supporting  documents  on  a  sampling  basis,  and  for  independent  audit. 
Reimbursement and liquidation of individual payments in excess of the SOE ceiling should be 
11 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Handbooks/Loan_Disbursement/loan-disbursement-final.pdf 
12  Both  initial  and  additional  advances  are  to  be  accompanied  by  an  Estimate  of  Expenditure  Sheet  (form  may  be 
found in https://lfis.adb.org/gfis/download.jsp). 
13 The SOE procedure is a simplified documentation procedure requiring no submission of supporting documentation 
of expenditures (such as invoices, bills, and receipts). 
26 
supported by full documentation when submitting the withdrawal application to ADB.  
C. 
Accounting 
44.  MOEF  will  maintain  separate  project  accounts  and  records  by  funding  source  for  all 
expenditures  incurred  on  the  project.  MOEF  will  prepare  consolidated  project  financial 
statements  in  accordance  with  the  government’s  accounting  laws  and  regulations  which  are 
consistent with international accounting principles and practices. 
D. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
45.  MOEF will cause the detailed consolidated project financial statements to be audited in 
accordance  with  International  Standards  on  Auditing  and  with  the  government’s  audit 
regulations,  by  an  independent  auditor  acceptable  to  ADB.  The  audited  project  financial 
statements will be submitted in the English language to ADB within six (6) months from the end 
of the fiscal year by MOEF 
46.  MOEF  will  engage  the  Badan  Pemeriksa  Keuangan  (BPK),  the  Indonesian  Supreme 
Audit Institution (SAI), to audit the consolidated project financial statements annually. BPK  will 
allocate adequate budget to properly audit the project. The draft terms of reference of the BPK 
will be discussed and once approved by BPK, MOF and ADB it will be used for this project.  
47. 
The  annual  audit  report  for  the  project  financial  statements  will  include  a  management 
letter and auditor’s opinions, which cover (i) whether the project financial statements present an 
accurate  and fair  view  or  are  presented fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  in  accordance  with  the 
applicable financial  reporting  standards; (ii)  whether  the  proceeds  of  the grant  were  used  only 
for  the  purpose(s)  of  the  project;  and  (iii)  whether  the  borrower  or  executing  agency  was  in 
compliance with the financial covenants contained in the legal agreements (where applicable). 
48. 
Compliance  with  financial  reporting  and  auditing  requirements  will  be  monitored  by 
review  missions  and  during  normal  program  supervision,  and  followed  up  regularly  with  all 
concerned, including the external auditor. 
49. 
The  government,  MOEF  and  IAs  have  been  made  aware  of  ADB’s  policy  on  delayed 
submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of the audited project 
financial  statements.14  ADB  reserves the right to  require  a change in the auditor  (in a manner 
consistent with the constitution of the recipient), or for additional support to be provided to the 
auditor, if the audits required are not conducted in a manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits 
are  substantially  delayed.  ADB  reserves  the  right  to  verify  the  project’s  financial  accounts  to 
confirm  that  the  share  of  ADB’s  financing  is  used  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  policies  and 
14 ADB Policy on delayed submission of audited project financial statements: 
  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  by  the  due  date,  ADB  will  write  to  the  EA 
advising that (i) the audit documents are overdue; and (ii) if they are not received within the next six months, 
requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  imprest  account, 
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 6 months after the due date, ADB 
will withhold processing of requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment 
of imprest accounts, processing of new reimbursement and issuance of new commitment letters. ADB will (i) 
inform the EA of ADB’s actions; and (ii) advise that the grant may be suspended if the audit documents are 
not received within the next six months. 
  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 12 months after the due date, ADB 
may suspend the grant. 
procedures. 
50. 
Public  disclosure  of  the  audited  project  financial  statements,  including  the  auditor’s 
opinion  on  the  project  financial  statements,  will  be  guided  by  ADB’s  Public  Communications 
Policy (2011).15 After review, ADB will disclose the audited project financial statements and the 
opinion  of  the  auditors  on  the  project  financial  statements  within  30  days  of  the  date  of  their 
receipt by posting them on ADB’s website. The audit management letter will not be disclosed. 
27 
15 Available from http://www.adb.org/documents/pcp-2011?ref=site/disclosure/publications. 
28 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
51. 
A Project Procurement Risk Assessment was prepared in accordance with ADB’s “Guide 
on  Assessing  Procurement  Risks  and  Determining  Project  Procurement  Classification.”16  The 
overall procurement classification for the project for the different entities involved is presented in 
Table 5. The general recommendation is to provide practical training to procurement service unit 
(PSU/ULP)  staff  not  only  from  regulation  aspect,  but  also  from  practical  procurement  skill 
aspect, and improving their English proficiency.  
Table 5: Procurement Assessment for the Different Entities Involved 
Indicators 
PSU 
MOEF 
PSU 
Kalimantan 
PSU 
Kapuas Hulu 
Low 
Organization and staff 
capacity 
Information management 
Procurement practices 
Effectiveness 
Accountability measures  Moderate  Moderate to 
High 
High 
Moderate 
Low 
Low 
Low 
High 
Overall rating 
Low 
A. 
Advance Contracting 
substantial 
Substantial to high  Moderate 
Low 
Moderate 
Low to moderate 
Low 
Moderate to 
substantial 
PSU 
Sintang 
Low to moderate 
Moderate 
Low to moderate 
Low 
Moderate to 
substantial 
Moderate 
All  advance  contracting  will  be  undertaken  in  conformity  with  ADB’s  Procurement 
52. 
Guidelines  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time)17  and  ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of 
Consultants  (2013,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).18  The  issuance  of  invitations  to  bid, 
advertisement,  bidding  documents  and bid evaluation,  and recommendation  of  contract  award 
under  advance contracting  will  be  subject  to ADB’s  approval.  The  recipient,  MOEF,  BUPSHA, 
PJLHK,  and  KPHP  have  been  advised  that  approval  of  advance  contracting  does  not  commit 
ADB to financing the project. 
53. 
Recruitment.  ADB  will  assist  the  EA  in  recruiting  the  PISU  consultants  in  accordance 
with  the  ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Consultants.  The  EA  retains  the  responsibility  for 
negotiating and signing the contract with the consulting firm, issuing the notice to proceed and 
supervising the consultant’s services.  
B. 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
All  procurement  will  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Procurement  Guidelines 
54. 
(2015, as amended from time to time).    
Before  the  start  of  any  procurement  ADB  and  the  government  will  review  the  public 
55. 
procurement  laws  of  the  central  and  state  governments  to  ensure  consistency  with  ADB’s 
Procurement Guidelines. Under the project, goods will be procured through national competitive 
bidding  (NCB)  procedures  acceptable  to  ADB  for  packages  up  to  less  than  $5,000,000 
equivalent  or  where NCB  are  not feasible community  participation method  may  be  used  up  to 
$30,000.  For  packages  of  $100,000  equivalent  or  less,  shopping  method  may  be  used.  For 
goods  of  $3,000  or  less,  direct  contracting  may  be  used.    Master  documents  (NCB,  shopping 
16 ADB. 2014. Guide on Assessing Procurement Risks and Determining Project Procurement Classification. Manila. 
17 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Procurement/Guidelines-Procurement.pdf 
18 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Consulting/Guidelines-Consultants.pdf 
Project Procurement Risk: Low 
29 
and  community  participation)  for  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  livelihood  inputs  will  be 
prepared as part of project readiness. First two contracts of each type will be subject to ADB’s 
prior review irregardless of the value of the contract.  All consulting services recruitment notice 
(CSRN) must be posted in the ADB consultant management system (CMS) and the EA and IAs 
must  ensure  that  all  expression  of  interest  are  received  through  CMS  and  evaluated 
accordingly.  An  initial  18-month procurement  plan indicating threshold  and  review  procedures, 
goods,  works,  and  consulting  service  contract  packages  and  national  competitive  bidding 
guidelines are in section C. The procurement plan will be updated annually. 
C. 
Procurement Plan 
1. 
Basic Data 
  Project Name:   Community-Focused Investments to Address Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
  Project Number:   47084-002 
  Country:   Indonesia 
  Project Procurement Classification: Category B 
Approval Number:   G-XXXX 
Executing Agency:  Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
Implementing Agency: 
Directorate of Business Development for Social Forestry and 
Customary Forestry (BUPSHA) 
Directorate of Environmental Services of Conservation Forest 
(PJLHK); 
Directorate of Production Forest Management Unit (KPHP) 
Procurement Service Unit (PSU): (i) MOEF; (ii) UPT Social 
Forestry and Environmental Partnership Office, Kalimantan 
(BPSKL) Banjar Baru – South Kalimantan Province; (iii) UPT 
Production Forest Utilization Control Office, Pontianak 
(BPHP); (iv) UPT National Parks (BBNTNBKDS); (v) official 
commitment maker (Pejabat Pembuat Komitmen [PPK])  
Sintang and (iv) PPK Kapuas Hulu 
Project Closing Date: 30 June 2022 
  Project Financing Amount (in $ million):    
ADB Financing: 
Cofinancing (ADB Administered):  US$ 17.0 
Non-ADB Financing:   US$ 1.7 
  Date of First Procurement Plan:   13 April 2016   Date of this Procurement Plan:   25 August 2016 
2. 
Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan 
a.  Procurement and Consulting Methods and Thresholds 
Except  as  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following 
56. 
process thresholds shall apply to procurement of goods and works.  
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Method 
National Competitive 
Bidding for Goods 
National Competitive 
Bidding for Works 
Shopping for Goods 
Shopping for Works 
Community Participation 
Direct Contracting for 
Goods 
Threshold 
Between  US$  100,001 
and US$ 5,000,000 
Between  US$  100,001 
and US$ 10,000,000 
Up to US$ 100,000 
Up to US$ 100,000 
Up to US$   30,000 
Up to US$ 3,000 
First two contracts subject to ADB’s prior review  
Comments 
First two contracts subject to ADB’s prior review.   
First two contracts subject to ADB’s prior review.  
The  EA  and  IAs  may  purchase  the  items  directly  from 
suppliers, and in such cases, ADB should be satisfied that 
the price paid is reasonable.   
30 
Method 
  Quality- and Cost-Based 
Selection for Consulting Firm 
  Individual Consultants 
Selection for Individual 
Consultants 
Consulting Services 
Comments 
Prior review. Quality-cost ratio of 90:10 and full technical proposal.   
In  accordance  with  ADB's  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Consultants  (2013,  as 
amended from time to time). Per need basis, for technical experts to addressed 
gaps identified later in the project.   
3. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More 
The following table lists goods and works contracts for which the procurement activity is 
57. 
either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Package 
Number 
GDS-001 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Adver- 
tisement 
Date 
(quarter/ 
year) 
Comments 
Forest fire 
suppression 
equipment 
1,228,000 
1 
NCB 
Prior 
Q2 / 2018  Prequalification 
of Bidders: N 
Bidding 
Document: 
Goods 
Comments: 
To be procured 
by BBTNBKDS 
4. 
Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost $100,000 or More 
The following table lists consulting services contracts for which the recruitment activity is 
58. 
either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Package 
Number 
CS- 
GMIC-01 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Recruitment 
Method 
3,996,000 
QCBS 
Consulting 
Services for 
Project 
Implementation 
Supporting Unit 
(PISU) 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Prior 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Q4 / 2016 
Type of 
Proposal 
FTP 
ICS 
Individual 
Technical 
Experts 
374,000 
ICS 
Prior 
Q4 / 2017 
N/A 
Comments 
Assignment: 
International 
Quality-Cost 
Ratio: 90:10 
Advance 
Contracting: Y 
Comments:  To 
be  recruited  by 
BUPSHA 
Comments: 
To  be  recruited 
by BUPSHA 
5. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost Less than $1 Million and 
Consulting Services Contracts Less than $100,000 (Smaller Value 
Contracts) 
The following table lists smaller-value goods, works and consulting services contracts for 
59. 
which the activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.  
31 
Goods and Works 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
No. of 
Contracts 
Procureme
nt Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
2.1a 
3.2a 
Solar Panels 
200W/unit, 250 
units 
Micro hydro Power 
Plant, 40 KVA 
28,000 
59,000 
1 
1 
Shopping 
Post 
Shopping 
Prior 
 Q2 / 2018 
Adver- 
tisement 
Date (quarter/ 
year) 
Q4 / 2017 
3.3a 
Building for 
Community 
Meeting/Green 
School 
28,000 
1 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
2.2 
Cars, 2 unit 
56,000 
2.3a 
2.4a 
2.6 
2.7 
3.7a 
3.8a 
Field monitoring 
and office 
equipment 
Geospatial data 
6,300 km2 (RBI 
Skala 1:2500) 
Motorbikes, 
units 
53,000 
18,000 
12 
28,000 
Speed boats 
15,000 
Latex  Processing 
(sheet 
building 
latex) 
Gallery Building 
69,000 
88,000 
3.10a 
Nursery Workshop 
68,000 
3.10b 
Nursery Workshop 
68,000 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q3 / 2017 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q3 / 2017 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q3 / 2017 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q2 / 2017 
Shopping 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
Comments 
Comments: To 
be procured by 
BPSKL 
Prequalification of 
Bidders: N 
Bidding 
Document: small 
works 
Comments: 
To be procured 
by BPSKL 
Prequalification of 
Bidders: N 
Bidding 
Document: Small 
works 
Comments: 
To be procured 
by BPSKL 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BUPSHA 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
KPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
KPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BPHP 
32 
5a 
6a 
7a 
Agroforestry 
(should 
activities 
engage  community 
participation) 
1,500,000 
5 
NCB 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
3 
5 
CP 
Post 
 Q2 / 2018 
NCB 
Post 
Q2 / 2018 
Rubber  plantation 
(incl. materials) 
70,000 
400,000 
Livelihood 
improvement 
activities  (including 
handicrafts, 
beekeeping, 
fish, 
gardening, 
facilities) 
cat 
home 
water 
Comments: To be 
procured by UPT.  
Community 
Participation 
method may be 
used in specific 
circumstances 
where NCB is not 
feasible. 
Comments: To be 
by 
procured 
UPTs.  
Comments: To be 
procured  by  UPT.  
Community 
Participation 
method  may  be 
used 
in  specific 
circumstances 
where  NCB  is  not 
feasible. 
6. 
Indicative List of Packages Required Under the Project 
60. 
The  following  table  provides  an  indicative  list  of  goods,  works  and  consulting  services 
contracts over the life of the project, other than those mentioned in previous sections (i.e., those 
expected beyond the current period). 
Goods and Works 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
2.1b 
3.1 
Solar Panels 
200W/unit, 250 
units 
Village 
roads/transport 
network 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
112,000 
Estimated 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
2 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior 
/Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure  
Shopping 
Post 
N/A 
791,000 
17 
Shopping  
Post 
1S1E 
3.2b 
Micro hydro 
Power Plant, 
40 KVA 
59,000 
1 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E 
Comments 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BPSKL 
Prequalification of 
Bidders: N 
Bidding 
Document: Small 
Works 
Comments: 
To be procured by 
BPSKL 
Community 
participation may 
be used in specific 
circumstances 
where shopping is 
not feasible. 
Prequalification of 
Bidders: N 
Bidding 
Document: Small 
works 
Comments: 
To be procured by 
BPSKL 
Goods and Works 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
3.3b 
Building for 
Community 
Meeting/Green 
School 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
28,000 
Estimated 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
1 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior 
/Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure  
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E 
3.4 
Infrastructure 
for ecotourism 
26,000 
2 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E 
2.4b 
Geospatial 
data 6,300 km2 
(RBI Skala 
1:2500) 
18,000 
1 
Shopping 
Post 
N/A 
2.5 
Cars, 5 units 
168,000 
2.8 
3.5 
3.6b 
196,000 
77,000 
208,000 
Field and Office 
equipment 
Coffee 
processing 
House  (drying, 
soaking, 
process) 
Latex 
Processing 
Building  (sheet 
latex) 
3.8b 
Gallery Building 
88,000 
3.10c 
Nursery 
Workshop 
68,000 
1 
1 
2 
3 
1 
1 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Shopping 
Post 
N/A 
Shopping 
Post 
N/A 
Comments: To be 
procured by BPHP 
Shopping 
Post 
Shopping 
Post 
N/A 
N/A 
4A 
5b 
Assisted 
Natural 
Regeneration 
6000 Ha 
Agroforestry 
activities 
(should  engage 
1,164,000 
12 
NCB 
Post 
N/A 
3,600,000 
12 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
33 
Comments 
Prequalification of 
Bidders: N 
Bidding 
Document: Small 
works 
Comments: 
To be procured by 
BPSKL 
Prequalification of 
Bidders: N 
Bidding 
Document: Small 
works 
Comments: 
To be procured by 
BBTNBKDS 
Comments: To be 
procured by KPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by 
BUPSHA 
Comments: To be 
procured by BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by BPHP 
Comments: To be 
procured by BPHP 
Community 
Participation 
method may be 
used in specific 
circumstances 
where NCB is not 
feasible. 
Comments:  To  be 
procured  by  UPT.  
Community 
34 
Goods and Works 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
community 
participation) 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
Estimated 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior 
/Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure  
Comments 
6b 
Rubber 
plantation 
140,000 
5 
CP 
Post 
N/A 
800,000 
5 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
7b 
Livelihood 
improvement 
activities 
(including 
handicrafts, 
beekeeping, 
cat  fish,  home 
gardening, 
water facilities) 
Participation 
method  may  be 
used 
in  specific 
circumstances 
where  NCB  is  not 
feasible. 
Comments:  To  be 
procured  by  UPT.  
Community 
Participation 
method  may  be 
used 
in  specific 
circumstances 
where  NCB  is  not 
feasible. 
Comments:  To  be 
procured  by  UPT.  
Community 
Participation 
method  may  be 
used 
in  specific 
circumstances 
where  NCB  is  not 
feasible. 
Consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Type of 
Proposal  
Comments 
7. 
National Competitive Bidding 
a. 
Regular and reference Documents 
i. 
General  
61. 
The procedures to be followed for national competitive bidding shall be those as set forth 
in Presidential  Regulation No.  54/2010  of  the  Republic  of  Indonesia,  dated 6 August  2010,  as 
amended from time to time,  with  the  clarifications  and modifications described  in  the following 
paragraphs required for compliance with the provisions of the Procurement Guidelines.  
b. 
Procurement Procedures  
i. 
Eligibility 
62. 
The  eligibility  of  bidders  shall  be  as  defined  under  section  I  of  the  ADB  Procurement 
Guidelines; accordingly, no bidder or potential bidder should be declared ineligible for reasons 
other than those provided in section I of the Guidelines, as amended from time to time.  
ii. 
Participation of Foreign Bidders and Joint Ventures  
35 
Foreign  bidders  shall  be  eligible  to  participate  under  the  same  conditions  as  national 
63. 
bidders regardless of the estimated value of the contract.  
Foreign  bidders  shall  not  be  asked  or  required  to  form  joint  ventures  with,  or  be 
64. 
subcontractors to, national bidders in order to submit a bid and obtain a contract award.  
iii. 
Preferences  
No  preference  of  any  kind  shall  be  given  to  domestic  bidders  or  for  domestically 
65. 
manufactured goods.  
iv. 
Prequalification and Bidding Period  
The  time  allowed  for  the  preparation  and  submission  of  prequalification  documents 
66. 
and/or bids for large and/or complex contracts shall not be less than twenty-eight (28) days from 
the date of the last day of publication of the invitation to bid or the last day of availability of the 
bidding documents, whichever is later.  
c. 
Bidding Documents  
i. 
Bid Evaluation 
No  bid  shall  be  rejected  on  the  basis  of  a  comparison  with  the  owner's  estimate  or 
67. 
budget ceiling without ADB’s prior concurrence. 
ii. 
Rejection of All Bids and Rebidding  
Bids shall not be rejected and new bids solicited in a rebidding without the ADB’s prior 
68. 
concurrence.  
iii. 
ADB Policy Clauses  
69. 
A  provision  shall  be  included  in  all  NCB  works  and  goods  contracts  financed  by  ADB 
requiring  suppliers  and  contractors  to  permit  ADB  to  inspect  their  accounts  and  records  and 
other  documents  relating  to  the  bid  submission  and  the  performance  of  the  contract,  and  to 
have them audited by auditors appointed by ADB. 
70. 
A  provision  shall  be  included  in  all  bidding  documents  for  NCB  works  and  goods 
contracts  financed  by  ADB  stating  that  the  recipient  shall  reject  a  proposal  for  award  if  it 
determines that the bidder recommended for award has, directly or through an agent, engaged 
in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, or coercive practices in competing for the contract in question.  
A  provision  shall  be  included  in  all  bidding  documents  for  NCB  works  and  goods 
71. 
contracts  financed  by  ADB  stating  that  ADB  will  declare  a  firm  or  individual  ineligible,  either 
indefinitely  or  for  a  stated  period,  to  be  awarded  a  contract  financed  by  ADB,  if  it  at  any  time 
determines  that  the  firm  or  individual  has,  directly  or  through  an  agent,  engaged  in  corrupt, 
fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive practices or any integrity violation in competing for, 
or in executing, ADB-financed contract. 
D. 
Consultant's Terms of Reference 
Consulting  services  will  include:  (i)  project  implementation  supporting  unit  (PISU),  and 
72. 
(ii)  individuals.  The  PISU  consultants  will  support  EA  and  IAs  in  project  implementation  and 
strengthen technical and management capacities of the participating government agencies and 
36 
local  communities. The PISU  will  have  technical  specialists  on  REDD+  and  SFM,  safeguards, 
and administrative specialists. Individual consultants will be recruited to assist the FIP steering 
committee in coordination of all FIP projects in Indonesia.  
73. 
The scope of work for PISU consultants will include but not be limited to the following:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
training  for  the  EA, 
IAs,  and  UPTs  on  project 
Support  EA  and  IAs  to ensure  that  project  implementation  will  fully  comply  with 
government’s  and  ADB’s  policies  and  operational  requirements  in  terms  of 
procurement,  supervision  of  civil  works,  disbursement,  financial  management, 
monitoring and evaluation, social and environmental safeguards policies, REDD+ 
related  technical  guidance,  poverty  reduction,  gender  and  development,  social 
inclusion, and local community participation policies; 
implementation 
Provide 
management to ensure that the project will be implemented in compliance ADB 
and government policies and procedures; 
Provide  general  guidance,  issue  instructions  to  contractors  and  make  locally 
appropriate decisions in consultation with the IAs; 
Certify payment requests submitted by contractors; 
Report  and  advise  the  IAs  and  UPTs  on  work  progress,  quality  control,  and 
implementation issues;  
Prepare and conduct capacity development programs for FMU, district, province 
and other staff  on REDD+ issues; 
Prepare  and  conduct  awareness  raising  programs  for  local  communities  on 
REDD+ and FIP; and 
(viii)  Prepare  or  review,  consolidate  necessary  progress  and  monitoring  reports  for 
submission to EA, ADB, and FIP committee. 
74. 
The consultants are expected to be recruited for the entire duration of the project. A total 
of 1,665 person-months including 20 person-months of international experts and 1,645 person-
months of national experts will be required. Output-based contracts will be used. Detailed Terms 
of Reference for experts are presented in Annex 5.  
d. 
Summary of Consultant’s Inputs 
Key Experts 
International REDD+ and SFM Specialist 
International REDD+ Economics and Fiscal Policy Specialist 
International REDD+ Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) Specialist 
National REDD+ Specialist and Team Leader 
National SFM (Agroforestry and Assisted Natural Regeneration) Specialist 
National REDD+ Economics and Fiscal Policy Specialist 
National REDD+ MRV Specialist 
National REDD+ Safeguards Information System Specialist 
Total Key Experts 
Non-Key Experts (all Nationals) 
National REDD+ Capacity Building Specialists (3 persons, 45 pm each) 
National Land Use and Spatial Data Management  Specialist  
National Forest Fire Management Specialist 
National FMU Business Development and Market Promotion Specialist  
National Community Empowerment Specialist  
National Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist  
National Social Safeguards Specialists (2 persons, 30 pm each) 
National Forest Conflict Management Specialist (2 persons, 20 pm each) 
Inputs (PM) 
10 
5 
5 
60 
30 
30 
30 
30 
200 
135 
30 
20 
20 
30 
30 
60 
40 
National Gender and Social Development Specialist (2 persons, 20 pm each)  
National Environmental Safeguards Specialist  
National Stakeholder Communication and Public Relations Specialist  
National Procurement Specialists (2 persons, 20 months each) 
National Financial Management and Administration Specialists (2 persons, 30 pm each) 
National REDD+ Village Coordinators (2 persons, 60 pm each) 
National REDD+ Village Facilitators (7 persons, 60 pm each) 
National Project administration and accounting assistants (6 persons, 60 pm each) 
Total Non-Key Experts 
TOTAL INPUTS 
37 
40 
30 
30 
40 
60 
120 
420 
360 
1,465 
1,665 
75. 
Individual consultants: The consultants will be based at EA in Jakarta mainly to assist 
the FIP coordination and support the FIP Steering Committee for Indonesia in liaising with the 
Climate Investment Funds Administrative Unit.  The consultants will be recruited as needed in 
accordance with ADB’s Guidelines on the Use of Consultants (2013, as amended from time to 
time). The contract will be signed with the EA. 
A. 
Environment 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
76. 
The  project  is  classified  as  category  B  for  environment  in  accordance  with  the  ADB’s 
Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS) 2009. 19 ADB's category B requirements are equivalent to the 
government  environmental  guidelines  for  an  environmental  management  and  monitoring  plan 
(UKL  and  UPL).  An  environmental  assessment  review  framework  (EARF)  was  prepared  to 
identify  possible  adverse  impacts  of  project  activities  and  mitigation  actions.  The  EARF  also 
guide the environmental assessment process for this project, set up institutional arrangements 
in relation to environmental management and monitoring, and define environmental assessment 
requirements in accordance with the existing/applicable laws and regulations of the government 
and  with  ADB’s  environment  policy  and  Environmental  Assessment  Guidelines.  Sample  initial 
environmental examinations for two villages (Bungan Jaya and Tanjung Sari) were prepared to 
provide prototype for screening and identifying typical impacts of potential interventions and will 
serve as a template for preparing the environmental management and monitoring plans under 
the  project.  Effective  environmental  monitoring  at  all  stages  of  project  implementation  will  be 
ensured. 
The  project  is  expected  to  achieve  significant  environmental  benefits,  including 
77. 
cumulative  reduction  of  GHG  emissions  equivalent  to  3.7  million  tons  of  carbon  dioxide 
equivalent,  improved  watersheds  and  increased  biodiversity  in  the  ecosystems  of  previously 
degraded  and  deforested  areas.  Positive  activities  include:  (i)  community-based  forest 
management  agreements  that  will  secure  the  use  of  land  to  local  communities  and  avoid  the 
conversion  of forest  land to  other  uses,  (ii)    establishment  of  agroforestry  systems  and rubber 
plantation  in  degraded  land20  that  will  store  carbon,  (iii)  assisted  natural  regeneration  in 
degraded  lands  to  sequester  carbon,  (iv)  community-based  forest  management  activities,  and 
(v)  implementation  of  livelihood  activities  such  as  beekeeping,  fresh  water  fish  culture, 
handicrafts production, and community-based ecotourism, that are expected to reduce pressure 
to the forest by providing alternative economic income to local communities. In addition, positive 
impacts  are  expected  through  strengthening  capacity  of  district,  provincial  and  national 
19  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Safeguards/Safeguard-Policy-Statement-June2009.pdf 
20 In the context of REDD+, degraded land refers to areas with low carbon stocks. These areas typically have minimal 
tree cover and an absence of peat, so they do not contain or sequester as much carbon as natural forest do.  
38 
institutions for REDD+ implementation and by supporting harmonization of policies to facilitate 
REDD+ implementation.  
78. 
Project activities identified in the EARF that may have an adverse environmental impact 
include  the  installation  of  micro-hydropower  plants,  rehabilitation  of  small  roads  (2km  and  2m 
wide),  use  of  fertilizer  or  pesticides  in  agroforestry  and  plantations  and  infrastructure  for 
ecotourism  that  may  potentially  cause  minimal  disturbances  to  the  environment,  but  can  be 
easily mitigated with proper site selection, use of environment-friendly construction technology, 
use of best practices to minimize pollution during construction, and proper disposal of waste.  
79. 
All  project  activities  will  be  screened  to  ensure  that  none  will  have  significant  adverse 
impact on the environment. ADB procedures on the categorization of the project using the rapid 
environmental  assessment  (REA)  will  be  maintained  for  screening  and  monitoring  purposes. 
This is based on the most sensitive component, meaning that if one part of the project poses a 
potential  for  significant  adverse  environmental  impact,  that  part  would  be  excluded  from  the 
project to ensure category B for environment. 
For  activities 
identified  as  having  potential  negative  environmental 
80. 
impact,  an 
Environmental management and monitoring plan (UKL-UPL or SPPL) will be prepared following 
Indonesian regulations. This document will be submitted to ADB for approval in which case the 
UKL-UPL or  SPPL  will  be considered  as the  IEE  required  by  ADB.  UKL-UPL or  SPPL  will  be 
prepared  during  implementation  as  location  of  the  activities  will  depend  on  community 
discussion once the project has started. 
In  selecting  activities,  it  is  recommended  that  the  environmental  criteria  to  be  used  for 
81. 
the  initial  screening  include  activities  with  which  potential  adverse  environmental  impacts  are 
not  significant  so  that  it  will  not  surpass  environmental  category  B  under  ADB  guidelines,  or 
would require an Environmental Impact Assessment (AMDAL for its acronym in English) under 
the government’s requirements.  
The  project  will  also  not  fund  the  following  activities  that  would  give  rise  to  significant 
82. 
environmental impacts:  
A large-scale agricultural activity, 
Design of land conversion to convert a forest into agricultural land, 
Agricultural programs that impact on population migration, 
Large-scale water drainage and irrigation projects, 
Construction of water channels in marsh habitat or native forest, 
Large productive forest projects, 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii)  Conversion of mountain forest areas for transfer of uses 
(viii)  Commercial logging, 
(ix) 
(x) 
Housing development, 
Industrial  plants  and  industrial  estates,  including  expansion,  rehabilitation  or 
modification, 
Reclamation and new land development, and 
(xi) 
(xii)  Manufacturing, transportation and uses of pesticides or other toxic materials. 
B. 
Involuntary Resettlement 
83. 
The project is categorized as B for involuntary resettlement. Land acquisition is expected 
to be  minor  and no  relocation will  take  place.  Any  potential  category  A,  specifically  those that 
39 
result  in  relocation/physical  displacement  and/or  lose  10%  of  their  productive  assets,  will  be 
excluded from the project. The project shall uphold legal provisions under the MOEF issuances 
of  2014,  the  Land  Law  of  2012  and  all  other  government  laws  applicable  to  involuntary 
resettlement.  Small-scale  infrastructure  investments  will  only  be  undertaken  on  the  basis  of 
demand from and an agreement with the beneficiaries. 
84. 
The project aims at securing the use of land by MHA and local communities through the 
approval of community-based forest management plans. In addition, REDD+ pilot activities will 
provide alternative source of income to MHA and local communities. To address any involuntary 
resettlement  triggers  to  be  encountered  during  project  implementation,  a  resettlement 
framework was prepared in consultation with the FMUs, local governments in Kapuas Hulu and 
Sintang  districts  and  MOEF  to  guide  the  preparation  of  resettlement  plans,  as  needed.  The 
framework  includes  institutional  arrangements  and  mechanisms  for  disclosure,  meaningful 
consultation and redress of grievances. 
85. 
Based on field survey conducted in some villages of the districts included in the project, 
it  was determined that  negative impacts may  result from the  implementation  of  two (outputs  1 
and 2) out of three components of the project: (i) economic displacement or restriction to access 
among  households  traditionally  utilizing  the  area  and  (ii)  permanent  and  temporary  losses  of 
small areas of land due to rehabilitation/ construction works. The activities are unlikely to require 
land acquisition. No structure will be affected, and no relocation will take place. Annex 1 lists the 
anticipated involuntary resettlement of project activities and the suggested mitigation action.  
86. 
Resettlement  impacts  will  be  minimized  by  ensuring  the  following:  (i)  improvement  of 
small-scale  infrastructure  will  be  along  existing  rights  of  way  or  following  existing  alignments; 
(ii) the project will not finance any subproject with the ADB's category A21 resettlement criteria; 
(iii)  consultations  during  project  implementation  will  involve  local  stakeholders  proactively  to 
ensure  that  all  subprojects  are  with  minimal  or  no  land  acquisition.  Adequate  resources 
(technical and financial) will be allocated to support the preparation, implementation, monitoring 
and reporting of IR impacts. Effective monitoring at all stages of project implementation will be 
ensured by submitting quarterly internal reports and semiannual external reports.  
C. 
Indigenous Peoples 
87. 
The project is categorized as A, mainly from the point of significant positive impacts on 
MHA  or  customary  communities  through  livelihood  improvement  activities  and  beneficiary 
measures. The concerns of MHAs on cultural integrity and livelihoods are built into the project 
design through a community-focused approach. Benefits to MHA communities include a secure 
use of land by the approval of community based forest management plans and diversification of 
economic  activities.  Along  with  positive benefits,  adverse  impacts  were  also identified  through 
an initial impact assessment. Annex 2 presents the results of the impact assessment including 
mitigation actions.  
An 
indigenous  peoples  planning 
88. 
in  accordance  with 
government  laws  and  regulations  and  SPS  2009  to  provide  guidance  on:  (i)  screening  for  the 
presence of MHAs and the project’s impacts on them, (ii) preparing an indigenous peoples’ plan 
framework  was  prepared 
21 A proposed project is classified as category A if it is likely to have significant involuntary resettlement impacts. The 
involuntary resettlement impacts of an ADB-supported project are considered significant if 200 or more persons will 
experience major impacts, which are defined as (i) being physically displaced from housing, or (ii) losing 10% or 
more of their productive assets (income generating). The level of detail and comprehensiveness of the resettlement 
plan are commensurate with the significance of the potential impacts and risks. 
40 
for  activities  anticipated  to  have  impacts  on  MHAs,  and  (iii)  mitigating  adverse  impacts  and 
enhancing  positive  impacts,  and  (iv)  ensuring  adequate  grievance  redress  mechanism.  The 
framework  will  ensure  that  project  activities  are  implemented  to  foster  full  respect  for  MHA 
identity,  dignity,  human  rights,  livelihood  systems,  and  cultural  uniqueness  as  defined  by  the 
MHA  themselves.  The  project  will  exclude  any  subproject  that  would  have  any  significant 
adverse impact on IP. The framework will enable MHA to: (i) receive culturally appropriate social 
and  economic  benefits,  (ii)  participate  actively  in  the  project,  and  (iii)  ensure  that  they  do  not 
suffer adverse impacts as a result of the project.22 Adequate resources (technical and financial) 
will  be  allocated  accordingly  for  preparation,  implementation,  monitoring  and  reporting  of 
indigenous peoples  planning framework. The  Indigenous  Peoples’  Plan  shall:  (i)  mitigate risks 
that MHAs may not be able to capture project benefits, (ii) improve their participation in sharing 
benefits,  and  (iii)  address  the  possibility  that  effects  may  arise  that  may  increase  their 
vulnerability. 
89. 
Implementation  arrangements  for  safeguards.  Pursuant  to  ADB's  SPS  2009,  ADB 
funds may not be applied to the activities described on the ADB Prohibited Investment Activities 
List set forth at Appendix 5 of the SPS.  Implementation arrangements and estimated costs of 
safeguards  monitoring  have  been  integrated  into  the  overall  arrangements  and  total  project 
budget.  Additional  costs  have  been  allocated  for  consultant  interventions.  The  FMUs,  with 
guidance from the IAs and support from the project implementation supporting unit’s consultant 
team,  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  the  safeguards.  The  FMUs  with  assistance  from 
environmental  and  social  safeguards  specialists  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  the 
implementation  of  the  UKL-UPL  or  SPPL,  resettlement  framework  and  indigenous  peoples 
planning  framework.  Two  national  social  safeguards  specialists  (60  person-months  total),  one 
environmental safeguards specialist (30 person months) and one REDD+ safeguards specialist 
(30 person months), together with other consultants such as conflict management specialist and 
community  empowerment  specialist,  will  support  (i)  assessment  of  safeguards  related  training 
needs, (ii) EMMP, RF and IPPF development for focal groups in each FMU, (iii) development of 
appropriate  training  materials,  (iv)  development  of  guidelines  for  effective  implementation  and 
monitoring  of  social  and  environmental  safeguards,  and  (v)  the  establishment  of  safeguards-
related  indicators  for  project  performance  monitoring  and  evaluation.  FMUs,  with  assistance 
from  PISU,  will  incorporate  safeguards  monitoring  in  their  progress  reports  to the  government 
and ADB. 
90. 
Budget for safeguards. Safeguards-related capacity building activities will be financed 
mainly  through  the  output  1,  and  partly  through  output  2,  and  are  intended  to:  (i)  help  ensure 
that  project  implementation  will  fully  comply  with  government’s  and  ADB's  safeguards  policies 
and operational requirements; (ii) improve forest management in a way that community interests 
and rights are safeguarded; and (iii) help local communities increase awareness of REDD+ and 
sustainable forest management. The safeguards consultants will be funded through the project 
consulting services budget.  
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
A  poverty  and  social  assessment  (PSA)  report  was  prepared  for  the  project  to  identify 
91. 
key social issues and how to address them. Information collected effectively contributed to the 
project  design,  ensuring  social  inclusion  of  the  poor  and  economically  vulnerable  as  well  as 
supporting the need for measures to address impacts of climate change on forest communities. 
A  gender  action  plan  (GAP),  stakeholder  consultation  and  participation  plan  (SCPP)  and 
22 ADB-SPS 2009.Appendix 3. 
41 
stakeholder  communication  strategy  (SCS)  were  prepared,  and  input  was  provided  into  the 
summary poverty reduction and social strategy (SPRSS). The SCPP incorporates participation 
modalities 
institutions,  executing/implementing  agencies, 
international  and  national  NGOs,  research  institutions  active  in  the  project  areas,  media, 
community organizations as well as the private sector. 
level  government 
from  central 
92. 
From the analysis conducted, the project is classified as General Intervention (GI). The 
project will benefit at least 10,000 persons in 17 villages, with 2,000 households increasing their 
income  by  participating  directly  in  afforestation  and  other  livelihood  activities.  The  project  will 
contribute  to  poverty  reduction  efforts  of  the  government  by  providing  income-generating 
activities and alternative livelihoods to poor communities, which, in turn, decrease pressure on 
the forests. At the same time, by protecting forests, communities can turn to forest resources to 
supplement their incomes and enhance their adaptive capacity. Small-scale rural infrastructure 
provided by the project is expected to improve their access to basic services and amenities. In 
addition, downstream communities are expected to benefit from enhanced ecosystem services 
generated through the actions of the direct beneficiaries. The project’s institutional and capacity-
building interventions are expected to generate significant social benefits to communities, local 
governments,  and private and non-government organizations;  however, these benefits  are not 
readily quantifiable.  As the project is community-focused, participation and engagement of the 
poor,  local  communities,  civil  society  organizations,  and  other  stakeholders  is  emphasized. 
During project implementation, a social/community development specialist will be hired as part 
of the PISU to look into poverty and social issues, and to integrate social dimensions into project 
operations  and  monitoring  systems.  A  counterpart  staff  from  the  government  will  also  be 
appointed  to  ensure  that  project  implementation  involves  the  poor  and  that  project  benefits 
accrue  to  the  poor.  Indicators  to  measure  increases  in  income  and  the  sustainability  of 
community-based interventions are included in the DMF.  
95. 
The project is categorized as Effective Gender Mainstreaming (EGM). The GAP focuses 
on increasing women’s participation in decision making on natural resource management at all 
levels of governance and service provision through participation in capacity building plans and 
training sessions. The GAP is also designed to improve access to services which will result in 
decreased time and effort for performing their duties. The GAP is presented in Table 6. 
96. 
GAP  implementation  arrangements.  Implementation  arrangements  and  estimated 
costs have been integrated into the overall arrangements and total project budget. Some costs 
have  been  allocated  through  consultant  interventions.  The  FMUs,  with  guidance  from  gender 
focal points in each of three implementing agencies (IAs) and support from gender specialists of 
the  project  implementation  supporting  unit  (PISU),  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  the 
implementation  of  the  GAP  and  incorporating  in their  progress  reports  to  the  government  and 
ADB.  Two  gender  specialists  (40  person-months  (pm)  total)  supported  by  one  national 
community  empowerment  specialist  (30  pm)  and  two  conflict  management  specialists  (40  pm 
total),  together  with  other  environmental  and  social  safeguards  consultants,  will  support  (i) 
gender  and  development  training  needs  assessments,  (ii)  gender  plan  development  for  each 
FMU, (iii) development of appropriate training materials, (iv) development of guidelines for, and 
the  establishment  of  sex-disaggregated  indicators  for  project  performance  monitoring  and 
evaluation, and (v) the promotion of gender equality in SFM and REDD+ initiatives. 
97. 
GAP budget. Capacity building activities  will be financed through the  output 1 and are 
intended to: (i) help ensure that project implementation will fully comply with  the government’s 
and ADB's policies and operational requirements; (ii) improve forest management in a way that 
local  women’s  interests  and  rights  are  safeguarded;  and  (iii)  help  local  women  increase 
42 
awareness  of  REDD+  and  sustainable  forest  management.  The  gender  consultants  will  be 
funded through the project consulting services budget. 
Output 
GAP target 
Table 6: Gender Action Plan 
1. Community-focused and gender-responsive REDD+ pilot projects implemented in Kapuas Hulu 
and Sintang districts 
1.1 Facilitate coordination and information 
dissemination on SFM and REDD+ 
between FMU offices and provincial 
agencies, with improved communication 
infrastructure.  
facilitate policy coordination, technology collaboration 
and information dissemination established at provincial 
level is based on gender-disaggregated 
data/information. 
  Communication infrastructure and processes to 
1.2 Conduct workshops and study visits 
for FMU staff and local communities, 
including women, on REDD+ aspects such 
as safeguards, forest law enforcement, 
FPIC, conflict mediation and PES.  
1.3 Formulate CBFM agreements with 
local communities, including women.  
1.4 Train FMU staff and local 
communities, including women, in forest 
products utilization, value addition and 
enterprise development.  
  Communication programs and materials include 
information on the role of women in forest management 
and REDD+ to increase gender awareness and design 
gender-sensitivea initiatives in the sector.  
  Women  constitute  at  least  30%  of  the  participants  in 
workshops  and  study  visits  as  well  as  REDD+ 
readiness and implementation activities.  
  Study visits for women to share and learn from similarly 
engaged women’s community groups are designed and 
implemented. 
  Gender training programs include integration of gender 
analysis  into  REDD+  strategies,  action  plans  and 
screening criteria.b 
  Women  constitute  at  least  30%  of  the  participants  in 
forest 
in  community 
consultation  processes  and 
management groups;  
  At 
least 
three  women-only 
forest 
management  groups  are  established  as  pilots 
to 
support  NTFP-based  micro-enterprise  development. 
Women  are  also  trained  to  manage  funds  and  have 
accounting literacy. 
community 
  Consultations  are  conducted  in  locations  and  at  times 
convenient for women 
  Separate  assessments  for  women  are  conducted  to 
identify women’s priorities and needs for strengthening 
local organizational capacity. 
  Gender-sensitive training programs are developed and 
implemented  with  content  based  on  men’s  and 
women’s  priorities  and  needs.  Clear  anticipated 
outcomes and indicators are developed to monitor and 
evaluate impact of training interventions. 
  30% of beneficiaries in training programs on livelihood 
skills (including forest product utilization, value addition, 
enterprise development and marketing) are women. 
  FMU  staff  and  village 
facilitators  are 
trained  on 
participatory and gender integrated planning.  
  At  least  30%  of  newly  recruited  field  facilitators, 
technical  experts  and  participants  in  the  capacity 
building  activities  targeted  for  FMU/district  forestry 
agency staff are women. 
43 
Output 
1.5 Establish a REDD+ monitoring and 
safeguards information system, with 
geospatial databases.  
1.6 Develop spatial and business plans for 
FMUs, through a participatory process, 
consistent with CBFM plans.  
1.7 Support establishment of FMU “block 
XXI” and prepare its long-term business 
plan.  
1.8 Establish a fund-flow mechanism at 
community level as a basis for results-
based payments for verified performance 
in SFM and emission reduction.  
1.9 Implement REDD+ pilot projects with 
local communities, including women, to 
generate income, enhance CO2 removals 
and reduce emissions.  
GAP target 
  Gender  indicators  are  included  in  the  safeguards 
information system. 
  30%  of  newly  recruited  field  facilitators  and  technical 
experts for FMU are women. 
  Minimum  30%  of  participants  in  the  development  of 
spatial  and  business  development  plans  for  FMUs  are 
women. 
  Minimum  30%  of  community  participants  engaged  in 
consultation  processes  in  designing  the  FMU’s  long-
term plan are women; 
  A  mechanism  is  established  and  implemented  to 
ensure women’s inclusion in FMU governance. 
  Minimum 30% of participants for consultations on fund 
flow mechanism are women. 
  The 
fund 
flow  mechanism  demonstrates  clear 
indicators and outcomes for gender mainstreaming. 
  30%  of  beneficiaries  in  pilot  programs  on  livelihood 
skills are women; 
  FMU  staff  members  and  village  facilitators  are  trained 
on participatory and gender integrated planning;  
  At  least  three  women’s  groups  are  established  to 
support  NTFP  based  micro-enterprise  development. 
Women  are 
funds  and  have 
accounting literacy; 
to  manage 
trained 
  Larger  markets  and  access mechanisms  are  identified 
(e.g.  these  may  include  supply  chains  for  hotels  and 
resorts  and  other  wholesalers  interested  in  unique 
branding); 
  At  least  30%  women  and  youth  (girls  and  boys)  are 
engaged in the assessment, design and implementation 
of  ecotourism  programs.  Moreover,  gender-equitable 
benefit  sharing  mechanisms  for  ecotourism  will  be 
promoted. 
  Communication 
2. Provincial REDD+ strategy in West Kalimantan effectively implemented 
2.1  Facilitate coordination and information 
dissemination on forestry planning and 
policy between provincial agencies and 
national and district-level agencies.  
2.2 Conduct provincial workshops and 
training programs on REDD+ concepts, 
FMU business plan development and 
carbon accounting, including drafting of 
regulations 
  Gender  expertise 
  At  least  30%  of  the  participants  engaged  in  the 
consultation  meetings  to  draft  the  regulations  are 
women. 
is 
regulations with specific gender indicators. 
included 
in 
the  drafting  of 
infrastructure  and  processes 
to 
facilitate  policy  coordination,  technology  collaboration 
and  information dissemination at the provincial  level  is 
based on sex-disaggregated data. 
2.3 Establish a provincial monitoring 
system and safeguards information 
system for REDD+.  
  At  least  30%  of  participants  in  workshops  and  training 
programs are women. 
  A  concrete  and 
locally 
is  established 
relevant  communication 
mechanism 
the 
information on REDD+ monitoring system and REDD+ 
safeguards information system is easily accessible and 
comprehensible to women.  
to  ensure 
that 
44 
Output 
2.4 Establish a grievance redress 
mechanism on tenure and REDD+ 
activities.  
GAP target 
  At least 30% of the participants in consultations for the 
development  of  a  strategy  for  a  grievance  redress 
mechanism  on  tenure  conflict  and  REDD+  are  women 
and gender expertise is included in the development of 
the mechanism; 
  All 
research,  data  collection  and 
reporting 
is 
disaggregated by sex. 
3. Sub-national fiscal policies on REDD+ harmonized with national policies 
3.1 Analyze fiscal policies on integration of 
natural capital considerations, in Indonesia 
and other countries with significant forest 
resources, and prepare a policy paper.  
  Arrangements 
for  benefit 
policies affecting REDD+ and SFM. 
  Gender  analysis  is  included  in  assessment  of  fiscal 
in  REDD+ 
demonstrate  clear  indicators  and  outcomes for  gender 
mainstreaming. 
  Communication 
sharing 
infrastructure  and  processes 
dialogues at all levels are women. 
  At least 30% of the participants in technical and policy 
to 
facilitate  policy  coordination,  technology  collaboration 
and  information dissemination  established  is based on 
sex-disaggregated data. 
3.2 Facilitate coordination and information 
dissemination on forestry policy between 
national and sub-national agencies, with 
improved communication infrastructure.  
3.3 Conduct policy dialogues to assess 
gaps and identify remedial measures on 
fiscal, monitoring and benefit sharing 
policies and West Kalimantan forest 
industry strategy, leading to policy 
harmonization.  
3.4 Identify relevant funding sources for 
REDD+ implementation and conduct 
training to prepare proposals to extend the 
scope, area and/or time frame of the 
current project.  
a  “Gender-sensitive” refers to training materials that take into account both women’s and men’s interests and needs 
(based on their different roles and responsibilities), and that are presented in such a way that both women and 
men can  understand  the  information  being  communicated and  do  not  contain contents or  images  that  reinforce 
gender stereotypes.  
  All  proposals  developed  for  additional  funding  should 
include  gender  responsive  initiatives  with  clear  gender 
outcome  indicators  and  relevant  activities  specifically 
targeted for women’s groups. 
  Gender analysis is included in conducting the analysis 
on  fiscal,  monitoring  and  benefit  sharing  policies 
relevant to the forest industry 
b   “Screening  criteria”  refers  to  REDD+ and SFM  projects  seeking  support  such  that  one  of  the screening 
criteria include “analysis of gender and gender impacts”. 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  GAP  =  gender  action  plan;  PCR  =  project  completion  report;  PISU  =  project 
implementation supporting unit; SFM = sustainable forest management. 
45  
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Impact the Project is Aligned with 
Environmental and livelihood benefits increaseda. 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Risks 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
REDD+ 
implementation in 
project areas of 
West Kalimantan 
improved. 
By 2026: 
a. Cumulative GHG emissions in project area 
reduced by 3.7 million tons CO2e. (2017-2026 
baseline net GHG emissions of 12.4 million 
tons CO2e) 
By 2022: 
b. Household income of local communities1 in 
three FMUs increased by 20% in real terms 
(2015 baseline: Rp30 million/year in Kapuas 
Hulu, Rp15 million/year Sintang in project 
villages) (with sex disaggregated data on 
targeted beneficiaries). 
a-b. Government 
reports to the 
UNFCCC, MOEF 
records, 
BAPPENAS 
statistics, West 
Kalimantan 
REDD+ 
monitoring 
system 
Outputs 
By 2021: 
1. Community-
focused and 
gender-responsive 
REDD+ pilots in 
Kapuas Hulu and 
Sintang districts 
implemented. 
1a. Four FMUs in two districts implement 
REDD+ pilots in a participatory manner (2016 
baseline: N.A.) 
1b. 6,000 ha of degraded land rehabilitated 
through community-based assisted natural 
regeneration. (2016 baseline: 0) 
1a-e. PPMS 
reports, FMU 
management 
plans, FIP 
progress report 
1c. 1,880 ha of deforested land brought under 
improved community-based agroforestry 
systems. (2016 baseline: 0) 
1d. 5,000 ha of additional natural forest 
protected directly (2016 baseline: 1,400 ha) 
and 91,000 ha indirectly (2016 baseline: 0) 
through community-based forest fire 
management, including improved honey 
collection and fish drying techniques.  
1e. 17,000 ha of natural forest land brought 
under CBFM. (2016 baseline: 0) 
1f. At least 20 staff and 500 community 
members (150 women) trained in 
implementing community-based REDD+ 
pilots. (2016 baseline: 8 staff, 0 community 
members) 
1f. Training 
reports, PPMS 
reports 
1g. At least 10,000 people (5,000 women) in 
2,800 households in project villages with 
improved clarification on access to land and 
natural resources. (2016 baseline: N.A.) 
1g. Field 
surveys, PPMS 
reports 
Rapid expansion of 
agriculture into project 
areas can lower net 
emission reductions 
Conflicts of interest and 
unclear responsibilities on 
REDD+ among 
stakeholders, including 
communities 
Low commodity market 
prices erode household 
income 
Lack of ownership by FMU 
staff and local 
communities 
Lack of clarity on tenure 
and overlaps with 
concessions, and 
unexpected revisions in 
local forest management 
arrangements can delay 
implementation of CBFM 
agreements and REDD+ 
pilot projects. 
Natural disasters, forest 
fires, insect pests and plan 
pathogens affect forest 
growth and quality 
46 
2. Provincial 
REDD+ strategy in 
West Kalimantan 
effectively 
implemented. 
3. Sub-national 
fiscal policies on 
REDD+ 
harmonized with 
national policies. 
Conflict of interest and 
lack of commitment to 
make necessary changes 
in policies and regulations. 
By 2021: 
2a. Three provincial regulations supporting 
REDD+ issued. (2016 baseline: N.A.) 
2a-b. Provincial 
reports 
2b. Grievance redress mechanism on tenure 
and REDD+ operationalized. (2016 baseline: 
N.A.) 
2c. At least 50 staff (15 women) trained on 
REDD+ planning, implementation and 
communication. (2016 baseline: 5) 
2c-d. PPMS 
reports, 
provincial reports 
2d. Safeguards and community-based 
monitoring system for REDD+, including 
activity registry, established. (2016 baseline: 
N.A.) 
By 2021: 
3a. Guidelines for integrating natural capital 
considerations into fiscal policies and 
incentive mechanisms drafted. (2016 
baseline: N.A.) 
3a-c. PPMS 
reports, MOEF 
reports 
Conflict of interest and 
lack of commitment to 
make necessary changes 
in policies and regulations. 
3b. At least three sub-national policies (fiscal, 
benefit sharing and incentive mechanisms) 
harmonized with national policies. (2016 
baseline: N.A.) 
3c. At least three gender-responsive 
proposals for mobilizing sub-national REDD+ 
funding developed. (2016 baseline: N.A.) 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1.  Community-focused and gender-responsive REDD+ pilots in Kapuas Hulu and Sintang districts 
implemented 
1.1  Facilitate coordination and information dissemination on SFM and REDD+ between FMU offices and provincial 
agencies, with improved communication infrastructure (Q4 2017) 
1.2  Conduct workshops and study visits for FMU staff and local communities, including women, on REDD+ aspects 
such as safeguards; forest law enforcement; free, prior, and informed consent; conflict mediation; and payment 
for environmental services (Q3 2018) [GCD] 
1.3  Formulate CBFM agreements with local communities, including women (Q3 2018) [GEM, GCD] 
1.4  Train FMU staff and local communities, including women, in forest products utilization, value addition, and 
enterprise development (Q4 2018) [GCD, GEM, PSD] 
1.5  Establish a REDD+ monitoring and safeguards information system with geospatial databases (Q3 2019) [GCD] 
1.6  Develop spatial and business plans for FMUs through a participatory process consistent with CBFM plans (Q3 
2019) [GCD] 
1.7  Support establishment of FMU “block XXI” and prepare its long-term business plan (Q4 2019) 
1.8  Establish a fund flow mechanism at community level as a basis for results-based payments for verified 
1.9 
performance in SFM and emission reduction (Q4 2020) [GCD] 
Implement REDD+ pilot projects with local communities, including women, to generate income and reduce 
emissionsc (Q3 2021) [PSD, GEM] 
1.10  Provide equipment and training for community-based forest fire management (Q3 2021) 
Provincial REDD+ strategy in West Kalimantan effectively implemented  
2. 
2.1  Facilitate coordination and information dissemination on forestry planning and policy between provincial 
agencies and national and district level agencies, with improved communication infrastructure (Q4 2017) 
2.2  Conduct provincial workshops and training programs on REDD+ concepts, FMU business plan development, 
and carbon accounting, including drafting of regulations (Q3 2019) [GCD] 
2.3  Establish a provincial monitoring system and safeguards information system for REDD+ (Q4 2019) 
2.4    Establish a grievance redress mechanism on tenure and REDD+ activities (Q3 2019) 
3.      Sub-national fiscal policies on REDD+ harmonized with national policies  
3.1  Analyze fiscal policies with regard to integration of natural capital considerations, in Indonesia and other 
countries with significant forest resources, and prepare a policy paper (Q3 2017) [KS] 
47 
3.2  Facilitate coordination and information dissemination on forestry policy between national and subnational 
agencies with improved communication infrastructure (Q4 2017) 
3.3  Conduct policy dialogue to assess gaps and identify remedial measures on fiscal, monitoring, and benefit 
sharing policies and West Kalimantan forest industry strategy, leading to policy harmonization (Q2 2018) 
3.4    Identify relevant funding sources for REDD+ implementation and conduct training to prepare proposals to 
extend the scope, area, and/or time frame of the current project (Q4 2021) [GCD] 
Project Management Activities 
PPMS established and operational (Q3 2017). 
200 staff from various levels (national, provincial and FMU) trained on project management (Q2, 2018). 
Inputs 
 Strategic Climate Fund: $17.0 million (grant) 
Government: $1.7 million 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Not Applicable 
BAPPENAS  =  Badan  Perencanaan  Pembangunan  Nasional  (National  Development  Planning  Agency);  CBFM  = 
community-based forest management; CO2e = carbon dioxide equivalent; FIP = Forest Investment Program; FMU = 
forest management unit; GCD = governance and capacity development; GEM = gender equity and mainstreaming; 
GHG  =  greenhouse  gas;  ha  =  hectare;  KS  =  knowledge  solutions;  MOEF  =  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Forestry; 
PPMS = project performance monitoring system; Q = quarter; REDD+ = reducing emissions from deforestation and 
forest degradation conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks; SFM 
= sustainable forest management; UNFCCC = United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
a  
Indonesian REDD+ Task Force. 2012. REDD+ National Strategy. Jakarta; Government of Indonesia. 2012. Forest 
Investment Plan, document FIP/SC/.9/6. Jakarta; Government of West Kalimantan. 2012. Provincial Action Plan 
for Reducing GHG Emissions, Pontianak. 
1  The  local  communities  predominantly  comprise  Dayak  and  Melayu,  in  Indonesia  known  as  masyarakat  hukum 
adat (MHA) or customary communities. 
2  REDD+  pilot  projects  include  forest-based  activities  (such  as  agroforestry  systems,  rubber  plantations  and 
assisted  natural  regeneration),  other  income  generating  activities  (beekeeping,  catfish  culture,  handicrafts, 
community-based  ecotourism)  and  provisioning  of  training  and  small-scale  infrastructure  (such  as  rural  road 
improvement, micro-hydro and solar panels). 
*  
** 
*** 
Source: ADB 
REDD+ National Strategy, Indonesian REDD+ Task Force, Jakarta, Indonesia, June 2012 
Indonesia Forest Investment Plan, document FIP/SC.9/6, Government of Indonesia, 2012. 
Provincial Action Plan for Reducing GHG Emissions, Government of West Kalimantan, 2012. 
B. 
Monitoring  
1. 
Project Performance Monitoring 
98. 
To monitor the project progress in achieving the planned outcome and outputs, the PISU 
will  establish  a  project  performance  management  system  (PPMS)  during  the  first  quarter  of 
project  implementation.  The  PPMS  will  have  flexibility  to  adopt  remedial  actions  regarding 
project  design,  schedules,  activities,  and  development  impact.  The  PPMS  will  adopt  the 
following  agreed  indicators  based  on  targets  described  in  the  DMF:  (i)  physical  progress  of 
project  implementation,  (ii)  results  of  REDD+  and  SFM  capacity  development  and  policy 
analysis, and (iii) social and poverty development.  
99. 
The  monitoring  and  evaluation  for  the  project  will  include:  (i)  quarterly  reporting  on 
progress  of  the  DMF  indicators  to  the  ADB  in  a  format  consistent  with  ADB’s  project 
performance reporting system, including an update of indicators and key implementation issues 
and  solutions;  (ii)  an  annual  report  to  the  FIP  sub-committee  as  indicated  in  FIP  guidelines; 
(iii) a  mid-term  and  final  report  with  evaluation  on  project  implementation;  and  (iv)  a  report  on 
financial realization appropriate to the government regulations. 
48 
100.  At project inception, the FMUs, in consultation with the IAs and with support from PISU, 
will  develop  comprehensive  PPMS  procedures  to  systematically  generate  data  on  inputs  and 
outputs,  and  the  socioeconomic  and  environmental  indicators  to  measure  the  project  impact. 
The PPMS will include detailed definitions of impact, outcome and output indicators; procedures 
and  schedules for  data collection;  and roles  and  responsibilities.  Implementation of the  PPMS 
will generate data systematically on project inputs, outputs and outcomes for each component, 
as well as on compliance, safeguard and social indicators.  
101.  The  PISU  will:  (i)  refine  the  PPMS  framework,  (ii)  establish  the  baseline,  (iii)  confirm 
achievable  targets  and  update  DMF,  (iv)  finalize  the  monitoring,  reporting  and  evaluation 
arrangements, and (v) establish data collection systems and reporting procedures no later than 
six months after project implementation begins. The IAs will report baseline and progress data 
at  regular  intervals.  IAs,  with  support  from  PISU,  will  also  be  responsible  for  analyzing  and 
consolidating  the  reported  data,  and  for  reporting  the  outcome  to  ADB  through  the  quarterly 
progress reports and to the FIP PSC meetings held on an annual basis. The FIP PSC meetings 
will also be used to exchange information with other development partners active in REDD+ and 
SFM activities in Indonesia. 
2. 
Compliance Monitoring 
102.  ADB  will  undertake  regular  review  missions  to  assess  the  status  of  compliance  of  the 
project  and  the  EA  with  the  grant  covenants  related  to  policy,  legal,  economic,  financial, 
environmental,  and  institutional  elements.  Non-compliance  issues  identified  during  the  ADB 
review  missions  will  be  specified  in  the  quarterly  progress  reports  together  with  the 
recommended course of action. 
3. 
Safeguards Monitoring 
103.  Environment.  The  IAs,  assisted  by  PISU,  will  prepare  and  submit  to  EA  semi-annual 
reports  on  the  environmental  parameters  and  any  other  environmental  co-benefits  identified 
during the course of implementation. The report will cover environment performance based on 
implementation of the environmental management and monitoring plans. The EA, through PISU, 
will be responsible for the consolidation and submission of the reports to ADB in accordance to 
the format and process described in the IEEs and EARF.  
104.  Social  safeguards.  The  social  safeguard  specialists  of  PISU  will  monitor  the 
implementation of resettlement framework and indigenous peoples planning frameworks, as per 
FIP,  government  and  ADB  guidelines.  The  project  is  not  expected  to  cause  any  resettlement, 
but it will result in significant positive impacts on customary communities. The PISU, under the 
guidance  of  FMUs  and  IAs,  will  be  responsible  for  preparation  and  reporting  of  social 
safeguards, as needed. 
4. 
Gender and Social Dimensions Monitoring 
105.  Monitoring of the implementation of the GAP will be undertaken by the IAs and FMUs, 
with  support  from  PISU.  Progress  in  the  achievement  of  the  outputs  in  the  GAP  will  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  PISU  gender  specialists.  The  PISU  will  develop  PPMS,  establishing  sex-
disaggregated  indicators  for  project  performance,  monitoring  and  evaluation.  The  PPMS  will 
include  monitoring  tools,  reporting  templates  (including  use  of  the  ADB  GAP  progress  report 
template)  and  output  indicators,  assisted  by  the  consultants  (national  gender  specialists).  The 
49 
IAs  will  submit  periodic  (minimum  bi-annual)  reports  to  the  EAs  and  ADB  using  these  tools, 
templates and indicators. The GAP budget will include the cost of monitoring and evaluation.  
106.  Monitoring  of  the  pro-poor  and  social  inclusion  design  measures,  indicated  in  the 
SPRSS, Participation Plan, and Stakeholder Communication Strategy, will be the responsibility 
of the FMUs. Periodic activity reports will be submitted by the IAs and FMUs. The FMUs will be 
assisted by the PISU in devising the monitoring indicators and reporting templates in assessing 
progress of the social action plans. 
C. 
Evaluation 
107.  The  implementation  of  the  project  will  be  jointly  reviewed  at  least  twice  a  year  by  the 
government  and the  ADB.  The  EA  and IAs  will  review  and  evaluate  project  performance  on  a 
quarterly basis. The project review will cover: (i) the performance of the EAs, IAs, consultants, 
and  contractors  against  project  indicators;  (ii)  the  scope,  design  and  implementation 
arrangements  of  the  project;  (iii)  identification  of  problems  and  necessary  changes  since  the 
time  of  project  appraisal;  (iv)  effectiveness  of  the  REDD+  capacity  development  and  training 
programs; (v) compliance with grant covenants; and (vi) assessment of project sustainability in 
terms of technical and financial aspects.  
108.  Aside  from  the  regular  joint  project  reviews,  the  government  and  ADB  will  conduct  a 
comprehensive midterm review of project implementation after three years of operation. This is 
intended to identify key issues and constraints that hinder smooth project implementation and to 
come up with appropriate remedial courses of action. 
109.  Within  six  months  of  physical  completion  of  the  project,  the  EA  will  submit  a  project 
completion report to ADB.23 
D. 
Reporting 
110.  The EA will provide ADB with:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with ADB’s project performance 
reporting system(an outline of the progress report is in Annex 3); 
Consolidated  annual  reports  including  (a)  progress  achieved  by  output  as 
measured  through  the  indicator's  performance  targets,  (b)  key  implementation 
issues  and  solutions;  (c)  updated  procurement  plan  and  (d)  updated 
implementation plan for next 12 months  
Annual report to the FIP sub-committee as per FIP guidelines24 
A mid-term report with the evaluation of the implementation of the project; and 
A  project  completion  report  within  six  months  of  physical  completion  of  the 
project. 
23  Project  completion  report  format  is  available  at:  http://www.adb.org/Consulting/consultants-toolkits/PCR-Public-
Sector-Landscape.rar. 
24 Forest Investment Program. 2014. FIP Monitoring and Reporting Toolkit. 
50 
E. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
1. 
Consultation and Participation 
111.  A  consultation  and  participation  plan  was  prepared  in  early  phases  of  the  project 
preparation to identify stakeholders at different levels: district, provincial and national. The plan 
includes  stakeholder  consultation  and  participation  activities  during  project  preparation  and 
implementation with regard to the three outputs of the project (Annex 4).  
112.  The  project  design  reflects  discussions  during  three field  visits  with  local  stakeholders, 
including  customary  community  members,  FMU  staff,  local  organizations  and  NGOs.  In 
addition, field surveys have been conducted with potential beneficiaries to collect information on 
social structure and productive activities of households, and to identify REDD+ pilot activities to 
be implemented. A series of public consultations was organized to get comments from different 
stakeholders:  an  interim  workshop  at  national  level  on  23  March  2015  in  Jakarta  and  public 
consultations at a district level in Sintang and Kapuas Hulu on 6 and 7 April 2015 respectively 
and  at  a  provincial  level  in  Pontianak  on  8  April  2015.  In  every  meeting,  comments  from 
participants  were  recorded  and incorporated  in project  design.  Meetings  were  also  held at the 
provincial level with the regional officials of MOEF. During project implementation, the PISU will 
ensure  that  project  activities  are  implemented  as  per  the  project  design  and  monitoring 
framework and stakeholder participation plan. 
113.  The participation of MHA and local communities is included in all activities of the project. 
Selection of beneficiaries of REDD+ pilots in the target villages will be done in agreement with 
village leaders and with effective and meaningful participation of community members. Similarly, 
the  development  of  forest  management  plans  will  be  community  based  and  gender  inclusive. 
Small  infrastructure  and  service  facilities  will  be  provided  on  the  basis  of  discussions  and  in 
agreement with community members.  
2. 
Communication Strategy 
114.  The  preparation  and  adoption  of  a  stakeholder  communication  strategy  (SCS)  is 
required  by  ADB  to  ensure  inclusiveness,  transparency,  timeliness  and  the  meaningful 
participation  of  stakeholders  in  the  project.24  The  SCS  essentially  provides  an  agreed 
communication  platform  for  all  key  stakeholders  particularly  between  the  project’s  affected 
groups  and  the  EA,  IAs,  and  ADB  to  ensure  that  the  former’s  views  and  interests  are  fully 
integrated  into  the  project  design,  implementation,  and  impacts.  The  SCS  is  also  prepared  to 
guide the project for ensuring effective communications that resonate with the target audience, 
to be delivered in multiple channels. The SCS contains three different communication strategies 
for:  (i) general  REDD+  awareness  and  technical  issues,  (ii)  project  design  related  responses 
(FIP project, FMU functions and related issues), and (iii) project implementation on the ground. 
115.  Key stakeholders, who are essential to be engaged to achieve the project objectives and 
lessen project specific risks, have been identified. Stakeholders include (i) government agencies 
responsible for the design, management, and implementation of the project (MOF, BAPPENAS, 
MOEF,  provincial  and  district  forest  agencies,  and  FMUs);  (ii)  community  organizations  who 
assist  with  providing  community-focused  REDD+  and  SFM  interventions;  (iv)  customary 
communities;  and  (v)  local  media.  The  SCS  serves  to  inform  and  support  community 
development, enhance government agency capacity to manage project outcome, and enhance 
project benefits and mitigate negative impacts. 
51 
116.  The  SCS  ensures  that  vulnerable  groups,  such  as  the  poor,  elderly,  indigenous  and 
customary  communities,  and  women,  who  risk  being  marginalized,  are  provided  with 
opportunities for communication and feedback during project design and implementation. In this 
way,  the  SCS  serves  to  inform  and  support  community-focused  development,  enhance 
government agency capacity to manage the project outcome, and enhance project benefits and 
minimize negative impacts. Similar to the participation plan (PP), the SCS builds on the data in 
the stakeholder analysis and summary of consultation and participation. It complements the PP 
to ensure effective participation of stakeholders in the project. 
117.  The  SCS  is  designed  to  ensure  (i)  a  regular  flow  of  reliable  project  information,  and 
(ii) inclusion  of  vulnerable  groups  in  benefit  distribution  in  project  implementation.  It  complies 
with FIP guidelines and REDD+ safeguard principles from the Strategic Climate Fund, requiring 
clear  language  and  details  on  the  provision  of  benefits  for  indigenous  people  based  on 
customary community law, strengthening multiple benefits and prohibition of the conversion of 
natural forests. The goal is to support efforts that aim to protect forest ecosystem services, build 
institutional capacity and promote biodiversity conservation. The strategy is to take a low-carbon 
direction  that  is  also  socially  and  economically  empowering  instead  of  just  pursuing  forest 
management  with  the  singular  goal  of  reducing  GHG  emissions.  Further  details  of  SCS  are 
given in a linked document. 
118.  A communications strategy implementation matrix is in Table 7 below. For more details, 
please  refer  to  the  supporting  document  on  communication  strategy  which  is  available  on 
request. 
Table 7: Communication Strategy Implementation Matrix 
Objective 
Communicate REDD+ 
intervention and 
development of 
activities on the ground 
Build community-based 
forest management and 
adopted in FMU long-
term management plan 
 Promote community 
production, ecotourism 
to increase local income 
and facilitate market link 
Main Stakeholders 
General target: Government 
opinion leaders, decision makers, 
media, civil society and affected 
people 
Specific Target: 
Pemda, Bappeda, Bupati, 
Governor, Dishut & Perkebunan 
Community Leaders, Head of 
Religious, targeted community 
groups, local CSOs 
Communities and FMU officers 
Means of Communication/Activities 
Interactive dialogue, meetings, 
seminars, focus group discussions 
(FGDs), trainings 
Printed information such as posters, 
brochures, banners, comics with 
illustration and adopt local culture for 
distributions in the villages. 
Website social media, movie, radio/tv 
program 
Information in Bahasa and English 
Same as above. 
Women’s groups 
PKK 
Same as above. 
Collaboration with national designers, 
food travel, adventure travel, sponsor a 
women’s magazine journalist to the 
field, join craft exhibitions, link with 
work of UN bodies such as UNICEF, 
find broader market links. 
Create MOU for collaboration with 
cooperatives. 
Internet-based promotion. 
52 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
119.  ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed 
with  MOEF.  Consistent  with  its  commitment  to  good  governance,  accountability,  and 
transparency, ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations 
of the Anticorruption Policy relating to the project.25 All contracts financed by ADB shall include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
executing agency and all Project contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers. 
Individuals/entities  on  ADB’s  anticorruption  debarment  list  are  ineligible  to  participate  in  ADB-
administered activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project.  
120.  To support these efforts, relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy are included 
in  the  grant  agreement  and  the  bidding  documents  for  the  Project.  The  project  design  and 
implementation  arrangements  provide  for  mitigation  of  corruption  risks.  Risks  associated  with 
project  management,  including  procurement  and  disbursement,  will  be  mitigated  by  the 
engagement  of  PISU  to  advise  and  assist  in  the  procurement  of  goods and  services,  and the 
engagement  of  other  consultants.  The  project  will  also  establish  a  website  in  which  it  will 
disclose  implementation  progress;  bid  notifications  and  their  results;  and  provide  grievance 
mechanism  against  any  corrupt  practice.  References  on  ADB's  Anticorruption  Policy  can  be 
accessed through the following link: http://www.adb.org/Integrity/.  
25 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf 
53 
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
121.  People  who are, or may in the future be, adversely affected by the project may submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent  forum  and  process  whereby  people  adversely  affected  by  ADB-assisted  projects 
can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make a good faith effort to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.    Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, they should approach the Accountability Mechanism.26 
122.  A  grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRM)  is  a  systematic  process  to  receive,  evaluate, 
and address the project-related grievances of affected persons/groups. The EA will set up GRM 
at  national  level  in  consultation  with  relevant  stakeholders  within  nine  months  of  grant 
effectiveness  or  six  months from the  mobilization  of the  PISU,  whichever  is  earlier  and post  it 
publicly  on  the  project  website  with  outreach  for  all  project  areas.  In  addition,  as  part  of  the 
output  2  of  the  project,  PISU  will  establish  a  GRM  at  provincial  level  focusing  on  tenure  and 
REDD+  issues,  nine  months  of  grant  effectiveness  or  six  months  from  the  mobilization  of  the 
PISU, whichever is earlier. An information disclosure mechanism in Bahasa will also be in place 
at  district  level  to  ensure  that  the  local  communities  in  Kapuas  Hulu  and  Sintang  districts  are 
aware  of  grievance  mechanisms  and  their  potential  involvement  and  responsibilities  in  the 
project activities. The PISU will operationalize the GRM at various levels to receive and facilitate 
the  resolution  of  concerns,  complaints,  and  grievances  (both  safeguards  related  and  non-
safeguards  related).  Any  complaint  from  community  will  be  managed  in  accordance  with  the 
GRM. The project, with the assistance of the PISU, will work proactively to prevent issues from 
becoming  grievances  by  ensuring 
that  appropriate  mitigation  measures  are  correctly 
implemented by monitoring and conducting public consultation procedures. 
A. 
Environment 
123.  The  intent  of  the  GRM  is  to  satisfactorily  resolve  complaints  about  the  Project’s 
environmental  performance  during 
the  pre-construction,  construction,  operation,  and 
maintenance  phases.  The  GRM  will  (i)  protect  the  basic  rights  and  interests  of  every  person 
affected  in  the  case  of  poor  environmental  performance;  and  (ii)  ensure  that  concerns  arising 
from the poor environmental performance of the Project are effectively and timely addressed.  
124.  The  MOEF,  the  PISU,  and  FMUs  will  make  the  public  aware  of  the  GRM  through 
awareness campaigns, training, and capacity building. The PISU will nominate and train a staff 
to be the environmental Grievance Point Person. Any person who has complaints regarding the 
project’s  environmental  performance  (e.g.,  safety,  environmental  standards,  criminal  activity, 
and disturbance to plants/wildlife) during the pre-construction, construction, or operation phases 
will have access to the GRM. 
B. 
Affected Persons (AP) 
125.  The  MOEF  and  IAs  will  ensure  a  culturally  and  gender-sensitive  GRM  to  receive  and 
address, in coordination with provincial authorities,  project-related concerns and to resolve AP 
disputes  that  may  arise  during  project  implementation.  It  is  anticipated  that  all  grievances 
related to benefits and other assistance will be resolved at the PISU level.  
26 http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp. 
54 
126.  For MHA or customary communities, GRM shall follow their internal mechanism (if any) 
or  any  mechanism  provided  by  the  local  government  based  on  request  from  community. 
Communities may raise their grievances to MOEF following the newly launched MOEF Decree 
No.  24/Menhut-II/2015  in  January  2015  on  the  Establishment  of  Team  for  Addressing 
Environmental  and  Forestry-related  Grievances.  If  there  are  any  grievances  related  to  the 
environment and forestry, the local community in the project area can raise their complaints to 
the Team. The community empowerment and safeguards specialists of the PISU will assist APs 
in registering their complaints with FMU, and in preparing specific grievances. The resettlement 
framework  mentions  two  types  of  complaints  that  are  specific  in  redress  modalities:  (i) 
compensation rates and (ii) other resettlement concerns.  
XII. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
127.  All  revisions  and/or  updates  during  the course of  implementation should be  retained in 
this  section  to  provide  a  chronological  history  of  changes  to  implemented  arrangements 
recorded  in  the  PAM,  including  revision  to  contract  awards  and  disbursement  s-curves.
55 
56  
Annex 1: Lists of the Anticipated Involuntary Resettlement of Project Activities and the Suggested Mitigation Action 
Anticipated IR impacts 
Mitigating measure 
  Permanent and temporary losses of small 
areas of land due to rehabilitation/ 
construction works may be unavoidable., In 
addition loss of crops and trees may occur, 
although not expected to cause severe 
impacts since rehabilitation works will be 
carried out within existing right-of-way or, if 
any ,additional land will be expected to be 
minor. Loss of structure is not expected.  
Project output / Type of subprojects 
Output  1.  Community-focused  and 
gender-responsive REDD+ pilot projects 
in  Kapuas  Hulu  and  Sintang  districts 
implemented. 
community 
-  beekeeping, 
implemented  with 
livelihood 
1.1 REDD+  pilot  projects 
program 
local 
communities (including women) includes 
non-land  based  activities 
(including 
fish  culture, 
NTFPs) 
handicrafts, 
based 
ecotourism,  and  land  based  activities 
including  1880  ha  of:  agroforestry 
systems 
rubber-
(rubber-coffee  and 
gaharu),  and  rubber  plantation.  The 
implementation  of  these  activities  will 
include  training  as  required  and  the 
development  of  supporting 
facilities, 
which  may  include:  micro-hydro  and 
Infrastructure 
small-scaled 
village 
(including  small 
rehabilitation 
(2km  and  2m  wide  per  village)  and 
facilities for ecotourism). 
roads 
1.2.  Development  of 
spatial  and 
business  plans  for  FMUs,  through  a 
participatory  process,  consistent  with 
CBFM plans   
  Economic displacement or restriction to 
access among households traditionally 
utilizing the area; affect access to land and 
forest resources; 
  Classification and zoning under spatial 
planning27 may restrict access to areas and 
resources presently available to MHAs 
  Secure broad community support/ FPIC. Village 
regulations and or customary regulations on the 
protection of customary and local community have 
to be crafted. Provide transformative perspective 
on social relations such as understanding the 
nature of collective work on shifting cultivation 
may be harnessed into cooperative movement. 
  Provide   compensation for lost land and non-land 
asset loss through several options: 
  Land replacement (arable land) 
  Cash compensation with the amount 
determined by the local government/village 
and participate in the livelihood program 
under output 1  
  In case of voluntary donation, the APs will be 
provided with the participation of the land based 
livelihood program  
  KPH authorities need to be socially sensitive to 
community needs as well as culturally sensitive to 
traditions to generate meaningful and effective 
participation. Social preparation has to be 
considered and planned well with communities. 
  Providing alternative livelihood for household 
income design in close participation of 
communities 
  Meaningful consultation and broad community 
support will have to be observed and harness 
partnership with local NGOs. 
27 A system and process of planning spatial layout, spatial use and spatial use control. Joint Regulation of Minister of Home Affairs, Minister of Forestry, Minister of 
Public Works And Head of National Land Agency on Procedure of Resolution of Land Tenurial Issues in Forest Areas, 2014.  
Project output / Type of subprojects 
Output 2. Provincial REDD+ strategy  in 
effectively 
West 
implemented 
Kalimantan 
2.1  Conduct  provincial  workshops  and 
training  programs  on  REDD+  concepts, 
FMU  business  plan  development  and 
carbon  accounting,  including  drafting  of 
regulations.  
Anticipated IR impacts 
  Economic displacement or restriction to 
access among households traditionally 
utilizing the area; access to land and forest 
resources affected;  
                             Annex 1 
57 
Mitigating measure 
  Forestry authorities need to be socially sensitive 
to community needs as well as culturally sensitive 
to traditions to generate meaningful and effective 
participation. Social preparation has to be 
considered and planned well with communities 
  Providing alternative livelihood for household 
income design in close participation of 
communities 
  Meaningful consultation and broad community 
support will have to be observed and harness 
partnership with local NGOs. 
58 
Annex 2 
Annex 2: Results of the Impact Assessment and Mitigation Actions 
Outputs / Activities 
Positive Impacts 
1. Community-focused and gender-
responsive REDD+ pilot projects in 
Kapuas Hulu and Sintang districts 
implemented.  
REDD+  pilot  projects  focusing  on  forest 
livelihood  options 
implemented  with 
MHA  and  local  communities,  including 
women.  Livelihood  options  include  non-
land based activities (including NTFPs) - 
beekeeping, 
fish  culture,  handicrafts, 
community based ecotourism, and land l 
based  activities  including  1,880  ha  of: 
agroforestry systems (rubber-coffee and 
rubber-gaharu),  and  rubber  plantation. 
The  implementation  of  these  activities 
will  include  training  as  required  and  the 
development  of  supporting 
facilities, 
which  may  include:  micro-hydro  and 
infrastructure 
small-scale 
village 
rehabilitation 
(including  small 
(2km  and  2m  wide  per  village)  and 
facilities for ecotourism). 
roads 
The project provides 
alternative livelihoods and 
households’ income: added 
value from wet paddy field, 
rubber, honey and handicraft, 
including in processing and 
marketing. 
The project potentially 
endorse the change of status 
from illegal to legal of 
community existence in the 
FMU areas and improved 
capacity for sustainable 
forest management 
The development of the 
Project has the potential to 
improve existing social 
infrastructure and to increase 
access to towns. It is noted 
that the Project will involve 
the upgrade of 2km roads for 
participating villages. This will 
reduce current travel time to 
and from service centers 
(includes schools, markets 
and medical facilities) and 
reducing costs of 
transportation of goods as 
well as increasing business 
opportunities. 
The project will improve 
access to market, rural roads 
from farm to market and 
enhance required capacity of 
Negative Impacts 
Positive impact in economic gain 
might trigger undesired competing 
claims over resources addressed 
by project activites, such as 
competing claims over rubber 
agroforestry areas; claim over 
area for ecotourism development, 
etc. 
There might be potential impact to 
community culture/tradition and 
institutions due to development of 
ecotourism with outsiders coming 
and interact closely with 
community. 
New learnings especially 
conceptual ones (REDD+, GHG, 
etc.) may impact on worldviews: 
their connection to local culture 
and tradition related to social 
organization, natural resources 
management and ecosystem 
services 
It may affect their access to land 
and forests; while value added 
income generating activities 
results to raising income in terms 
of cash, it may lead to 
commercialization of cultural 
practices that affect social 
relationships and sense of 
collectivity in natural resources 
management.  
Encroachment of forest due to 
Mitigation 
Endorse clarity of tenure through 
participatory mapping to prevent 
conflicting claims over lands and 
forest, promoting CBFM as the 
main approach of the Project 
activities 
Secure consent through broad 
community support. 
Build concensus among 
community member on the clarity 
of claims over the area.  
Consultation and intensive 
discussion with community 
regarding potential change and or 
transformation they might be 
facing and  build awareness 
among the MHA 
Conduct of meaningful 
consultation and participation and 
operationalize culturally 
appropriate communication 
strategies. 
Provide clear information on 
community culture/traditions, local 
institutions and their role for 
outsiders. Developing rules of the 
game for outsiders while being in 
and interacting with the 
communities. 
Impact on connection to culture 
and tradition will be addressed 
through well designed training 
Outputs / Activities 
Annex 2  
59 
Positive Impacts 
community to have access to 
market. 
It also has the potential to 
improve health conditions in 
the local area should 
electricity be provided to 
MHA and local communities. 
The provision of local 
electricity supply can 
decrease reliance on other 
energy resources, such as 
burning firewood, which can 
negatively impact on health, 
for example increasing the 
risks of respiratory diseases 
and high mortality/ morbidity 
rates, in poorly ventilated 
dwellings (ADB, 2012). 
FMU staff and MHA/ local 
communities will have 
enhanced understanding and 
capacity to be involved and 
participate in REDD+ 
readiness and 
implementation, FPIC 
procedures, conflict 
mediation, landscape 
management and payment 
for ecosystem services 
MHA communities will have 
the opportunity to participate 
in REDD+ pilots focusing on 
livelihood and will have 
capacity to develop value 
added non-timber forest 
products processes and 
showcase their culture 
Negative Impacts 
improved access to market and 
rehabilitation of rural roads.. 
Social exclusion due to elite 
capture in the development of the 
Project, particularly when the 
Project started to provide benefits. 
These may however affect 
community traditions as regards 
the agricultural cycle from 
opening the forest to harvesting 
ceremonies. 
Economic displacement or 
restriction to access among 
households traditionally utilizing 
the area. 
Vulnerable groups which can 
include women, children, 
economically disadvantaged and 
MHA communities are typically 
less resilient to change, may be 
more vulnerable to project 
impacts and may also have 
limited opportunities to take 
advantage of the benefits of 
development.  
Permanent and temporary losses 
of small areas of land due to 
rehabilitation/ construction works 
may be unavoidable, in addition to 
loss of crops, trees and 
structures, may occur, although 
not expected to cause severe 
impacts since rehabilitation works 
will be carried out within existing 
Mitigation 
and workshop that provide 
transformative perspective on 
local culture to show its 
conformity with modern science 
and knowledge. 
Strengthening monitoring system 
of KPH with community 
participation and improve 
coordination between community 
institutions and KPH 
Revisit knowledge management 
initiatives for the project. There 
may be no need to force through 
some concepts. Rather, project 
implementers will have to base 
REDD+ concepts anchored on 
traditional forest management 
schemes and reinforce these. 
Appropriate livelihood 
replacement for lost areas 
whether in terms of new area for 
daily occupation or in terms of 
alternative economic activities 
The pricing policies of Project 
benefits, for example electricity 
supply has to ensure that 
distribution of Project benefits is 
equitable and considers the 
economic limitations of certain 
groups. 
KPH authorities need to be 
socially sensitive to community 
needs as well as culturally 
sensitive to traditions to generate 
60 
Annex 2 
Outputs / Activities 
2. Provincial REDD+ strategy in West 
Kalimantan effectively implemented 
Some activities include: 
(i)  Province-wide workshops, exchange 
visits, and training programs 
conducted on REDD+ concepts, 
FMU business plan development, 
carbon accounting, and SFM 
guidelines  
(ii)  Provincial strategy for tenure conflict 
management, including REDD+ data 
clearinghouse, safeguard 
information system and grievance 
and redress mechanism, developed 
Positive Impacts 
through ecotourism which in 
turn can raise their income 
and connect them to markets. 
Activities on food production 
may prevent the community 
from opening up more forest 
areas for shifting cultivation. 
Communities are able to 
participate in sustainable 
food production 
management. 
Provision of electricity for 
communities which they can 
use to support domestic 
activities 
Provides opportunities for 
communities to participate 
and share access to benefits 
from forest management; 
with security of tenure. 
Strengthened capacity for 
preventing deforestation and 
forest degradation 
Tenure clarity 
Provides opportunities for 
communities to participate in 
alternative economic 
activities and get benefits 
from these activities, 
participate in policy 
collaboration and information 
dissemination 
Negative Impacts 
Mitigation 
meaningful and effective 
participation. Social preparation 
has to be considered and planned 
well with communities. 
right-of-way. 
Decrease in traditional community 
decision-making with respect to 
natural resource management. As 
a state-driven initiative, MHA 
communities will be subject to 
control through the FMU: plans 
will have to be in line with the 
FMU Long Term Management 
Plan. 
Providing alternative livelihood for 
household income design in close 
participation of communities 
Meaningful consultation and 
broad community support will 
have to be observed and harness 
partnership with local NGOs. 
Potential restriction of access to 
forest and forest lands 
Classification and zoning under 
spatial planning may restrict 
access to areas and resources 
presently available to MHAs. 
As the project area is largely rural, 
agricultural based economy 
dependent on natural resources is 
likely to be high. The Project will 
have to consider the use of 
natural resources in the context of 
how the Project might increase 
competition and/or conflict over 
Outputs / Activities 
Positive Impacts 
and implemented 
(iii)  Multi-stakeholders consultations 
conducted to improve 
aaccountability&ttransparency on 
Kapuas Hulu and Sintang districts 
land use planning, hence 
accelerating the process to legalize 
the spatial plan   
3. Subnational fiscal policies on REDD+ 
harmonized with national policies  
Effectiveness of 
implementation of REDD+ 
strategy and sustainable 
forest management 
Annex 2  
61 
Mitigation 
Social preparation is necessary in 
the provision of alternative 
income generating activities prior 
to implementation of the project 
and should include clear 
information regarding possible 
impacts and alternatives. 
Negative Impacts 
natural resources, including 
water. The project may impact on 
MHA communities’ use of water 
for irrigation and drinking supply. 
Potential restriction of access to 
forests and forest lands. Potential 
restriction could result in 
disorientation of communities as 
to what could substitute for their 
loss of income due to limitations. 
For the time being they are 
strongly dependent upon forests 
and forestlands. Sudden 
restrictions will cut their 
dependency on the forest and its 
resources. 
62 
Annex 3 
A. 
Introduction 
Annex 3: Project Performance Monitoring System 
This  document  presents  the  project  performance  monitoring  system  (PPMS)  for  the 
1. 
Republic  of  Indonesia:  Community-Focused  Investments  to  Address  Deforestation  and  Forest 
Degradation  Project,  funded  by  the  Strategic  Climate  Fund  (administered  by  the  Asian 
Development  Bank  [ADB])  and  the  Government  of  Indonesia.  The  PPMS  is  developed  for 
monitoring the indicators and targets for outcome and outputs outlined in the project design and 
monitoring framework (DMF) 
B. 
Project Description 
I.  Components 
2. 
Output  1:  Community-focused  and  gender-responsive  REDD+  pilot  projects  in 
Kapuas  Hulu  and  Sintang  districts  implemented.  The  project  will  implement  REDD+  pilot 
projects  in  17  villages  of  four  FMUs,  including  Betung  Kerihun  and  Danau  Sentarum  national 
parks. The focus is  on  conserving  areas  with high  carbon stocks  and restoring forest  cover  in 
areas with the  highest  potential for maximizing  climate  and development  benefits from  carbon 
sequestration and soil, water, and biodiversity conservation in the project area. Activities include 
(i)  rehabilitating  6,000  ha  of  degraded  land  through  community-based  assisted  natural 
regeneration;  (ii)  bringing  1,880  ha  of  deforested  land  under  improved  community-based 
agroforestry  systems; 
(CBFM)  
agreements  between villages and FMUs  to  cover  about  17,000 ha;  (iv)  protecting  5,000 ha of 
natural  forests  directly  and  91,000  ha  indirectly  from  fire  via  community-based  forest  fire 
management; (v) strengthening REDD+ monitoring and safeguards information systems at the 
district level; (vi) developing spatial and business plans for FMUs, in line with CBFM plans; and 
(vii)  strengthening  the  capacity  of  FMU  staff  and  local  communities,  including  women,  on 
REDD+  safeguards,  SFM,  conflict  mediation,  and  payment  for  ecosystem  services.  The 
activities  will  reduce  pressure  on  forests  by  providing  alternative  livelihoods  to  local 
communities, contributing to their economic resilience. 
formulating  community-based 
forest  management 
(iii) 
3. 
Output 2: Provincial REDD+ strategy in West Kalimantan effectively implemented. 
This  output  will  address barriers  to  effective implementation  of  the  provincial  policy  framework 
and strategy for REDD+ in West Kalimantan. Key activities include (i) strengthening the capacity 
of provincial staff to understand REDD+ concepts, monitor and report on REDD+, prepare FMU 
business plans, draft REDD+ regulations, and perform carbon accounting; (ii) establishing and 
linking  province-wide  grievance  and  benefit  sharing  mechanisms  with  FMUs  and  national 
systems;  (iii)  creating  a  provincial  REDD+  monitoring  and  safeguards  information  system, 
including  a  REDD+  activity  registry;  and  (iv)  establishing  a  grievance  redress  mechanism  on 
tenure and REDD+ activities. 
4. 
Output  3:  Sub-national  fiscal  policies  on  REDD+  harmonized  with  national 
policies.  Key  activities  include  (i)  analyzing  fiscal  policies  for  integration  of  natural  capital 
considerations  to  provide  policy  guidance  to  national  and  subnational  governments;  (ii) 
conducting  policy  dialogues  to  assess  gaps  in  fiscal,  monitoring,  and  benefit  sharing  policies 
and  West  Kalimantan  forest  industry  strategy,  and  identifying  measures  for  effective 
harmonization  of  policies;  and  (iii)  identifying  funding  sources  for  REDD+  implementation  and 
conducting  training  to  prepare  proposals  to  extend  the  scope,  area  and/or  time  frame  of  the 
current project. 
Annex 3  
63 
II.  Project Area 
5. 
The  project  will  be  implemented  in  Sintang  and  Kapuas  Hulu  districts,  which  hold  the 
second and third largest state forest area in West Kalimantan province. Direct interventions of 
the project will be implemented in 17 villages (Table 1). 
Table 2: Villages in Kapuas Hulu and Sintang included in the Project 
Population  Households  Area (ha) 
7,106 
9,608 
2,713 
SN 
Village 
Kapuas Hulu District 
FMU Model Kapuas Hulu 
1  Banua Tengah 
2  BatuLintang 
3  Nanga Nyabau 
4  Padua Mendalam 
5  RantauPrapat 
6  SibauHilir 
7  Sibau Hulu 
8  Sungai Uluk Palin 
9  Tanjung Lasa 
FMU block XXI 
10  Bunut Hulu 
11  Nanga Tuan 
FMU National Park BetungKerihun 
12  Bunjun Jaya 
13  Tanjung Lokang 
FMU National Park DanauSentarum 
Sintang District 
FMU Model Sungai Meraka 
14  KayuDujung 
15  Radin Jaya 
16  Senangan Kecil 
17  Tanjung Sari 
Total 
574 
326 
365 
292 
422 
2,439 
1,090 
363 
574 
1,149 
838 
 691 
485 
100 
145 
100 
179 
89 
 610 
365 
157 
124 
322 
197 
199 
126 
119 
175 
143 
240 
381 
550 
1,399 
128 
385 
78 
75 
2,468 
 965 
4,070 
1,022 
248 
1,898 
915 
442 
815 
13,678 
502 
214 
107 
199 
3,735 
66 
 123 
 21 
38 
7,354 
C. 
Project Costing 
The  project  is  estimated  to cost  $18.7 million  (Table  2). The  project  investment  plan  is 
6. 
given in Table 3 below. 
Source 
Strategic Climate Funda  
Government 
Total 
Table 2: Financing Plan 
Amount ($ million) 
Share of Total (%) 
90.9 
9.1 
100.0 
17.0 
  1.7 
18.7 
a Under the Forest Investment Program financed by the Strategic Climate Fund. Administered 
by the Asian Development Bank. 
Source: ADB. 
64 
Annex 3 
Table 3: Project Investment Plan ($ million) 
Item 
A.  
Base Costb 
1. Community-focused and gender-responsive REDD+ pilots    
2. Provincial REDD+ strategy in West Kalimantan effectively implemented 
3. Sub-national fiscal policies on REDD+ harmonized with national policies 
B.  
Subtotal (A) 
Contingenciesc 
Total (A+B) 
Amounta 
15.35 
1.27 
1.07 
17.69 
1.01 
18.70 
REDD+  =  Reducing  Emissions  from  Deforestation  and  Degradation,  conservation,  sustainable  management  of 
forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks. 
a  Includes taxes and duties of $1.7 million to be financed from government resources through exemption. ADB may 
finance  taxes  and  duties  for  the  project.    Taxes  and  duties  financing  by  ADB  is  within  the  reasonable  threshold 
identified  in  the  CPS,  does  not  represent  an  excessive  share  of  project  investment  plan,  apply  only  to  ADB 
financed expenditures, and is material and relevant to the project 
b  In mid-2016 prices. 
c  Physical contingencies computed at 10% for civil works; 3% for consulting services, and 8% for community driven 
development activities, training, surveys, and studies. Price contingencies computed at 1.5% on foreign exchange 
costs  and  5.1%  on  local  currency  costs;  includes  provision  for  potential  exchange  rate  fluctuation  under  the 
assumption of a purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
Sources: ADB and government estimates. 
D. 
Project Implementation Arrangements 
7. 
The  Directorate General  of  Social  Forestry  and  Environmental  Partnerships  (Perhutanan 
Social dan Kemitraan Lingkungan – PSKL) of the Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MOEF) 
will  be  the  executing  agency  (EA).    The  EA  will  provide  overall  coordination,  ensure  proper 
financial  management  and  comply  with  annual  monitoring  and  reporting  of  the  project’s 
contribution  to  the  FIP  results  framework.  The  implementing  agencies  (IAs)  will  be:  (i)  the 
Directorate of Business Development for Social Forestry and Customary Forest (Direktorat Bina 
Usaha  Perhutanan  Sosial  dan  Hutan  Adat,  BUPSHA)  to  implement  REDD+  activities  through 
partnerships  with  local  communities  in  FMUs  outside  national  parks,  (ii)  the  Directorate  of 
Environmental  Services  of  Conservation  Forest  (Direktorat  Pemanfaatan  Jasa  Lingkungan 
Hutan  Konservasi,  PJLHK)  to  implement  REDD+  activities  in  national  parks,  and  (iii)  the 
Directorate  of  Production  Forest  Management  Unit  (Direktorat  Kesatuan  Pengelolaan  Hutan 
Produksi,  KPHP)  to  implement  REDD+  activities  other  than  those  related  to  social  forestry  in 
production forests  of  FMUs.  The  respective technical  implementation  units  of  IAs  at  provincial 
levels  will  assist  IAs  in  effective  project  monitoring.  The  provincial  and  district  forest  agencies 
and  FMUs  will  collaborate  with  the  technical  implementation  units  and  are  supported  by  a 
consultant team. 
8. 
The  FIP  steering  committee  for  Indonesia,  comprising  representatives  of  various 
ministries,  will  serve  as  the  project  steering  committee  and  will  coordinate  all  FIP-supported 
projects  to  be  administered  by  ADB,  World  Bank  and  IFC.  The  implementation  arrangements 
are described in detail in the project administration manual (PAM).28  
E. 
9. 
Implementation Progress 
[Brief write-up on the status of implementation of activities] 
Implementation  progress  in  terms  of  start-up  activities,  safeguards,  procurement  of 
10. 
goods and services, contracts, and physical progress are presented below. 
28  Project Administration Manual (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2). 
Annex 3  
65 
a.  
Start-up Activities 
11. 
[Brief write-up on the status of activities] 
Table 4: Start-up Activities 
Deadline 
Status 
Activity 
Opening of imprest account 
Recruitment of PISU 
Award of Goods Packages 
b.  
Safeguards 
[Brief write-up on the status of activities]. The table below presents the project’s status 
12. 
on safeguards. 
Table 5: Safeguards 
Resettlement Plan 
Environment 
Assessment 
Indigenous People 
Completed 
Yes/No/NR 
On-
going 
- 
Completed 
Yes/No 
On-
going 
- 
Completed 
Yes/No 
On-
going 
- 
Sub-
project/ 
Contract 
Social 
Safeguard 
Assessment 
Contract 
no. 1 
Completed 
Social 
Safeguard 
Screening 
(Y/N) 
Y 
c.  
Procurement 
[Brief write-up on the status of procurements]. The tables and graphs below present the 
13. 
project progress on procurement of goods and equipment, works, and works contracts  
Package 
Estimated Amount ($) 
Date of Award 
Contract Amount Awarded ($) 
Table 6: Goods and Equipment 
Package 1 
Package 2 
Package 3 
[You may insert graph for estimated and actual contract awards of goods] 
Package 
Estimated Amount ($) 
Date of Award 
Contract Amount Awarded ($) 
Table 7: Progress of Agroforestry (& other activities) 
Package 1 
Package 2 
Package 3 
Fund Source 
Amount Allocation($) 
Amount Disbursement($) 
Table 8: Disbursements 
ADB 
Government 
Table 8: Financial Progress 
Amount 
Budgeted ($) 
Contract Amount 
Awarded ($) 
Amount Paid ($) 
66 
Annex 3 
Items 
Goods: 
Contract 1 
Contract 2 
Consulting Services 
Contract 1 
Individual 1 
Project Management 
D. 
Performance vs. DMF 
The project’s performance against the targets set out in the DMF for outcome,  outputs, 
14. 
and inputs is reported in the table below:  
Achievements 
Results Chain  Performance Indicators with Targets and Baselines 
Outcome 
REDD+ 
implementation 
in project areas 
of West 
Kalimantan 
improved 
By 2026: 
a. Cumulative GHG emissions in project area reduced by 
3.7 million tons CO2e. (2017-2026 baseline net GHG 
emissions of 12.4 million tons CO2e) 
By 2022: 
b. Household income of local communities1 in three FMUs 
increased by 20% in real terms (2015 baseline: Rp30 
million/year in Kapuas Hulu, Rp15 million/year Sintang in 
project villages) (with sex disaggregated data on targeted 
beneficiaries). 
Outputs 
By 2021: 
1.Community-
focused and 
gender-
responsive 
REDD+ pilots in 
Kapuas Hulu 
and Sintang 
districts 
implemented 
1a. Four FMUs in two districts implement REDD+ pilots in 
a participatory manner (2016 baseline: N.A.) 
1b. 6,000 ha of degraded land rehabilitated through 
community-based assisted natural regeneration. (2016 
baseline: 0) 
1c. 1,880 ha of deforested land brought under improved 
community-based agroforestry systems. (2016 baseline: 0) 
1d. 5,000 ha of additional natural forest protected directly 
(2016 baseline: 1,400 ha) and 91,000 ha indirectly (2016 
baseline: 0) through community-based forest fire 
management, including improved honey collection and fish 
drying techniques.  
1e. 17,000 ha of natural forest land brought under CBFM. 
(2016 baseline: 0) 
1f. At least 20 staff and 500 community members (150 
women) trained in implementing community-based REDD+ 
pilots. (2016 baseline: 8 staff, 0 community members) 
1g. At least 10,000 people (5,000 women) in 2,800 
households in project villages with improved clarification 
on access to land and natural resources. (2016 baseline: 
N.A.) 
By 2021: 
Results Chain  Performance Indicators with Targets and Baselines 
2. Provincial 
REDD+ strategy 
in West 
Kalimantan 
effectively 
implemented 
2a. Three provincial regulations supporting REDD+ issued. 
(2016 baseline: N.A.) 
2b. Grievance redress mechanism on tenure and REDD+ 
operationalized. (2016 baseline: N.A.) 
Annex 3  
67 
Achievements 
3. Sub-national 
fiscal policies on 
REDD+ 
harmonized with 
national policies 
2c. At least 50 staff (15 women) trained on REDD+ 
planning, implementation and communication. (2016 
baseline: 5) 
2d. Safeguards and community-based monitoring system 
for REDD+, including activity registry, established. (2016 
baseline: N.A.) 
By 2021: 
3a. Guidelines for integrating natural capital considerations 
into fiscal policies and incentive mechanisms drafted. 
(2016 baseline: N.A.) 
3b. At least three sub-national policies (fiscal, benefit 
sharing and incentive mechanisms) harmonized with 
national policies. (2016 baseline: N.A.) 
3c. At least three gender-responsive proposals for 
mobilizing sub-national REDD+ funding developed. (2016 
baseline: N.A.) 
E.  
Gender Action Plan 
The  project’s  progress  against  the  Gender  Action  Plan  (use  Table  8  of  PAM)  is 
15. 
presented in a table below. 
F.  
Status of Compliance with Grant Covenants  
16. 
There are [number] grant covenants, out of which [number] are complied with, [number] 
are partly complied, [number] are ongoing, [number] and are still not met, [number] are not yet 
due. The list of covenants under relevant categories and their status of compliance as of [date] 
is provided in the table below.  
Sr. No. 
Table 9: Status of Compliance with Grant Covenants 
Covenant 
Reference in Grant 
Agreement (GA) 
Status of 
Compliance 
Remarks 
Financial Covenants 
1.  
2.  
Safeguard Covenants  
3.  
4.  
Social Covenants  
5.  
6.  
Economic Covenants  
7.  
8.  
Others Covenants  
68 
Annex 3 
G.  
Problems and Issues during Implementation  
Describes problems caused by delayed project implementation over the last 6 months. The list 
of actions taken and the status of proposed actions are recorded 
Output 1: Community focused and gender responsive REDD+ pilot projects in Kapuas Hulu and Sintang districts implemented 
Annex 4: Consultation and Participation Plan 
                                                     Annex 4   
69 
Time Line 
Start  End 
2016  2021 
Who is 
Responsible 
Team Leader, 
 Project 
Implementation 
Supporting Unit 
(PISU) 
2016  2021 
Team Leader of 
PISU and FMU, 
and UPT of 
government offices  
Stakeholders 
Objectives of 
intervention 
Directorate General of 
Social Forestry and 
Environmental Partnership 
as Executing Agency 
To provide policy and 
guidelines, and to plan 
and coordinate the 
implementation of project 
activities 
Approach to 
participation 
and depth 
Consultation, 
Depth: high. 
Participation Method 
Method 
Through regular steering committee and 
technical consultative group meetings and 
routine office work 
UPT (BPDAS, BP2HP, 
BPKH, BK NP, DS NP) 
and FMU (FMU P/K/L) as 
Implementing Units. 
To plan and implement 
project activities in the 
project areas 
Partnership, 
depth high. 
Involvement in project activities in line with 
descriptions as found in other project 
documents, including:  
  train FMU staff, MHA and local 
community members, including women, 
on REDD+ aspects;  
  enforce forest law;  
  oversee implementation of safeguards, 
FPIC, conflict mediation and PES;  
  establish a REDD+ monitoring and 
safeguard information system with 
geospatial databases;  
  develop spatial and business plan for 
FMU through a participatory process 
consistent with CBFM plan;  
  support establishment of FMU “block 
XXI” and prepare its business plan;   
  support assisted natural regeneration of 
forest;  
  establish a fund flow mechanism at 
community level as basis of result-based  
payments for verified performance in 
SFM and emission reduction; and 
  facilitate coordination and information 
dissemination on SFM and REDD+ 
between FMU and provincial offices with 
improved communication infrastructure.  
70 
Annex 4 
Stakeholders 
Objectives of 
intervention 
Local firms, which may 
include NGOs, as project 
sub-contractors 
To implement project 
components awarded 
through open bidding 
Approach to 
participation 
and depth 
Partnership,  
Depth: high. 
Participation Method 
Method 
Involvement in project activities in line with 
descriptions as found in other project 
documents, including: 
  delineate forest and village areas in 
FMU,  
  design community-based forest 
management initiatives in 10 villages (in 
FMU impact areas),  
  oversee land-based and non-land-based 
livelihood development,   
  implement small grants for women and 
rural development activities, and 
  provide equipment and training for 
community-based forest management. 
To independently monitor 
project implementation 
Consultation,  
Depth: high. 
To conduct close monitoring of activities: 
  delineation of forest and village areas in 
National NGOs to act as 
an independent monitor 
and watch dog 
MHA, local communities, 
and women as right holder 
and project owners 
To get prior informed, 
consent and involved to 
the project activities and 
outputs 
To develop ownership and 
get equitable benefits from 
the project results 
FMU,  
  design community-based forest 
management initiatives in 10 villages (in 
FMU impact areas),  
  land-based and non-land-based 
livelihood development,   
  implementation of small grants for 
women and rural development activities,  
  provide equipment and training for 
community-based forest management 
Partnership,  
Depth: high 
Involvement in project activities:  
  Delineation of forest and village areas in 
FMU,  
  design of community-based forest 
management in 10 village (in FMU 
impact areas),  
  land-based livelihood development,  
  non-land-based livelihood development,  
  small grant for women,  
  rural development activities, 
  provide equipment and training for 
community-based forest management. 
Time Line 
Start  End 
2016  2021 
Who is 
Responsible 
Responsible 
persons within any 
contracted firm or 
NGO(s)  
Focal persons for 
advocacy and 
monitoring 
functions 
2016  2021 
Village 
Facilitator(s), Head 
of villages and 
community 
representatives 
Stakeholders 
Objectives of 
intervention 
Private sector companies 
(palm oil companies and 
association) as 
development partners 
To generate and share 
information and resources 
for economic development 
and reduce emissions 
Approach to 
participation 
and depth 
Information 
generation 
Depth: low. 
Participation Method 
Method 
Share project communication and 
information materials, printed and electronic 
through project website 
Who is 
Responsible 
Communication/PR 
Specialist 
Time Line 
Start  End 
2015  2021 
Annex 4  
71 
72 
Annex 4 
Output 2: Provincial REDD+ strategy in West Kalimantan effectively implemented 
Stakeholders 
Directorate General of 
Social Forestry and 
Environmental Partnership 
as executing agency 
UPT and FMU as 
Implementing Units. 
Objectives of their 
intervention 
To provide policy, 
guidelines, plan and 
coordinate the 
implementation of 
project activities  
To plan and implement 
project activities in their 
areas. 
National NGOs as  
independent monitoring, 
reviewer  
To take part in review 
of existing and new 
policies formulation.  
Approach to 
participation 
and depth 
Consultation, 
depth: high 
Participation Method 
Time Line 
Method 
Who is Responsible  Start 
End 
Steering Committee and Technical 
Consultative Group Meetings 
Project Implementing 
Units 
2016  2021 
Partnership, 
depth: high. 
Involve in project activities:  
  Establish a provincial monitoring and 
Project Implementing 
Units 
2016  2021 
safeguard information system for REDD+,  
  conduct provincial workshops and training 
programs on REDD+ concepts and 
carbon accounting including drafting 
regulations, 
 establish a grievance redress mechanism 
on tenure and REDD+ activities,  
facilitate   coordination and information 
dissemination  
 
 
Consultation, 
depth: high. 
To monitor, review project activities :  
  processes to establish a provincial 
Project Implementing 
Units 
2016  2021 
monitoring and safeguard information 
system for REDD+, 
 conduct provincial workshops and 
training programs on REDD+ concepts 
and carbon accounting including drafting 
regulations, 
 establish a grievance redress mechanism 
on tenure and REDD+ activities,  
facilitate   coordination and information 
dissemination 
 
 
 
MHA, local communities 
and women as primary 
stakeholder and most 
affected by REDD+ policies 
and strategies in the project 
area.    
To enhance their 
capacity related with 
REDD+ policy and 
process and take fair 
benefit from it at the 
implementation.  
Consultation, 
depth: high. 
Participate in training/workshop:  
  safeguard, carbon accounting, 
Project Implementing 
Units 
2016 
2021 
participatory planning,  
  design strategy of grievance mechanism,  
 
tenure conflict resolution. Active 
participation on consultative process of 
policy on monitoring of REDD+ activities.   
Private sector (palm oil and 
timber companies and 
association) as 
development partners 
To inform to the project 
and generate support. 
Information 
sharing, depth: 
low. 
Share project communication and information 
materials, printed and electronic through 
project website 
Project Implementing 
Units 
2016  2021 
Annex 4  
73 
Time Line 
Start 
End 
2016 
2021 
2016 
2021 
Who is 
Responsible 
Project 
Implementing 
Units 
Project 
Implementing 
Units 
Project 
Implementing 
Units 
2016 
2021 
Output 3: Subnational fiscal policies on REDD+ harmonized with national policies 
Stakeholders 
Directorate General of 
Social Forestry and 
Environmental 
Partnership as 
executing agency 
UPT and FMU as 
Implementing Units. 
Objectives of their 
intervention 
To provide policy, 
guidelines, plan and 
coordinate the 
implementation of project 
activities  
To plan and implement 
project activities in their 
areas. 
National NGOs as  
independent monitoring, 
reviewer  
To take part in review of 
existing and new policies 
formulation.  
Approach to 
participation 
and depth 
Consultation, 
depth: high 
Participation Method 
Method 
Steering Committee and Technical 
Consultative Group Meetings 
Partnership, 
depth: high. 
Involvement in project activities:  
  Assessment of fiscal policies 
 
 
harmonization and production of policy 
paper,  
Technical and policy dialogues on 
harmonizing fiscal policies and 
regulations, forest industry strategy in 
West Kalimantan assessed and support 
provided to ensure the policy 
harmonization with forest industry strategy 
at national level.  
Identify relevant funding sources for 
REDD+ implementation and conduct 
training to prepare proposal to extent 
scope, area and/or time frame of the 
current project.    
Consultation, 
depth: high. 
Take part in project processes:   
  Assessment of fiscal policies 
 
harmonization and production of policy 
paper,  
technical and policy dialogues on 
harmonizing fiscal policies and 
regulations,  
  Assess and support forest industry 
 
strategy in West Kalimantan to ensure the 
policy harmonization with forest industry 
strategy at national level.  
Identify relevant funding sources for 
REDD+ implementation and conduct 
training to prepare proposal to extent 
scope, area and/or time frame of the 
current project. 
74 
Annex 4 
Stakeholders 
MHA, local communities 
and women as primary 
stakeholder and most 
affected by REDD+ 
policies and strategies 
in the project area.    
Private sector (palm oil 
and timber companies 
and association) as 
development partners 
Objectives of their 
intervention 
To enhance their capacity 
related with REDD+ policy 
and process and take fair 
benefit from it at the 
implementation.  
Approach to 
participation 
and depth 
Consultation, 
depth: high. 
Participation Method 
Method 
  Participate in training/workshop: 
safeguard, carbon accounting, 
participatory planning, design strategy of 
grievance mechanism, tenure conflict 
resolution.  
  Active participation on consultative 
process of policy on monitoring of REDD+ 
activities.   
Time Line 
Start 
End 
2016 
2021 
Who is 
Responsible 
Project 
Implementing 
Units  
To inform to the project 
and generate support. 
Information 
sharing, depth: 
low. 
Share project communication and information 
materials, printed and electronic through 
project website 
Project 
Implementing 
Units  
2016 
2021 
Annex 5 
75 
Annex 5: Project Implementation Supporting Unit (PISU) Consultants 
A. 
Terms of Reference 
Consulting  services  are  required  to  support  the  implementation  of  the  “Community-
1. 
Focused Investments to Address Deforestation and Forest Degradation Project”. The Ministry of 
Environment  and  Forestry  (MOEF)  is  the  executing  agency  (EA).  The  project  implementation 
supporting  unit  (PISU)  consultants  will  support  EA  and  the  implementing  agencies  (IAs)  in 
implementation  and  strengthen  technical  and  management  capacities  of  the  participating 
government  agencies  and  local  communities.  The  PISU  will  include  technical  specialists  on 
REDD+ and state forest management (SFM), and safeguards (Table 1).  
The  firm  will  be  providing  20  person-months  (pm)  of  international  and  1,645  pm  of 
2. 
national consulting inputs. Recruitment will follow the quality- and cost-based selection method 
(QCBS  90:10)  with  full  technical  proposal,  in  accordance  with  the  Asian  Development  Bank 
(ADB) Guidelines on the Use of Consultants (2013, as amended from time to time). Preference 
will be given to firms with  work experience in Indonesia, especially in West Kalimantan. Firms 
which provide evidence that personnel proposed are full time or long term employees of the firm 
will be given positive consideration. 
In the technical proposal, firms are encouraged to describe in detail how they propose to 
3. 
develop  and  deliver  the  proposed  outputs  under  section  “Approach  and  Methodology.”  The 
proposed  methodology  should  have  a  logical  implementation  schedule  as  per  the  design  and 
monitoring  framework  (DMF).  Description  of  approach  and  methodology  should  be  distinct  for 
each output. The curriculum vitae (CVs) of proposed personnel should specify direct experience 
of experts in those themes.  
4. 
The PISU will include key experts and non-key experts. Only CVs of key experts will be 
evaluated and scored. The CVs of non-key experts will be assessed on a pass/fail basis (i.e. EA 
may choose to require an expert to be replaced if it is assessed that he/she does not have the 
appropriate qualifications for the proposed position). All positions and pm allocation proposed by 
the  firm  must  be  included  and  budgeted  for  in  its  financial  proposal.  For  expenses  related  to 
workshops, training and conferences, administrative support, surveys, and knowledge products, 
the budget will be separately approved by the MOEF.  
B. 
Preferred Qualification and Detailed Terms of Reference. 
1. 
Key Experts  
5. 
International REDD+ and Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) Specialist (10 pm, 
intermittent): The consultant will have at least 8 years of experience as a REDD+ specialist, with 
a master's degree or higher in forestry, climate change, environmental policy or a related area. 
He/she  must  have  at  least  five  years  of  experience  in  REDD+  with  emphasis  on  community 
forestry; agroforestry and assisted natural regeneration, and REDD+ safeguards. The specialist 
must  have  extensive  experience  in  implementing  REDD+  projects;  sound  knowledge  of 
subnational  forest  management  processes  in  Indonesia,  including  financing  schemes  such  as 
performance-based  grants;  and  familiarity  with  donor  agencies  and  institutions  involved  in 
climate change. The expert will: 
(i) 
Provide targeted advice to the national consultants in all REDD+ and SFM activities; 
76 
Annex 5 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Assist  in  providing  the  technical  content  of  workshops  and  training  programs  on 
REDD+ and SFM; 
Oversee  the  design  of the  community  based forest management  plans, and spatial 
and business plans for FMUs based on international best practices and examples; 
Inform  the  team  and  the  government  on  international  requirements  for  REDD+ 
safeguards, 
informed  consent  (FPIC),  and  benefit  sharing 
mechanisms and share  practical steps in its implementation; 
Guide implementation of REDD+ pilot activities based on international best practices 
and lessons from other parts of the world; and 
Guide  national  consultants  on  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  and  other  project-
related communications.  
free,  prior  and 
International  REDD+  Economics  and  Fiscal  Policy  Specialist  (5  pm,  intermittent): 
6. 
The consultant will have at least 6 years of experience as a REDD+ specialist, with a master's 
degree or higher in agricultural or forest economics, finance, natural resource management or a 
related  area.  He/she  must  have  at  least  four  years  of  experience  in  REDD+  economics.  The 
specialist  must  have  experience  in  conducting  economic  analysis  of  REDD+  projects  and 
familiarity with national and sub-national fiscal policies related to natural resources. The expert 
will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Design  a fund flow  mechanism  for  REDD+,  including  the  organization  of  payments 
(incentives and compensations) to environment service providers and/or carbon right 
holders  (individuals,  communities  or  government  agencies)  for  emission  reductions 
and carbon stock enhancement in the project areas;  
Advise the national REDD+ economics and fiscal policy specialist in analyzing fiscal 
policies  on  integration  of  natural  capital  considerations,  in  Indonesia  and  other 
countries with significant forest resources, and prepare a policy paper; 
Contribute to the design of a training program for provincial and district level staff and 
technical experts on REDD+ benefit sharing mechanisms; 
Support  the  national  REDD+  economics  and  fiscal  policy  specialist  in  conducting 
policy dialogues to assess gaps and identify remedial measures on fiscal, monitoring 
and benefit sharing policies; 
Assist in the design of West Kalimantan forest industry strategy; 
Identify approaches for harmonization of sub-national and national fiscal policies on 
REDD+ and integrate them in REDD+ policy frameworks and regulations; and 
(vii)  Consult with local government and civil society working on fiscal policy. 
International  REDD+  Monitoring,  Reporting  and  Verification  (MRV)  Specialist  (5 
7. 
pm, intermittent): The consultant will have at least 8 years of experience as an MRV specialist, 
with  a  master's  degree  or  higher  in  climate  change,  environmental  policy  or  a  related  area. 
He/she  must  have  at  least  four  years  of  experience  in  REDD+  related  MRV  issues.  The 
specialist  must  have  sound  knowledge  of  MRV  systems  in  Indonesia,  and  spatial  information 
systems, including GIS and remote sensing. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Guide and support the national specialist on REDD+ MRV issues; 
Support  the  establishment  and/or  strengthening of  REDD+  MRV  systems  at  district 
and provincial levels; 
Support  the  design  of  training  programs  on  tree  inventory  and  forest  assessment, 
GIS and REDD+ registry; 
Identify data required for development of reference emission levels; 
Support the processing of GIS datasets and integrate them into a common database. 
Advice on datasets required for the development of baseline (thematic) maps, spatial 
analyses (e.g. threat maps) and modelling tools (e.g. future land conversion); 
Annex 5  
77 
(vii)  Review  spatial  and  thematic  quality  of  collected  datasets  and  suggest  processing 
steps (or alternative better data sources) to improve overall accuracy; 
(viii)  Design  (GPS-based)  field  survey/reports  as  required  to  verify  accuracy  of  satellite 
(ix) 
imagery interpretations and GIS datasets; and 
Contribute  to  targeted  training  programs  on  REDD+  MRV  systems,  including  GIS 
and remote sensing. 
8. 
National REDD+ Specialist and Team Leader (60 pm, continuous): The consultant will 
have at least 10 years of experience as a REDD+ specialist, with a master's degree or higher in 
forestry,  climate  change,  environmental  policy  or  a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  at  least 
three years of experience in community forestry; agroforestry and assisted natural regeneration, 
and safeguards. The specialist must have sound knowledge of subnational forest management 
processes  in  Indonesia,  and  familiarity  with  donor  agencies  and  local  and  national  institutions 
involved in climate change. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Take  overall  responsibility  for  project  implementation,  including  supervision  of 
PISU  operations,  preparation  of  annual  work  plans,  coordination,  provision  of 
necessary support to financial management and administrative input, and timely 
deployment of consultants and guidance on ADB procedures; 
Support EA and IAs in effective implementation of all activities as per DMF; 
Oversee community livelihood support activities such as the installation of solar 
panels,  water  facilities,  road  rehabilitation  and  micro-hydro  for  electricity 
generation and the implementation of “green school”; 
Serve  as  the  contact  point  for  the  project  and  participate  in  national  and 
international discussions on REDD+; 
Oversee the conduct of the workshops and training on REDD+ concepts; 
Advise  on  the  design  of  the  community-based  forest  management  plans,  and 
spatial and business plans for FMU; 
Provide  advice  on  REDD+  safeguards,  FPIC,  grievance  redress  and  benefit 
sharing mechanisms, and implementation of pilot activities; 
(viii)  Supervise the  team  expert  in preparing  and  implementing  of  indigenous  people 
plan (IPP); 
(ix)  Work closely with local government and civil society organization (CSO) working 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
with masyarakat hukum adat communities; 
Identify funding sources and conduct training to prepare proposals to extend the 
scope, area and/or time frame of the current project; 
in  planning, 
Provide  necessary 
preparation  and  completion  of  the  subprojects  in  line  with  forest  management 
plans in FMUs; 
Establish a project management system and due diligence to enable continuous 
improvements; 
to  national  and  provincial 
teams 
inputs 
(xiii)  Establish  a  system  for  monitoring  and  evaluation,  including  approaches  to 
regularly update the baseline data; 
(xiv)  Ensure timely submission of quarterly progress reports and the completion report 
which  include  safeguards  monitoring  report  and  report  of  implementation  of 
gender action plan; and 
(xv)  Guide proper maintenance of the project accounts and financial records.  
National  Sustainable  Forest  Management  (Agroforestry  and  Assisted  Natural 
9. 
Regeneration)  Specialist  (30  pm,  intermittent):  The  consultant  will  have  at  least  5  years  of 
experience  as  a  SFM  specialist,  with  a  master's  degree  or  higher  in  forestry,  climate  change, 
78 
Annex 5 
environmental policy or a related area. He/she must have at least three years of experience in 
agroforestry  and  assisted  natural  regeneration.  The  specialist  must  have  sound  knowledge  of 
subnational forest management processes in Indonesia and familiarity with donor agencies and 
institutions involved in REDD+ in West Kalimantan. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Facilitate  community-based  forest  management  (CBFM)  agreements  working 
closely with the village facilitators,  safeguards and gender specialists; 
Prepare  detailed  activity  plans  for  agroforestry  ad  assisted  natural  regeneration 
in collaboration with FMU staff; 
Contribute  to  the  design  and  implementation  of  training  programs  to  FMU  staff 
and  local  communities,  including  women,  in  forest  products  utilization,  value 
addition  and  enterprise  development,  in  cooperation  with  the  National  FMU 
Business Development and Market Promotion Specialist; 
Contribute  to  development  spatial  and  business  plans  for  FMUs,  through  a 
participatory process, consistent with CBFM plans; 
Support  the  establishment  of  FMU  Block  XXI  by  providing  advice  on  its 
institutional composition and necessary processes for the legal establishment; 
Provide  technical  inputs  to  establish  REDD+  fund  flow  and  benefit  sharing 
mechanisms; 
(vii)  Organize  training  programs  on  SFM  focusing  on  agroforestry  and  assisted 
natural regeneration; and 
(viii)  Work  closely  with  non-government  organizations  (NGOs)  involved  in  agro-
forestry and small enterprise development. 
National  REDD+  Economics  and  Fiscal  Policy  Specialist  (30  pm,  intermittent):  The 
10. 
consultant will have at least 5 years of experience as an economist and fiscal policy specialist, 
with a master's degree or higher in agricultural or forest economics, environmental economics or 
a related area. He/she must have at least three years of experience in analysis of economic and 
fiscal  policies  with  emphasis  on  forestry.  The  specialist  must  have  sound  knowledge  of 
subnational  forest  management  processes  in  Indonesia.  The  expert,  under  the  guidance  of 
international REDD+ economics and fiscal policy specialist, will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Design  a  fund  flow  mechanism  for  REDD+,  including  the  organization  of 
payments  (incentives  and  compensations)  to  environment  service  providers 
and/or  carbon  right  holders  (individuals,  communities  or  government  agencies) 
for  emission  reductions  and  carbon  stock  enhancement,  in  cooperation  with 
international REDD+ economics and fiscal policy specialist, and national REDD+ 
and SFM specialists; 
Analyze  fiscal  policies  on  integration  of  natural  capital  considerations,  in 
Indonesia  and  other  countries  with  significant  forest  resources,  and  prepare  a 
policy paper; 
Design and implement training programs for provincial and district level staff and 
technical experts on REDD+ benefit sharing mechanisms; 
Conduct  policy  dialogues  to  assess  gaps  and  identify  remedial  measures  on 
fiscal, monitoring and benefit sharing policies; 
Provide technical inputs to improve the West Kalimantan forest industry strategy; 
Identify approaches for harmonization of sub-national and national fiscal policies 
on REDD+ and integrate them in REDD+ policy frameworks and regulations; and 
(vii)  Contribute to the development of the business plans of four FMUs. 
National REDD+ MRV Specialist (30 pm, intermittent): The consultant will have at least 
11. 
5 years of experience as a MRV specialist, with a Master's degree or higher in forestry, climate 
change,  environmental  policy  or  a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  at  least  three  years  of 
experience in REDD+ MRV issues. The specialist will have sound knowledge of GIS, GPS and 
remote sensing. The expert will: 
Annex 5  
79 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
threat  maps)  and  modeling 
Establish  and/or  strengthen  REDD+  MRV  systems  at  provincial  and  district 
levels; 
Assess  data  needs  for  the  development  of  reference  emission  levels,  spatial 
analysis  (thematic  maps, 
land 
conversion); 
Determine  reference  levels  for  emissions  associated  with  the  key  drivers  of 
deforestation and forest degradation; 
Process datasets (conversion, translation, cleanup, documentation) and integrate 
them into a common GIS database; 
Develop a plan to collect and process existing data, regularly update the baseline 
data and source secondary data as required; 
Identify  and  document  national  GIS  data  sources  and  discuss  /  coordinate  with 
national focal points on how to secure copies of relevant datasets; 
tools  (future 
(vii)  Recommend studies and assessments to fill data gaps; 
(viii)  Review spatial and thematic quality of datasets and suggest processing steps (or 
alternative better data sources) to improve overall accuracy; 
Design  GPS-based  field  surveys  to  verify  accuracy  of  interpretation  of  satellite 
imagery and GIS datasets; and 
Design and conduct training programs to establish sustained MRV capacities. 
(ix) 
(x) 
National  REDD+  Safeguards 
12. 
Information  System  (SIS)  Specialist  (30  pm, 
intermittent):  The  consultant  will  have  at  least  5  years  of  experience  as a  REDD+  safeguards 
specialist,  with  a  Master's  degree  or  higher  in  forestry,  climate  change,  information  systems, 
environmental  policy  or  a  related  area.  The  specialist  must  be  familiar  with  SIS  developed  by 
other  development  partners, 
for  REDD+ 
Safeguards in Indonesia (PRISAI). The expert will: 
including  Principles,  Criteria  and 
Indicators 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Assess  existing  approaches,  including  PRISAI,  to  safeguards  information 
provision,  and  assess  the  validity  of  currently  identified  REDD+  safeguards 
indicators; 
Revise/update the list of REDD+ safeguards indicators, as necessary; 
Conduct  stakeholder  consultations  at  district  and  FMU  levels  on  (i)  potential 
types  and  sources  of  information  for  each  safeguard  indicator,  (ii)  potential 
monitoring and assessment options, and (iii) methods for safeguards information 
dissemination; 
Prepare  a  draft  report  that  details  potential  options  for  types  and  sources  of 
information, and methods for their dissemination; 
Identify  data  needs  and  establish  REDD+  SIS  at  district  and  provincial  levels, 
building on efforts of other development partners in West Kalimantan province; 
Contribute to the workshops and training on REDD+ SIS; 
Provide  inputs  to  the  national  MRV  specialist  on  REDD+  monitoring  systems 
regarding REDD+ safeguards (social and environmental); 
(viii)  Report  on  the  implementation  of  REDD+  safeguards  at  regular  intervals,  in line 
with international guidelines and requirements; and 
80 
Annex 5 
(ix) 
Document  lessons learned  and  success  stories on  SIS  to  improve  South-South 
collaboration. 
2. 
Non-Key Experts 
13. 
National  REDD+  Capacity  Building Specialists  (3  persons,  45pm  each,  continuous): 
The consultant will have at least 5 years of experience as a capacity building specialist, with a 
Master's  degree  or  higher  in  forestry,  climate  change,  environmental  policy  or  a  related  area. 
He/she must have at least three years of experience in conducting workshops on REDD+ with 
emphasis  on  community  forestry;  agroforestry  and  assisted  natural  regeneration,  gender 
mainstreaming  and  REDD+  safeguards. The  specialists  must  have  sound knowledge  of forest 
management efforts in Indonesia and familiarity with donor agencies and institutions involved in 
REDD+. The experts will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Collect  and  analyze  information  on  capacity  needs  that  may  be  available  from 
previous capacity assessments of the relevant institutions, REDD+ pilot projects 
and other initiatives in West Kalimantan; 
Assess  current  roles,  responsibilities  and  capacities  of  relevant  institutions, 
including FMUs, on REDD+ in Sintang and Kapuas Hulu districts; 
Identify  the  capacity  gaps  at  sector  levels  and  in  the  implementation  of REDD+ 
and considering key thematic areas on REDD+ such as governance, safeguards, 
rights,  REDD+  policies,  REDD+  financing,  incentives  and  benefit  sharing,  and 
MRV; 
Identify  opportunities  and  entry  points  for  strengthening  and  coordinating  the 
capacity of relevant stakeholders on REDD+; 
Enhance  awareness  of  REDD+  among  local  stakeholders,  including  customary 
communities, FMUs, district and province officials; 
(vi)  Work  closely  with  the  village  facilitators  for  the  implementation  of  the  various 
REDD+  pilot  activities  (including  ecotourism,  beekeeping,  handicrafts,  home 
gardens and fish cultivation) with local communities, including women; 
(vii)  Design and implement capacity building programs on REDD+ and value addition 
activities  such  as  the  processing  of  coffee,  rubber  and  gaharu,  honey,  and 
weaving; 
(viii)  Support  community  livelihood  support  activities  such  as  the  installation  of  solar 
panels,  water  facilities,  road  rehabilitation  and  micro-hydro  for  electricity 
generation and the implementation of “green school”; and 
Train at least 10 local resource persons in each FMU as future REDD+ trainers in 
their communities. 
(ix) 
14. 
National  Land  Use  and  Spatial  Data  management  Specialist  (30  pm,  intermittent): 
The consultant will have at least 5 years of experience as a data management specialist, with a 
bachelor's  degree  or  higher  in  information  technology,  computer  science,  spatial  information 
sciences  or  a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  at  least  three  years  of  experience  in  GIS  and 
remote  sensing  for  analysis  of  land  use.  Experience  in  and  creating  maintaining  project  web 
sites is required. Knowledge of forest management issues in Indonesia is preferred. The expert 
will: 
(i) 
Review the existing national and provincial land use and land cover classification 
schemes,  the  accuracy  of  existing  land-use  assessments,  and  of  carbon  stock 
and inventory data; 
Annex 5  
81 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Identify  data  needs  and  gaps  on  land  use  in  project  areas,  and collect  relevant 
data  to  prepare  baseline  (thematic)  maps,  land  use  maps,  and  vulnerability 
maps; 
Conduct training on GIS for FMU and district staff; 
Advise FMU staff on the design of the CBFM plans; 
Design,  develop  and  maintain  a  user-friendly  project  web  site  in  collaboration 
with other team members; 
Advice the team on hardware and software related issues; and 
(vi) 
(vii)  Conduct training of trainers. 
15. 
National Forest Conflict Management Specialist (2 experts, 20pm each, intermittent): 
The consultant will have at least 5 years of experience as a conflict management specialist, with 
a Bachelor's degree or higher in forestry, environmental science, communications, journalism or 
a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  some  exposure  to  REDD+  grievance  redress  mechanisms 
and safeguards. The specialist must have sound knowledge of subnational forest management 
processes in Indonesia, including tenure related issues. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Facilitate  and  assist  the  FMU  and  district  staff  in  handling  conflicts,  which  also 
involve customary communities and the private sector; 
Participate  in  the  mediation  process  of  the  design  of  CBFM,  especially  for 
activities with the potential of causing friction between members; 
Strengthen the institutional settlement of tenure related conflicts; 
Prepare  a  draft  road  map  for  REDD+  related  conflict  resolution  in  West 
Kalimantan; 
Conduct  training  and  mentoring  activities  to  increase  the  capacity  of  FMU  staff 
and others related to the conflict resolution; 
Support  the development  of grievance  redress mechanisms  to ensure that  they 
include communities’ needs and represent local circumstances; and 
Prepare progress report on GRM implementation and issues. 
16. 
National Forest Fire Management Specialist (20 pm, intermittent): The consultant will 
have  at  least  5  years  of  experience  as  a  forest  fire  management  specialist,  with  a  Master's 
degree  or  higher  in  forestry,  climate  change,  environmental  policy  or  a  related  area.  He/she 
must  have  good  exposure  to  causes  and  countermeasures  of  forest  fire,  especially  in 
Indonesian context. The specialist must have sound knowledge of practical measures of forest 
fire management. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Assess  current  mechanisms  for  law  enforcement,  legal  review  of  licenses,  and 
compliance audit for forest fire management in FMUs; 
Support the distribution of forest fire suppression equipment; 
Conduct 
communities and FMU staff; and 
Support community-based forest fire brigade patrol activities.  
training  on  community-based 
fire  management 
forest 
local 
to 
National  Forest  Management  Unit  (FMU)  Business  Development  and  Market 
17. 
Promotion  Specialist  (20  pm,  intermittent):  The  consultant  will  have  at  least  5  years  of 
experience  as  a  business  management  specialist,  with  a  Master's  degree  or  higher  in  forest 
economics,  business  administration,  commerce  or  a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  at  least 
two  years  of  experience  in  forestry  related  small  and  medium  enterprises  with  emphasis  on 
promoting ecotourism, community forestry and non-timber forest products. The specialist must 
have  experience  in  value  addition  of  forest  products;  sound  knowledge  of  forestry  business 
82 
Annex 5 
procedures  in  Indonesia;  and  familiarity  with  donor  agencies  and  institutions  involved  in 
sustainable forest management. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Develop  four  FMU  business  plans,  in  cooperation  with  the  REDD+,  SFM  and 
economics and fiscal policy specialists; 
Advise  local  communities  and  FMU  staff  on  development  of  value  added 
products such as processed coffee, latex and gaharu, handicrafts and honey; 
Advise  women  groups  and  entrepreneurs  in  the  development  of  the  business 
plan; 
Provide inputs to the development of West Kalimantan forest industry strategy; 
Conduct training programs on value addition and micro-enterprise development, 
in  coordination  with  the  national  REDD+  and  SFM  specialists  and  village 
facilitators; and 
Contribute to branding and promotion of the project and its products, via media, 
events, PR/Marketing with diverse stakeholders.  
National  Community  Empowerment  Specialist  (30  pm,  intermittent):  The  consultant 
18. 
will  have  at  least  5  years  of  experience  as  a  community  empowerment  specialist,  with  a 
Master's  degree  or  higher  in  communications,  social  work,  anthropology,  environmental  policy 
or  a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  experience  in  engaging  diverse  stakeholders  in  REDD+ 
processes.  The  specialist  must  have  sound  knowledge  of  local  community  needs  and      the 
processes by which communities can increase their assets and build capacities to gain control 
over the factors and decisions that shape their livelihood. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Conduct ethnographic studies to gain a better understanding of the social capital 
and  baseline  information  related  to  improvement  of  community  livelihood, 
especially in the context of FIP interventions; 
Act as an external agent to facilitate community level participatory processes and 
CBFM in close consultation with customary communities; 
Conduct 
training  activities  and  workshops 
empowerment; 
Identify relevant partners, networks and key stakeholders to facilitate community 
livelihood programs, including marketing actions; 
Participate  in  the  development  and  implementation  of  REDD+  activities  to 
empower communities and create ownership with a view to ensure sustainability; 
Draft  guidelines  on  participatory  planning  through  a  community  consultative 
process; 
Facilitate  community  level  participatory  processes  to identify  and  implement  the 
best possible and socially acceptable approaches; 
to  FMU  staff  on  community 
(viii)  Facilitate  community  to  organize  themselves  in  implementation  of  all  livelihood 
(ix) 
(x) 
plans; 
Assist communities to conduct M&E in compliance with external audit; and 
Record  lessons  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  stakeholder  communication 
strategy. 
19. 
National  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Specialist  (30  pm,  intermittent):  The  consultant 
will have at least 5 years of experience as a M&E specialist, with a Master's degree or higher in 
economics,  environmental  policy  or  a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  at  least  two  years  of 
experience  in  M&E  aspects  of  REDD+.  The  specialist  must  have  sound  knowledge  of 
subnational forest management processes in Indonesia and familiarity with M&E framework of 
Forest Investment Program. The expert will: 
Annex 5  
83 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Collect baseline data for indicators in Design and Monitoring Framework (DMF), 
in close collaboration with FMU staff; 
Develop  data  collection  and  monitoring  system  as  per  DMF  and  FIP  results 
framework,  in  association  with  staff  of  West  Kalimantan  province,  districts  and 
FMUs; 
Identify  data  needs  and  gaps,  and  formulate  methodology  to  collect  relevant 
data; 
Conduct seminars to strengthen capacity of government staff on monitoring and 
evaluation and FIP results framework; 
Monitor  and  update  annually  the  progress  of  DMF  indicators  and  targets  and 
report to FIP Steering Committee in Indonesia, FIP Subcommittee and ADB; and 
Prepare annual reports as per FIP Results Framework to the FIP subcommittee. 
20. 
National  Social  Safeguards  Specialists  (2  persons,  30  pm  each,  intermittent):    The 
consultants will have at least 5 years of experience as a social safeguards (indigenous peoples 
and  involuntary  resettlement)  specialist,  with  a  Master's  degree  or  higher  in  environmental 
science,  policy  or  a  related  area.  One  of  the  consultants  must  focus  on  social  safeguards  at 
national  and  provincial  levels,  while  the  other  pays  attention  to  safeguards  at  FMU  level.  The 
specialists  must  have  sound  knowledge  of  REDD+  safeguards  and  subnational  forest 
management processes in Indonesia. The experts will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Ensure that investments in the project areas are socially inclusive, equitable, and 
sustainable  -  consistent  with  national  REDD+  strategy  and  ADB  safeguards 
policies; 
Assist FMUs in conducting community consultations and report results following 
the social safeguards guidelines; 
Ensure that indigenous peoples (IP) and poverty issues are integrated in project 
in  close 
area  selection,  project  design  and 
communication with village coordinators and village facilitators; 
Verify  that  the  indigenous  peoples’  planning  framework  (IPPF)  and  the 
resettlement  framework  (RF)  are  considered  in  implementation  of  project 
activities; 
Organize training on social safeguards, with emphasis on corrective measures; 
Conduct  periodic  verification  of  social  safeguards  and  report  findings  to  the 
government, ADB and FIP subcommittee; 
Provide recommendations on the IPPF and determine activities that may require 
an IPP or Masyarakat Hukum Adat (MHA) Plan; 
implementation,  and  M&E, 
(viii)  Guide  FMU  staff  to  achieve  meaningful  IP  participation  in  activities  that  require 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
IPP; 
Liaise  with  MHA  CSOs  to  implement  the  IPPF  effectively  and  generate 
acceptable IPPs in the project areas; 
Provide  awareness  and  sensitivity  briefings  on 
stakeholders; 
Assess project activities to (a) identify opportunities to enhance positive impacts 
on  MHA  communities,  and  (b)  determine  the  likelihood  of  significant  adverse 
impacts on MHA communities and make recommendations to prevent or mitigate 
them; 
IP  participation 
to  FIP 
(xii)  Review  and  provide  recommendations  on  RF  and  Resettlement  Plans  (RP),  if 
any.  
(xiii)  Advise the district and FMU staff in RP preparation, if needed; 
84 
Annex 5 
(xiv)  Work closely with gender and other specialists/experts; and 
(xv)  Prepare quarterly social safeguards monitoring report. 
21. 
National  Gender  and  Social  Development  Specialists  (2  persons,  20  pm, 
intermittent):  The consultant will have at least 5 years of experience as a gender specialist, with 
a Master's degree or higher in arts, social sciences, or a related area. He/she must have at least 
three  years  of  experience  in  gender  mainstreaming  aspects  of  REDD+  with  emphasis  on 
community  forestry  and  REDD+  safeguards.  The  specialist  must  have  good  knowledge  of 
subnational forest management processes in Indonesia. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Conduct gender and social impact assessments and associated census, surveys 
and reports, and ensure effective integration of gender aspects in preparation of 
socio-economic and poverty profiles of project beneficiaries; 
Conduct  gender  analysis  of  policy  adjustments  related  to  social  dimensions 
including but not limited to: land tenure, land use planning, other REDD+ policies; 
Recommend  gender-responsive  strategies  and  options  to  minimize  adverse 
impacts  due  to  introduction  of  new  schemes,  which  may  potentially  affect 
livelihood and/or demand for socio economic services; 
Assist in the implementation of Gender Action Plan (GAP) and train project staff 
on gender mainstreaming in project activities; 
Ensure that the gender targets and indicators described in GAP are integrated in 
the project activities and M&E frameworks, and support the efforts to achieve the 
targets; 
Provide  technical  advice  for  the  district  and  FMU  staff  to  implement  GAP  and 
conduct  training  on  participatory  and  gender  responsive  planning  at  FMU  and 
community  levels,  leadership  and  public  speaking  training  for  women,  pilots  for 
women grant management, among others; 
Ensure  implementation  of  gender  safeguards  as  described  in  the  GAP  (e.g., 
ensuring  women’s  participation  and  representation  in  all  project  activities, 
allocation of adequate resources for activities relevant to GAP); 
(x) 
(viii)  Conduct periodic visits to the project area to verify the compliance with the GAP; 
Ensure,  in  collaboration  with  communication  specialist,  that  project  materials 
(ix) 
include information on gender issues in forest management and REDD+ as well 
as ensure that communication strategies adopt gender responsive measures; 
Identify  key  stakeholders  (including  both  men  and  women  within  poor  and 
vulnerable groups) and their project-related interests, including possible barriers 
to their meaningful participation in and benefit from the project; 
Recommend  strategies  to  address  stakeholder  concerns  and  identify  factors 
affecting project risk and viability; 
Ensure that poverty concerns are integrated well in project activities; 
(xii) 
(xiii)  Contribute  to  the  development  of  M&E  systems  and  monitor  poverty  indicators 
(xi) 
throughout the project life as aligned with the DMF; and 
(xiv)  Prepare bi-annual and annual reports on progress in GAP implementation to the 
government, ADB, and FIP subcommittee.  
22. 
National Environmental Safeguards Specialist (30 pm, intermittent):  The consultant 
will  have  at  least  5  years  of  experience  as  an  environmental  safeguards  specialist,  with  a 
Master's  degree  or  higher  in  environmental  policy,  natural  resource  management,  climate 
change,  or  a  related  area.  He/she  must  have  at  least  two  years  of  experience  in  REDD+ 
environmental  safeguards.  Experience  in  preparing  Initial  Environmental  Examinations  and 
Environmental Monitoring Plans is required.  The expert will: 
Annex 5  
85 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Initial  Environmental  Examinations  (IEEs) 
Coordinate  environmental  safeguards  related  activities  and  ensure  that  EARF 
guidelines are applied in project activities; 
Prepare  environmental  management  plans  and  review  Rapid  Environmental 
Assessment (REA) of activities; 
Prepare 
determined as category B for environment, as per ADB’s SPS 2009; 
Provide  technical  guidance  and  strengthen  capacity  of  staff  at  district  and  FMU 
levels in all aspects of environmental management; 
Guide  preparation  of  UKL-UPLs  and  SPPLs  of  project  activities  and  prepare 
strategy 
to  effectively  submit  environmental  assessment  documents  and 
environment permits (if necessary) to the concerned government offices and the 
ADB; 
Consolidate  progress  and  monitoring  report  on  the  environmental  safeguards; 
and 
for  activities 
that  are 
(vii)  Work closely with CSO working on environmental issues 
23. 
National  Stakeholder  Communication  and  Public  Relations  Specialist  (30  pm, 
intermittent): The expert will have at least 5 years of experience as a communications specialist, 
with  a  Bachelor's  degree  or  higher  in  communications,  journalism,  public  policy  or  a  related 
area. He/she must have exposure to REDD+ communications. Experience as a public relations 
specialist for a project or organization is preferred. The expert will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Assume  overall  responsibility  for  refinement  and  implementation  of  stakeholder 
communication strategy (SCS); 
Disseminate  project  related  information  via  project  web  site  and  other  means 
(e.g.,  TV,  radio,  newspapers),  in  collaboration  with  spatial  data  management 
specialist; 
Identify,  develop,  distribute  and  evaluate  a  variety  of  project  communication 
materials  (e.g.,  fact  sheets,  brochures,  press  releases,  newsletters)  targeting 
different groups of stakeholders; 
Support the project team in workshops and other training activities; 
installation  and  use  of  communication  equipment 
Guide 
communication across various levels of the government; 
Collaborate  with  local  media  and  contribute  to  branding  and  promotion  of  the 
project,  in  cooperation  with  the  FMU  business  development  and  market 
promotion specialist. 
facilitate 
to 
(vii)  Monitor  and  evaluate the  effectiveness of  media  on  a regular  basis  to  enhance 
the effectiveness of SCS; and 
(viii)  Support knowledge management and information exchange activities. 
24. 
National  Procurement  Specialists  (2  persons,  20  pm  each,  intermittent):  The 
consultants will have at least 5 years of experience as procurement specialist, with a Bachelor's 
degree  or  higher  in  engineering,  business  administration,  commerce  or  a  related  area. 
Experience with procurement in forestry-related institutions is preferred. One of the specialists 
will focus on procurement at FMU level and the other will focus on procurement at national and 
provincial levels. The experts will: 
(i) 
Assume  responsibility  for  compliance  of  procurement  with  the  government  and 
ADB  guidelines,  and  in  cooperation  with  Procurement  Service  Unit  (PSU)  and 
86 
Annex 5 
Electronic Procurement Service of the MOEF, and provincial and district forestry 
offices; 
Coordinate  with  other  experts  of  PISU,  executing  agency  (official  commitment 
maker  (Pejabat  Pembuat  Komitmen  –  PPK),  and  proxy  of  budget  user  (Kuasa 
Pengguna Anggaran – KPA) in preparing procurement plan; 
Develop guidelines for procurement of goods, services and contracting; 
Prepare documents for procurement and contracting processes at national level, 
and review documents prepared by the FMU/UPTs; 
Supervise procurement at the district and village level; and 
Conduct training on procurement of goods and services to staff at various levels. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
25. 
National  Financial  Management  and  Administration  Specialists  (2  persons,  30  pm 
each,  intermittent):  The  consultants  will  have  at  least  5  years  of  experience  as  a  financial 
management  specialist,  with  a  bachelor’s  degree  or  higher  in finance,  commerce,  accounting, 
business administration or a related area. Previous experience in working with forestry related 
institutions  in  Indonesia  is  an  advantage.  The  specialists  will  share  the  work  at  national, 
provincial and FMU levels depending on the workload. The experts will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Assist EA in financial planning, budgeting and accounting (related to the RKAKL 
work plan and budget); 
Coordinate  with  the  Director  General  of  the  Department  of  Treasury  on  finance 
issues,  in management of the  FIP grant,  replenishment  and filing  of  information 
related to Bank Accounts at Reksus government account at Bank Indonesia; 
Process  the  disbursement  of  funds  and  record  all  financial  transactions  in 
accordance with ADB and government procedures; 
Verify  evidence  of  project  expenditures,  and  prepare  periodic 
statements to the proxy of budget user (KPA) in a timely manner; 
Cross  check  data  on  grant  disbursement  from  RKBI,  from  the  letter  of  fund 
disbursement, and from the MDS Client Connection application on the Financial 
Management  Report  system  (software),  and  prepare  the  Interim  Financial 
Reports for withdrawal application purposes; 
Conduct  training  on  financial  procedures  and  regulations  to  staff  at  various 
levels; 
Support  the  EA  in  preparing  an  Activity  Implementation  Report  of  Grants  to 
BAPPENAS each quarter, primarily related to finance issues; 
financial 
(viii)  Monitor implementation of the project finance per category and per component; 
(ix) 
(x) 
Resolve issues related to management of the grant at central and local levels; 
Collect  data  and  cross  check  financial  data  for  the  Annual  Report/Financial 
Statement Special Account, which may be required for audits by BPKP and ADB  
(xi)  Maintain complete and transparent documentation of all financial data; 
(xii) 
Support  KLHK  in  preparing  periodic  and  monthly  reports  for  ADB  IFR  about 
Sources and Uses of Funds; and 
(xiii)  Coordinate with Treasury General and ADB in financial reporting to the FIP. 
National  REDD+  Village  Coordinators  (2  persons,  60  pm  each,  continuous):  The 
26. 
village coordinator will have at least 5 years of experience in forest villages of West Kalimantan, 
with  ability  to  build  consensus  among  villages  on  forestry  issues.  He/she  must  have  ability  to 
understand  project’s  objectives  to  involve  communities  in  efforts  to  reduce  deforestation  and 
forest degradation. The facilitators should be familiar with forestry challenges in various FMUs in 
West Kalimantan. The facilitators, under direct guidance of the team leader, will: 
Annex 5  
87 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Coordinate technical and administrative support for REDD+ activities in assigned 
villages to ensure timely implementation; 
Monitor  progress  against  project  implementation  schedule  and  prepare  periodic 
progress reports; 
Support forest inventories and assessments in FMUs and assess FMU plans to 
identify areas for forest restoration; 
Advise on the collection and analysis of all data relevant to forest management; 
Facilitate 
biodiversity  conservation,  and 
protection; 
Advise  local  communities  on  conservation,  reforestation,  ecosystem  restoration 
and proposed ecotourism plans; 
Support  preparation  of  guidelines  for  site  and  species  selection  for  community 
restoration of denuded and degraded forest areas; 
for  environmental  protection  and 
that  require  special 
implementation  of  guidelines 
for  delineating  areas 
(viii)  Ensure timely supply of best possible quality of planting stock of indigenous tree 
livelihood 
for  restoration,  enrichment  planting  and 
species  and  NTFPs 
opportunities; and 
(ix)  Work closely with other experts/specialists. 
27. 
National  REDD+  Village  Facilitators  (7  persons,  60  pm  each,  continuous):  The 
facilitators will have at least 5 years of experience in one or two assigned villages, with a good 
understanding  of  forestry  related  issues.  He/she  must  have  ability  to  build  consensus  among 
village  communities.  One  village  facilitator  will  cover  2-3  villages.  The  facilitator,  under  the 
guidance of REDD+ village coordinator and the team leader, will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Support the overall planning and implementation of REDD+ activities in assigned 
villages, in close consultation with local communities and the consulting team; 
Schedule training activities and workshops based on consideration of availability 
of local communities and specific circumstances of the villages; 
Support field visits of staff of EA, IAs and ADB; 
(iii) 
(iv)  Monitor progress of activities in assigned villages against project implementation 
schedule  and  submit  periodic  progress  reports  and  technical  reports  at  village 
level; 
Support  efforts  to  select  sites  and  species  for  community  restoration  of  forest 
areas; and 
Support capacity building activities aimed at local communities. 
(vi) 
(v) 
28. 
National Project Administration and Accounting Assistants (6 persons, 60 pm each, 
continuous): The consultant will have a relevant qualification in accounting, commerce or related 
area,  and  at  least  2  years  of  experience  as  administration  assistant.  Sound  knowledge  of 
administration and accounting procures in Indonesia is required. One assistant will be based in 
Jakarta, while the others will be based in FMU offices in Kapuas Hulu and Sintang districts. The 
assistants will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Support  all  project-related  administration  matters,  including  maintenance  of 
project  records,  attendance 
lists,  mission  clearances,  securing  visas  for 
consultants, assistance with getting quotations, tracking deliveries, etc.; 
Provide  logistic  support  to  organize  workshops  and  training  activities,  including 
letters of invitation, documentation; 
(iii)  Maintain project accounts properly, including petty cash registers; 
88 
Annex 5 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Send financial reports (budget realization report, balance sheet and notes to the 
financial  statements)  regularly  on  a  timely  basis  to  the  EA  and  IAs,  following 
standard regulations of the government; 
Verify  project-related  expenditures  systematically  and  consolidate  all 
transactions; and 
Prepare a report on implementation of Kuasa Pengguna Anggaran accounting to 
higher authorities periodically on a timely basis. 
Table 1: List of Consultants Inputs 
Key Experts 
International 
International REDD+ and SFM Specialist 
International REDD+ Economics and Fiscal Policy Specialist 
International REDD+ Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) Specialist 
Subtotal (International) 
National 
National REDD+ Specialist and Team Leader 
National SFM (Agroforestry and Assisted Natural Regeneration) Specialist 
National REDD+ Economics and Fiscal Policy Specialist 
National REDD+ MRV Specialist 
National REDD+ Safeguards Information System Specialist 
Subtotal (National)  
Total Key Experts 
Non-Key Experts 
National REDD+ Capacity Building Specialists (3 persons, 45 pm each) 
National Land Use and Spatial Data Management  Specialist  
National Forest Fire Management Specialist 
National FMU Business Development and Market Promotion Specialist  
National Community Empowerment Specialist  
National Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist  
National Social Safeguards Specialists (2 persons, 30 pm each) 
National Forest Conflict Management Specialist (2 persons, 20 pm each) 
National Gender and Social Development Specialist (2 persons, 20 pm each)  
National Environmental Safeguards Specialist  
National Stakeholder Communication and Public Relations Specialist  
National Procurement Specialists (2 persons, 20 months each) 
National Financial Management and Administration Specialists (2 persons, 30 pm each) 
National REDD+ Village Coordinators (2 persons, 60 pm each) 
National REDD+ Village Facilitators (7 persons, 60 pm each) 
National Project administration and accounting assistants (6 persons, 60 pm each) 
Total Non- Key Experts 
TOTAL INPUTS 
Inputs (PM) 
10 
5 
5 
20 
60 
30 
30 
30 
30 
180 
200 
135 
30 
20 
20 
30 
30 
60 
40 
40 
30 
30 
40 
60 
120 
420 
360 
1,465 
1,665 
Annex 6: Detailed Cost Estimates 
Annex 6 
89 
2016201720182019202020212022Total1AGOODS (Equipment and Vehicles)0.11A. 1. Field EquipmentFor Dit. KPHP and UPT.BPPHPaCars, 4 units 600,000     46,154046,154138,4620000184,61518,462203,077bMotorbikes , 12 units25,000        1,9230023,077000023,0772,30825,385cComputer/laptop, 4 units 10,000        76907692,30800003,0773083,385dGPS, 6 units 2,000          154009230000923921,015ePeat depth monitoring devices, 2 units 2,000          15400308000030831338fSpeed boat, 2 units 80,000        6,1540012,308000012,3081,23113,538gVideo-conferencing (Central: 1, Provincial: 1, district: 2), 4 units 100,000     7,69207,69223,077000030,7693,07733,846hOther equipment for improving Communication, (4 Units)10,000        76907692,30800003,0773083,385iSoftware and hardware ,4 units 9,000          69206922,07700002,7692773,046jCamera digital , 4 units 5,000          38503851,15400001,5381541,692For  UPT.BPSKL - Dit BUPSHAkSolar Panels 200W/unit, 250 Units  6,000462023,07746,15446,154000115,38511,538126,923For  UPT.BBTNBKDS - DG.PJLHKlForest fire suppression equipment , 10 units 1,319,000  101,462001,014,61500001,014,615101,4621,116,077Subtotal Field Equipment (1A.1)079,5381,266,76946,1540001,392,462139,2461,531,7081A. 2. Office EquipmentFor Dit. KPHP and UPT.BPPHPa)Geospatial data  6,300 km2 (RBI Skala 1:2500)605014,53814,538000029,0772,90831,985b)Computer Server (6 unit)100,0007,692015,38530,769000046,1544,61550,769c)Server data storage (4 unit)25,0001,92303,8463,84600007,6927698,462d)Color Printer and Scanner A4 3,0002310231462000069269762e)Scanner A0, (2 units)17,0001,30801,3081,30800002,6152622,877f)Plotter  A0, (2 units)17,0001,30801,3081,30800002,6152622,877g)Geographic information systems software, (4 units)105,3848,10608,10624,319000032,4263,24335,668h)Mapping and hardware/ soft-ware maintenance 20,0001,538001,5381,5381,5381,53806,1546156,769Subtotal Office Equipment (1A.2)044,72278,0891,5381,5381,5380127,42612,743140,1680124,2601,344,85847,6921,5381,53801,519,887151,9891,670,000NoExpenditures Category/activitiesAmount, in USDTotal Goods (1A)Unit Rate Eq.in USDContingencyTotal incl. ContingenciesUnit Rate (IDR'000) 
90 
Annex 6 
2016201720182019202020212022Total1BWORKS0.1For UPT BBTNBKDS - DJ KSDAEa)Infrastructure for ecotourism137,50010,57700010,57710,5770021,1542,11523,269For UPT.BPPHP-Dit. KPHPb)Coffee processing house (drying, soaking, processing) 415,00031,92300063,84600063,8466,38570,231c)Latex processing building (SHEET latex)743,60057,2000057,20057,200114,40000228,80022,880251,680d)Galery building946,00072,769000145,538000145,53814,554160,0920057,200277,162124,97700459,33845,934505,272For UPT BPSKL - Dit. BUPSHAa)village road/transport network 500,00038,462000346,154307,69200653,84665,385719,231b)Microhydro Power Plant, 40 KVA 701,50053,9620053,96253,962000107,92310,792118,715c)Building for Community Meeting/Green School300,00023,0770023,0770023,077046,1544,61550,769For UPT.BPPHP-Dit. KPHPd)Nursery Workshop730,80056,215056,21556,21556,215000168,64616,865185,511056,215133,254456,331307,69223,0770976,56997,6571,074,226056,215190,454733,492432,66923,07701,435,908143,5911,570,000NoExpenditures Category/activities1B.1 Works to Support Forest Livelihood Subtotal Works to Support Forest Livelihood Total Works (1B)Amount, in USD1B.2  Works  for Infrastructure in Forest VillageSubtotal Works  for Infrastructure in Forest VillageUnit Rate Eq.in USDContingencyTotal incl. ContingenciesUnit Rate (IDR'000) 
Annex 6 
91 
USD.1  =  IDR. 13,0002016201720182019202020212022Total1C OTHERsa)Gaharu Agro forestry for Kab. Sintang, 70 Ha38,8632,98900209,2600000209,26010,463219,723b)Gaharu Agro forestry for Kab. Kapuas Hulu, 110 Ha39,3003,0230090,69190,69190,69160,4610332,53416,627349,161c)Coffee Agro forestry for Sintang District, 410 Ha32,0182,46300246,293246,293246,293270,92301,009,80250,4901,060,293d)Coffee Agro forestry for Kapuas Hulu District, 410 Ha32,3582,48900497,815497,815746,7231,169,86602,912,220145,6113,057,831e)Rubber Plantation, 120 Ha20,4581,5740094,42294,422000188,8439,442198,285f)Handicraft in Sintang District 31,9902,461009,84300009,84349210,335g)Handicraft in Kapuas Hulu 31,9902,4610014,765000014,76573815,503h)Bee Keeping, Sintang District68,4935,2690021,075000021,0751,05422,128i)Bee Keeping, Kapuas Hulu72,0935,5460033,273000033,2731,66434,937j)Cat fish for Kab. Sintang93,2937,1760028,705000028,7051,43530,141k)Cat fish for Kab.Kapuas Hulu94,9937,3070043,843000043,8432,19246,035l)Home garden/horticulture (Dragon fruit, Kmiri Sunan)39,7403,0570030,56945,85445,85400122,2776,114128,391m)Other home garden activities3,169,936243,84100073,15273,15297,5360243,84112,192256,033n)Gaharu innoculant Support (year 5), 180 units 10,00076900000138,4620138,4626,923145,385o)Drinking water facilities 144,20011,09200188,569188,569000377,13818,857395,995p)Start up ecotourism447,00034,38500068,76900068,7693,43872,208q)Assisted Natural Regeneration2,184168000336,000336,000336,00001,008,00050,4001,058,400001,509,1241,641,5661,538,7142,073,24806,762,651338,1337,100,784For UPT.BPPHP-Dit. KPHPNoExpenditures Category/activitiesLivelihood Inputs by UPT BBTNBKDS / Dit. PJLHK Livelihood Inputs by UPT BPSKL - Dit. BUPSHAAmount, in USDTotal Community Participation (1C.1)Unit Rate Eq.in USDContingencyTotal incl. ContingenciesUnit Rate (IDR'000)1C. 1. Livelihood Improvement(incl.Comm.Services and Materials) 
92 
Annex 6 
USD.1  =  IDR. 13,0002016201720182019202020212022Total1C. 2. Workshop, Training and StudiesFor Dit. KPHP1)Facilitate meeting of KPH, regional forestry center and district forestry office to refine the KPH Kapuas Hulu 77,5005,96205,962000005,9622986,2602)Design of  official forest managem’t plan at KPH in Sintang 107,5008,269008,26900008,2694138,6833)Design of the forest management plan (new KPH)145,00011,15400011,15400011,15455811,7124)Meeting for Forest Management Plans Support100,0007,692015,38538,46223,07700076,9233,84680,7695)Workshop on methodology & Map Accuracy Assessment50,0003,846007,69200007,6923858,0776)Multi-stakeholder consultation on district land use planing 100,0007,69207,6927,6927,6927,6920030,7691,53832,3087)Workshop on harmonization of fiscal policies on land use100,0007,692007,6927,6927,6927,692030,7691,53832,3088)Workshop on REDD+ safeguard information system (district and province)100,0007,692007,69200007,6923858,0779)Data sharing guidelines and decrees for forest management and REDD+ information (sub-national REDD+ activity registry)100,0007,692000015,3850015,38576916,15410)Workshop on integrated GHG reporting at KPH, sub-national and national in Indonesia100,0007,6920007,6920007,6923858,07711)Workshop on provincial strategy for tenure conflict management and grievance and redress mechanism 100,0007,6920007,6920007,6923858,077029,03877,50065,00030,7697,6920210,00010,500220,5000.031)Training for field facilitators and KPH staff on participatory & gender integrated planning , 30 pns 112,5008,65408,654000008,6542608,9132)Training for grant for women management , 60 pns 315,00024,2310024,231000024,23172724,9583)Training for organization development mix group 11,000846008,46200008,4622548,7154)Training women's leadership in organization 11,000846008,46200008,4622548,7155)NTFP Women based business fund 30,0002,308004,6152,3080006,9232087,13108,65445,7692,30800056,7311,70258,433NoExpenditures Category/activitiesLivelihood Inputs by Dit. BUPSHAFor UPT BPSKLa) Workshop/Seminar and Planning Meetingb.1) Training for organization development Amount, in USDSubtotal Workshop (1C.2a))Subtotal of Training for Organization Dev. (1C.2b.1))Unit Rate Eq.in USDContingencyTotal incl. ContingenciesUnit Rate (IDR'000) 
Annex 6 
93 
USD.1  =  IDR. 13,0002016201720182019202020212022Total1)Training for Weaving  package training 40,0003,07703,0779,2313,07700015,38546215,8462)Technical support to improve productivity and income from home gardens50,0003,8460019,23119,23100038,4621,15439,6153)Training for beekeeping and other alternatives of non land base economic activities39,0003,0000030,000000030,00090030,9004)Training for economic livelihood products business, processing and marketing, 100 persons @ 7days525,00040,3850040,38540,38500080,7692,42383,1925)Training Green School (2 pilot village x10 pnsx5dys)37,5002,885002,8852,8850005,7691735,9426)Electricity technical & institutional management training (2 X 10 persons@6days)12,000923001,84600001,846551,902For UPT.BPPHP7)Training on raising awareness on forest and climate change for communities200,00015,3850030,76930,76900061,5381,84663,3858)Fair for exhibition handicrafts ad NTFP products in Jakarta100,0007,692007,6927,6927,6920023,07769223,7699)Training for KPH staff and community member in tree inventory and forest assessment30,0002,308009,2316,9236,9230023,07769223,76910)GIS management and land cover analysis for KPH staff and district forestry office50,0003,84607,692000007,6922317,92311)Training  field technicians on SFM25,0001,923019,23119,231000038,4621,15439,61512)Training for forest management to patrol operator24,0001,84600018,46218,4620036,9231,10838,03112)Training on SFM for Province staff52,5004,038004,03800004,0381214,16013)Training on FPIC procedures (FMU staff and communities)25,0001,92309,6159,615000019,23157719,80814)Training on conflict mediation (FMU staff & communities)25,0001,92309,6159,615000019,23157719,80815)Training on landscape level management (FMU staff)30,0002,3080011,538000011,53834611,88516)Training on Payment for ecosystem services (FMU staff and communities)25,0001,923009,6159,61500019,23157719,80817)Production and dissemination of printed materials50,0003,84603,8467,6927,6927,6927,6923,84638,4621,15439,61518)Audio-visual course materials30,0002,308002,30800002,308692,37719)Training to operate Communication Infrastructure established in 2 KPH, 6pns@5 days 60,0004,615004,61500004,6151384,75420)Training for web development, maintenance and content management (KPH staff, villagers representative) , 15 pns x 556,2504,327004,3274,3270008,6542608,91321)Training for Communications Skill (writing, reporting, facilitating for (KPH staff, villagers represent’ve) – 30 pns x 5days112,5008,654008,6548,65400017,30851917,82722)Material development & trainers for raising awareness on forest and climate change for communities, at KPH and provincial250,00019,231019,23119,231000038,4621,15439,615For BBTNBKDS23)Training for guide, interpreter, ecotourism management (homestay, sanitary, culinary, transports, etc.), 80 pns @7 days140,50010,8080010,80810,80800021,61564822,26424)Community forest fire brigade training and exercises 405,00031,154031,15462,30862,30862,30862,30831,154311,5389,346320,8850103,462334,865232,827103,07770,00035,000879,23126,377905,6080112,115380,635235,135103,07770,00035,000935,96228,079964,040Subtot.of Training for Livelihood Options (1C.2b.2))NoExpenditures Category/activitiesSubtotal of Training (1C.2b.1)+1C.2b.2) )For UPT BPSKLb.2) Training for Livelihoods OptionsAmount, in USDUnit Rate Eq.in USDContingencyTotal incl. ContingenciesUnit Rate (IDR'000) 
94 
Annex 6 
USD.1  =  IDR. 13,0002016201720182019202020212022Total1C.2c) Studies0.05For Dit. KPHP 1)Draft a policy on participatory planning and implementation 192,00014,76907,3857,385000014,76973815,5082)Consultative process for policy on participatory planning and implementation15,0001,15401,1542,3082,3082,3082,3081,15411,53857712,1153)Consultative process for benefit sharing 15,0001,15401,1542,3082,3082,3082,3081,15411,53857712,1154)Assessment and socio-economic and environmental study of the spatial plan (to identify potential economic activities)180,00013,846006,9236,92300013,84669214,5385)Forest industry strategy in West Kalimantan assessed and support provided to ensure the policy harmonization with the forest industry strategy at the national level.300,00023,077004,61511,5386,9230023,0771,15424,2316)Draft 3 proposal for additional financing 240,00018,46200018,46200018,46292319,3857)Develop modality of effective participation of communities in KPH operations2,540,000195,3850039,07797,69258,61500195,3859,769205,1548)Environmental assesment100,0007,69207,69223,07715,38515,38515,385076,9233,84680,7699)Community mapping teams (30 Person @ 12Months)51,0003,923011,76935,308000047,0772,35449,4311)Integrated GHG reporting at KPH, sub-national and national in Indonesia (MRV and registry)60,0004,61509,2319,2319,2319,2314,615041,5382,07743,6152)Fiscal policy harmonization assessment 300,00023,07704,61518,462000023,0771,15424,2313)Design of the benefit sharing mechanism 230,40017,72300017,72300017,72388618,6094)Draft policy on monitoring of REDD+ activities and MRV300,00023,077011,53811,538000023,0771,15424,2315)Consultative process for policy on monitoring REDD+ activities 15,0001,15401,1542,3082,3082,3082,3081,15411,53857712,1156)SubNational REDD+ activity registry 180,00013,84600013,84600013,84669214,5387)Provincial REDD+ safeguard information system180,00013,846005,5388,30800013,84669214,5388)Develop model KPH Procedure for REDD+ with community1,700,000130,7690026,15465,38539,23100130,7696,538137,3089)Strategy for tenure conflict management30,0002,308006,9236,92300013,84669214,53810)Field studies, surveys and assistants (baseline income)100,0007,692038,46238,462000076,9233,84680,769094,154239,615278,338136,30826,9233,462778,80038,940817,7400235,308697,750578,473270,154104,61538,4621,924,76277,5192,002,280NoExpenditures Category/activitiesTotal Workshop, Training and Studies (1C.2)Amount, in USDUnit Rate Eq.in USDContingencyTotal incl. ContingenciesSubtotal Studies (1C.2c))For Dit. BUPSHAUnit Rate (IDR'000) 
Annex 6 
95 
USD.1  =  IDR. 13,0002016201720182019202020212022Total1. Dit BUPSHA - Ditjen PSKLaSupervision4,000          30806,92313,84613,8469,2319,2316,92360,0001,80061,800bMonitoring and evaluation Meetings15,000        1,15401,1542,3082,3082,3082,3081,15411,53834611,885cKonsinyering Meeting3,000          23101,1542,3082,3082,3082,3081,15411,53834611,885dCoordination meetings with stakeholders250,000     19,231019,231000019,23138,4621,15439,615eCoordinat'n meetings with IAs and ADB150,000     11,538011,53846,15446,15446,15446,15411,538207,6926,231213,923fOperational materials30,000        2,30801,1542,3082,3082,3082,3081,15411,53834611,8852.  UPT BPSKL - Dit. BUPSHAaSupervision350              2704,5234,5234,52332332316214,37743114,808bDuty Trips for Meetings to Jakarta4,000          30801,2311,2311,2311,2311,2316156,7692036,972cDuty Trip for KPH to Field350              2704,5235,1695,16964664632316,47749416,9713.  Dit. KPHP - Ditjen PHPLaSupervision4,000          30806152,4622,4621,2316156158,0002408,240bMeetings5,000          38507691,5381,5381,5387697696,9232087,1314. UPT. BPHP  Wil X - Dit.KPHP.aSupervision350              2702,2624,5234,52332332316212,11536312,479bDuty Trips for Meetings4,000          30801,2311,2311,2311,2311,2316156,7692036,972cDuty Trip for KPH to Field350              2702,2624,5234,52332332316212,11536312,479dSalaries for  Speed Boat Driver  (3 unit) 3,50026904,8469,6929,6929,6929,6924,84648,4622,42350,885eGasoline , Cars ,Speed Boat and Motor Cycle 27,5762,121012,72725,45525,45525,45525,45512,727127,2746,364133,638fMaintenance for Cars, Speed boat and Motor Cycle, 1,50011506921,3851,3851,3851,3856926,9233467,2695.  Dit. PJLHK–Ditjen KSDAEaSupervision4,000          30806152,4622,4621,2316156158,0002408,240bMeetings5,000          38507691,5381,5381,5387697696,9232087,1316.  UPT BBTN BKDS–Ditjen KSDAE
aSupervision350              2702,2624,5234,52332332316212,11536312,479bDuty Trips for Meetings4,000          30801,2311,2311,2311,2311,2316156,7692036,972cDuty Trip for KPH  to Field 350              2704,5234,5234,52364632316214,70044115,141086,235142,932142,932110,655107,56265,166655,48223,318678,7990321,5432,349,8062,362,9711,919,5222,285,425103,6279,342,894438,9699,781,0002CONSULTING SERVICES0.05By  Dit. BUPSHA1Consulting Services for PISU, (QCBS Direct Paym't)3,460,000693,9381,134,919446,796456,487378,952348,9083,460,000173,0003,633,0002Individual Technical Experts for PCU Support, 2 pns35,0002,69232,30864,61564,61564,61564,61532,308323,07716,154340,0000726,2461,199,534511,411521,103443,568381,2153,783,077189,1543,973,00001,228,2655,084,6513,655,5662,874,8332,753,609484,84316,081,766923,70217,000,000Total Consulting Services (2)NoExpenditures Category/activitiesTotal of Other Activities (1C)Total GrantAmount, in USDUnit Rate Eq.in USDContingencyTotal incl. Contingencies 1C.3 Project ManagementTotal Project Management (1C.3)Unit Rate (IDR'000) 
96       Annex 7 
E. 
Procurement Plan 
1. 
Basic Data 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan by Executing and Implementing Agencies 
  Project Name:   Community-Focused Investments to Address Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
  Project Number:   47084-002 
  Country:   Indonesia 
  Project Procurement Classification: Category B 
Approval Number:   G-XXXX 
Executing Agency:  Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
Implementing Agency: 
Directorate of Business Development for Social Forestry and Customary Forestry 
(BUPSHA) 
Directorate of Environmental Services of Conservation Forest (PJLHK); 
Directorate of Production Forest Management Unit (KPHP) 
Procurement Service Unit (PSU): (i) MOEF; (ii) UPT Social Forestry and 
Environmental Partnership Office, Kalimantan (BPSKL) Banjar Baru – South 
Kalimantan Province; (iii) UPT Production Forest Utilization Control Office, Pontianak 
(BPHP); (iv) UPT National Parks (BBNTNBKDS); (v) official commitment maker 
(Pejabat Pembuat Komitmen [PPK])  Sintang and (iv) PPK Kapuas Hulu 
Project Closing Date: 30 June 2022 
Date of this Procurement Plan:   25 August 2016 
Project Procurement Risk: Low 
  Project Financing Amount (in $ million):    
ADB Financing: 
Cofinancing (ADB Administered):  US$ 17.0 
Non-ADB Financing:   US$ 1.7 
  Date of First Procurement Plan:   13 April 2016  
2. 
Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan 
b.  Procurement and Consulting Methods and Thresholds 
Except  as  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following  process  thresholds  shall  apply  to 
93. 
procurement of goods and works.  
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Method 
National Competitive Bidding for Goods 
National Competitive Bidding for Works 
Shopping for Goods 
Shopping for Works 
Community Participation 
Threshold 
Between US$ 100,001 and US$ 5,000,000 
Between US$ 100,001 and US$ 10,000,000 
Up to US$ 100,000 
Up to US$ 100,000 
Up to US$   30,000 
First two contracts subject to ADB’s prior review  
Comments 
First two contracts subject to ADB’s prior review.   
First two contracts subject to ADB’s prior review.  
Direct Contracting for Goods 
Up to US$ 3,000 
Annex 7 
97 
The  EA  and  IAs  may  purchase  the  items  directly  from 
suppliers, and in such cases, ADB should be satisfied that 
the price paid is reasonable.   
Method 
  Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting 
Firm 
Consulting Services 
Prior review. Quality-cost ratio of 90:10 and full technical proposal.   
Comments 
  Individual Consultants Selection for Individual 
Consultants 
In  accordance  with  ADB's  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Consultants  (2013,  as  amended  from  time to 
time). Per need basis, for technical experts to addressed gaps identified later in the project.   
2. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More 
The following table lists goods and works contracts for which the procurement activity is either ongoing or expected to commence 
within the next 18 months. 
Directorate of Environmental Services and Conservation Forest 
Package 
Number 
GDS-001 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Estimated 
Value 
1,228,000.00 
Bidding 
Procedure 
1S1E 
General Description 
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Procurement 
Method 
Comments 
Q2 / 2018 
NCB 
Prior 
Prequalification of Bidders: 
N 
Forest  fire  suppression 
equipment 
Domestic Preference 
Applicable: N 
Advance Contracting: N 
Bidding Document: Goods 
Comments: To be procured 
by BBTNBKDS   
3. 
Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost $100,000 or More 
The following table lists consulting services contracts for which the recruitment activity is either ongoing or expected to commence 
within the next 18 months. 
98 
Annex 7 
Directorate of Business Development for Social Forestry and Customary Forest 
Estimated 
Value 
3,996,000.00 
Package 
Number 
CS-GMIC-01 
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Prior 
Recruitment 
Method 
QCBS 
Q4 / 2016 
Advertisement 
Date (quarter/year) 
General Description 
Consulting  Services  for 
Project  Implementation 
Supporting Unit (PISU) 
Type of 
Proposal 
FTP 
ICS01-03 
Indivudal 
Experts 
Technical 
374,000.00 
ICS 
Prior 
Q4 / 2017 
N/A 
Comments 
Assignment: 
International 
Quality-Cost Ratio: 
90:10 
Advance 
Contracting: Y 
Comments: To be 
recruited by 
BUPSHA   
Assignment: 
National 
Expertise: REDD+ 
Advance 
Contracting: N 
Comments: To be 
recruited by 
BUPSHA   
4. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost Less than $1 Million and Consulting Services Contracts Less than 
$100,000 (Smaller Value Contracts) 
The  following  table  lists  smaller-value  goods,  works  and consulting  services  contracts  for  which  the  activity  is  either  ongoing  or 
expected to commence within the next 18 months.   
Directorate of Business Development for Social Forestry and Customary Forest 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
2.1a 
Procurement 
Method 
SHOPPING 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Estimated 
Value 
28,000.00  
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Post 
Number of 
Contracts 
1 
Advanced Contracting: N 
General 
Description 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Comments 
Q4 / 2017  
Solar 
Panels 
200W/unit, 250 units 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPSKL. 
3.2a 
3.3a 
5.a1 
6.a1 
7.a1 
Annex 7 
99 
1 
1 
1 
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q3 / 2017  
Advanced Contracting: N 
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
Comments: To be procured by 
BUPSHA   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPSKL.  
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPSKL.   
200,000.00  
1 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 / 2018  
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
2.2 
Cars, 2 unit 
56,000.00  
Micro  hydro  Power 
Plant, 40KVA 
59,000.00  
for 
28,000.00  
Building 
community 
meeting/green 
school 
Agroforestry 
(should 
activities 
engage  community 
participation) 
1 
1 
Rubber 
plantation 
(including materials) 
20,000.00  
80,000.00  
(including 
Livelihood 
improvement 
activities 
handicrafts, 
beekeeping,  cat  fish, 
home 
gardening, 
water facilities) 
CPP 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 / 2018  
Domestic Preference 
Applicable: N 
Advanced Contracting: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments: To be procured by 
UPTs. Community participation 
method may be used in specific 
circumstances where NCB is 
not feasible.   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
UPTs.   
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
Domestic Preference 
Applicable: N 
Advanced Contracting: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments: To be procured by 
UPTs. Community participation 
method may be used in specific 
circumstances where NCB is 
not feasible.   
100 
Annex 7 
Directorate of Environmental Services and Conservation Forest 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
5.a2 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Number of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
Agroforestry 
(should 
activities 
engage  community 
participation) 
500,000.00  
2 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 / 2018  
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
Domestic 
Applicable: N 
Preference 
Advanced Contracting: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by 
UPTs.  Community  participation 
method may be used in specific 
circumstances  where  NCB  is 
not feasible.  
6.a2 
Rubber 
plantation 
(including materials) 
7.a2 
(including 
Livelihood 
improvement 
activities 
handicrafts, 
beekeeping,  cat  fish, 
home 
gardening, 
water facilities) 
25,000.00  
1 
CPP 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by 
UPTs.   
160,000.00  
2 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2/ 2018  
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
Domestic 
Applicable: N 
Preference 
Advanced Contracting: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by 
UPTs.  Community  participation 
method may be used in specific 
circumstances  where  NCB  is 
not feasible. 
Directorate of Production Forest Management Unit 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
2.3a 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Number of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Field  monitoring  and 
office equipment 
53,000.00  
SHOPPING 
Annex 7 
101 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Post 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
Q3 / 2017  
Advanced Contracting: N 
2.4a 
Geospatial 
6,300km2 
Skala 1:2500) 
data 
(RBI 
18,000.00  
2.6 
Motorbikes, 12 units 
28,000.00  
2.7 
Speed boats 
15,000.00  
3.10a 
Nursery workshop 
68,000.00  
3.10b 
Nursery workshop 
68,000.00  
3.7a 
Processing 
Latex 
building (sheet latex) 
69,000.00  
3.8a 
Gallery building 
88,000.00  
5.a3 
Agroforestry 
activities 
(should 
engage  community 
participation) 
500,000.00  
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q3 / 2017  
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2017  
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
SHOPPING 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 / 2018  
Comments: To be procured by 
KPHP   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
KPHP   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPHP   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPHP   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPHP   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPHP   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPHP   
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
BPHP   
Domestic Preference Applicable: 
N 
Advanced Contracting: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments: To be procured by 
UPTs. Community participation 
method may be used in specific 
circumstances where NCB is not 
feasible.   
102 
Annex 7 
6.a3 
Rubber 
plantation 
(including materials) 
25,000.00  
160,000.00  
7.a3 
(including 
Livelihood 
improvement 
activities 
handicrafts, 
beekeeping,  cat  fish, 
home 
gardening, 
water facilities) 
1 
2 
CPP 
Post 
Q2 / 2018  
Advanced Contracting: N 
Comments: To be procured by 
UPTs.   
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 / 2018  
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
Domestic Preference Applicable: 
N 
Advanced Contracting: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments: To be procured by 
UPTs. Community participation 
method may be used in specific 
circumstances where NCB is not 
feasible.   
B. 
Indicative List of Packages Required Under the Project 
The following table provides an indicative list of goods, works and consulting services contracts over the life of the project, other 
than those mentioned in previous sections (i.e., those expected beyond the current period). 
  Directorate of Business Development for Social Forestry and Customary Forest 
  Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
  2.1b 
General Description 
Solar  Panels  200W/unit, 
250 units 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
112,000.00 
  2.5 
Cars, 5 units 
168,000.00 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
2 
1 
Procurement 
Method  
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure  
Comments 
SHOPPING 
Post 
Comments: To be procured by BPSKL  
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
Village 
network 
roads/transport 
791,000.00 
17 
SHOPPING 
Post 
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Bidding Document: Goods 
Comments: To be procured by BUPSHA  
Comments: To be procured by BPSKL  
Micro  hydro  Power  Plant, 
40 KVA 
59,000.00 
1 
SHOPPING 
Post 
Comments: To be procured by BPSKL  
  3.1 
  3.2b 
  3.3b 
  5.b1 
  6.b1 
  7.b1 
for  Community 
Building 
Meeting/Green School 
Agroforestry 
(should 
community participation) 
activities 
engage 
28,000.00 
1,200,000.00 
Rubber 
(including materials) 
plantation 
55,000.00 
200,000.00 
improvement 
(including 
Livelihood 
activities 
handicrafts, 
beekeeping,cat 
fish, 
home  gardening,  water 
facilities) 
1 
4 
2 
1 
SHOPPING 
Post 
Comments: To be procured by BPSKL  
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
Annex 7 
103 
CPP 
Post 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
Directorate of Environmental Services and Conservation Forest 
  Goods and Works  
  Package 
Number 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
26,000.00 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
2 
Procurement 
Method  
SHOPPING 
  3.4 
  5.b2 
Infrastructure 
ecotourism 
for 
Agroforestry 
activities 
(should 
engage 
community participation) 
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Post 
Bidding 
Procedure  
Comments 
Comments: To be procured by BBTNBKDS  
1,200,000.00 
4 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
  6.b2 
Rubber 
(including materials) 
plantation 
55,000.00 
2 
CPP 
Post 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
in  specific 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible  
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
104 
Annex 7 
  7.b2 
improvement 
(including 
Livelihood 
activities 
handicrafts, 
fish, 
beekeeping,cat 
home  gardening,  water 
facilities) 
300,000.00 
2 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
Directorate of Production Forest Management Unit  
  Goods and Works  
  Package 
Number 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
18,000.00 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
1 
Geospatial  data  6,300 
km2 (RBI Skala 1:2500) 
Procurement 
Method  
SHOPPING 
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Post 
Bidding 
Procedure  
Comments 
Comments: To be procured by KPHP  
Field 
equipment 
and 
office 
196,000.00 
1 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Nursery workshop 
Coffee  processing  house 
(drying, soaking, process) 
Latex processing building 
(sheet latex) 
Gallery building 
68,000.00 
77,000.00 
208,000.00 
88,000.00 
1 
2 
3 
1 
SHOPPING 
SHOPPING 
SHOPPING 
SHOPPING 
Assisted 
Regeneration 6000ha 
Natural 
1,164,000.00 
12 
NCB 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Bidding Document: Goods 
Comments: To be procured by BPHP  
Comments: To be procured by BPHP  
Comments: To be procured by BPHP  
Comments: To be procured by BPHP  
1S1E 
Comments: To be procured by BPHP  
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
  2.4b 
  2.8 
  3.10c 
  3.5 
  3.6b 
  3.8b 
  4A 
  5.b3 
Agroforestry 
activities 
(should 
engage 
community participation) 
1,200,000.00 
4 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  BPHP.  Community 
in  specific 
participation  method  may  be  used 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible  
  6.b3 
  7.b3 
Rubber 
(including materials) 
plantation 
improvement 
(including 
Livelihood 
activities 
handicrafts, 
beekeeping,cat 
fish, 
home  gardening,  water 
facilities) 
30,000.00 
300,000.00 
1 
2 
CPP 
NCB 
Post 
Post 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
Prequalification of Bidders: N 
1S1E 
Annex 7 
105 
Domestic Preference Applicable: N 
Bidding Document: Others 
Comments:  To  be  procured  by  UPT.    Community 
Participation  method  may  be  used 
in  specific 
circumstances where NCB is not feasible.  
