Panj-Amu River Basin Sector Project (RRP AFG 48042) 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 48042-001 
Grant Number(s): {GXXXX} 
8 September 2016 
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Panj-Amu River 
Basin Sector Project 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ACRONYMS 
I.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
Benefits and Beneficiaries 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
B. 
Project Readiness Activities 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
III.  MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Project Organization Structure 
Subproject Selection Process 
IV.  COSTS AND FINANCING 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Output 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curves 
Fund Flow Diagram 
V.  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
VI.  PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Advance Contracting and Retroacting Financing 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
National Competitive Bidding 
Consultant’s Term of Reference 
VII.  SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
B. 
Environment Safeguards 
Social Safeguards 
VIII. GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
I 
1 
1 
4 
4 
5 
6 
6 
7 
9 
9 
10 
11 
19 
21 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
28 
29 
29 
30 
30 
30 
31 
31 
32 
32 
38 
40 
40 
40 
41 
42 
IX.  PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND COMMUNICATION42 
43 
45 
46 
46 
47 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
X.  ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
XI.  ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
XII.  RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
ANNEXES 
ANNEX 1: LIST OF CANDIDATE SUBPROJECTS 
ANNEX 2: IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT CONSULTANCY (ISC) SERVICES 
ANNEX 3: INCREMENTAL STAFF REQUIREMENTS 
48 
48 
49 
50 
53 
64 
Program Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
1.  The  program  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes  the  essential  administrative  and  management 
requirements to implement  the  Project  on time, within  budget,  and  in  accordance  with  the government 
and Asian Development Bank (ADB) policies and procedures. The PAM should include references to all 
available templates and instructions either through linkages to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in 
the PAM. 
2.  The  Ministry  of  Finance (MOF)  as  the  executing agency  and  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and Water  (MEW) 
and  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Irrigation  and  Livestock  (MAIL)  as  the  implementing  agencies  are  wholly 
responsible for the implementation of the Project, as agreed jointly between the recipient and ADB, and 
in  accordance  with  the  government  and  ADB’s  policies  and  procedures.  ADB  staff  is  responsible  to 
support  implementation  including  compliance  by  MOF,  MEW  and  MAIL  of  their  obligations  and 
responsibilities for project implementation in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
3.  At  grant  negotiations  the  recipient  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  the  PAM  and  ensure  consistency  with  the 
grant  agreements.  Such  agreement  shall  be  reflected  in  the  minutes  of  the  Grant  Negotiations.  In  the 
event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the grant agreements, the provisions of 
the grant agreements shall prevail. 
4.  After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP), changes 
in  implementation  arrangements  are  subject  to  agreement  and  approval  pursuant  to  relevant 
government  and  ADB  administrative  procedures  (including  the  Project  Administration  Instructions)  and 
upon such approval they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM. 
ACRONYMS 
Asian Development Bank 
Asian Development Fund 
Afghanistan National Development Strategy 
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 
Afghanistan Water Resources Development Project 
Central Intelligence Agency 
country operations business plan 
catchment management association 
country partnership strategy 
Central and West Asia Department 
Department for Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock 
design and monitoring framework 
Department of Rural Rehabilitation and Development 
executing agency 
environmental assessment and review framework 
environmental management plan 
European Union 
final acceptance certificate 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
financial management assessment 
gross domestic product 
grievance redress mechanism 
irrigation association 
international competitive bidding 
initial environmental examination 
implementation support consultancy 
irrigation service fee 
integrated water resource management 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
knowledge base 
land acquisition and resettlement plan 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–  Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock 
–  monitoring and evaluation 
–  Ministry of Energy and Water 
–  micro hydropower 
–  Ministry of Finance 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
national competitive bidding 
National Environmental Protection Agency 
non-government organization 
National Irrigation Program 
natural resources management 
National Water and Natural Resources Development Program 
on-farm water management 
operation and maintenance  
project administration manual 
payment for ecosystem services  
public financial management  
project implementation office 
project management office 
ADB 
ADF 
ANDS 
ARTF 
AWARD 
CIA 
COBP 
CMA 
CPS 
CWRD 
DAIL 
DMF 
DRRD 
EA 
EARF 
EMP 
EU 
FAC 
FAO 
FMA 
GDP 
GRM 
IA 
ICB 
IEE 
ISC 
ISF 
IWRM 
JICA 
KB 
LARP 
MAIL 
M&E 
MEW 
MHP 
MOF 
NCB 
NEPA 
NGO 
NIP 
NRM 
NWNRDP 
OFWM 
O&M 
PAM 
PES 
PFM 
PIO 
PMO 
PPMS 
PPP 
PPTA 
QCBS 
RBA 
RBC 
RFP 
RRP 
RSP 
R&U 
SBA 
SBC 
SCLW 
SOP 
SPS 
SPRSS 
SWE 
TOR 
UNEP 
US 
USGS 
WEAP 
WRDIP 
WUA 
project performance monitoring system 
public-private partnership 
project preparatory technical assistance 
quality and cost based selection 
river basin agency 
river basin council 
request for proposal 
Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors 
representative subproject 
rehabilitation and upgrading 
sub-basin agency 
sub-basin council 
Supreme Council on Land and Water 
standard operating procedure 
Safeguards Policy Statement 
summary poverty reduction and social strategy 
snow water equivalent 
terms of reference 
United Nations Environment Program 
United States 
US Geological Service 
water evaluation and planning 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
–  Water Resources Development Investment Program 
– 
water users’ association 
A. 
Rationale 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The proposed project will increase agricultural productivity in  the Panj-Amu River Basin 
1. 
through  improving  access  and  use  of  water  at  farm,  scheme  and  river  levels.1 The  project  will 
support the government strategy, which aims to increase per-capita income and reduce poverty 
among rural and pastoral communities. It will improve cropping intensities and crop yields on a 
command  area  of  74,500  hectares  (ha)  and  as  a  result,  increase  annual  farm  incomes  in  the 
range  $123–$615  per  household  (or  11%–55%)  for  over  55,000  households,  and  create 
approximately  11,000  full-time  rural  jobs  per  annum,  with  an  estimated  labor  income  of  $10.4 
million.  The  project  will  also  improve  food  security,  substitute  imports  for  wheat,  and  improve 
self-sufficiency,  and  increase  in  exports  of  high-value  products  such  as  fruit  and  nuts.  The 
project will also create more economic opportunities for agribusiness development, particularly 
for  input  suppliers  and  processors  of  and  market  intermediaries  for  agricultural  products.2 The 
project is included in ADB’s Country Operations Business Plan for Afghanistan, 2016–2018. 
2. 
Sector  Issues.  Afghanistan  is  one  of  the  least  developed  countries  in  the  world.  The 
poverty  headcount  rate  is  39%  and  the  percentage  of  food  insecure  population  is  33%. 3 
Average  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  per  capita  during  2011–2015  is  $634,  causing 
Afghanistan  to  rank  168th  out  of  183  countries  reviewed  by  the  World  Bank.4 Agriculture  is 
Afghanistan’s  major  sources  of  livelihood,  employs  79%  of  the  national  work  force,  and  is  a 
significant source of national income. Agriculture contributes significantly to Afghanistan’s GDP, 
although  this  has  been  decreasing  from  38%  in  2002  to  22%  in  2014.5 The  country's  major 
staple  crop  is  wheat,  representing  60%  of  Afghan's  daily  dietary  intake.  With  total  production 
output of 5.37 million tons in 2015, Afghanistan relies heavily on import to meet its population’s 
dietary energy requirements with an import dependency of 16% of total food demand. This level 
of dependency is growing 11% per annum.6 Food insecurity is prevalent throughout the country, 
but most critical in the north where food insecurity index is as high as 73% in the provinces of 
Badakhshan and Bamyan.7 
3. 
Afghanistan  is  a  dry  country  with  precipitation  falling  as  snow  falls  in  the  winter,  while 
crops require water in the summer. Limited access to irrigation water is a key binding constraint 
to agricultural productivity, besides low quality inputs and traditional agricultural practices. While 
the vast majority of Afghans depends on agriculture for a living, only 12% (or 64.4 million ha) of 
the country’s terrain is arable. Rain-fed area is currently of 3.7 million ha8 and irrigated area 3.8 
million ha, each representing about 5%–6% of total arable land. Of the total irrigated area of 3.8 
million  ha,  around  2.2  million  ha  are  single  or  double  cropped,  with  balance  of  1.6  million  ha 
being irrigated if and when water is available, at intervals of 2–6 years. 
Sporadic irrigation has been the primary cause for crop yields below the world average, 
4. 
for  example  average  wheat  yield  of  2.03  tons/ha  in  2013  (world  average  of  3.27  tons/ha)  and 
1  European Union (EU) provided project preparatory technical assistance for the proposed project. 
2  The sector modality is proposed since (i) a sector development plan is in place to meet the priority development 
needs of the sector, (ii) the institutional capacity is adequate to implement the sector development plan, and (iii) the 
policies applicable to the sector are appropriate. 
3  CSO. 2016. Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey. National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 2013–2014. Kabul. 
4  The World Bank. 2016. World Development Indicators. Washington. (web database). 
5  FAOSTAT. 2015. 
6  Ibid. 
7  Central Intelligence Agency. 2014. World Factbook, 2014–15 (52nd edition). Washington. 
8  Rain-fed crop production is largely limited to winter and spring cereal crops, predominantly wheat. 
2 
average  rice  yield  2.5  tons/ha  in  2013  (world  average  of  4.5  tons/ha). 9 Irrigated  yields  are 
observed to be significantly greater than rain-fed yields, for example, the irrigated wheat yield is 
2.5  times that  of rain-fed. With  irrigated  areas  producing  69%  of total  wheat  outputs,  irrigation 
water  is  a  critical  high  value  factor  for  yield  improvement.  While  water  is  available,  improving 
access  to  irrigation  water  on  existing  irrigation systems faces two critical constraints,  including 
(i)  inequitable  distribution  of  water  both  between  and  within  schemes,  and  (ii)  dilapidated  and 
inefficient state of irrigation infrastructure.  
Climate  Change  Impacts.  Afghanistan  is  considered  highly  vulnerable  to  the  adverse 
5. 
effects  of  climate  change.10 Current  models  indicate  significant  warming  across  all  regions  of 
Afghanistan, and a decrease in precipitation particularly spring rainfall.11 The anticipated rise in 
average temperatures means that the average timing of the spring snow melt may occur earlier 
into  the  year,  reducing  water  availability  in  the  summer  growing  season.  This  may  be 
counteracted  to  some  extent  by  the  decrease  in  spring  rainfall,  which  is  another  important 
catalyst  in  the  initiation  of  spring  snow  melt.  The  anticipated  rise  in  average  temperatures 
means  that  there  will  be  more  energy  available,  which  may  result  in  a  higher  frequency  of 
extreme storm events and resultant flooding. Higher temperatures and lower precipitation may 
increase  the  frequency,  intensity  and  duration  of  droughts.  Improving  irrigation  infrastructure 
proposed  under  the  project,  to  protect  irrigation  schemes  from  flood  events  and  to  improve 
water  distribution  to  downstream  users  particularly  in  dry  years,  as  well  as  watershed 
management,  will  address  key  climate  change  adaptation  needs  identified  in  the  National 
Adaptation  Plan  and  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  submitted  to  the  United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.12 
Panj-Amu  Basin  Overview.  The  Panj-Amu  Basin  is  located  in  the  north-east  of  the 
6. 
country  on  the  border  with  Tajikistan,  covering  the  provinces  of  Badakshan,  Takhar,  Kunduz, 
Baghlan  and  part  of  Bamyan.  The  Basin  is  part  of  the  Amu  River  Basin,  parts  of  which  lie  in 
Afghanistan  (30%),  Tajikistan  (61%),  Uzbekistan  (6%),  Kyrgyzstan  (2%)  and  Turkmenistan 
(1%).  It  is  the  second  largest  of  Afghanistan's  five  basins,  covering  14%  of  the  land  area  of 
Afghanistan. It has the highest mean annual surface water flow of all basins (22 km3 or 39% of 
the national total) and the highest precipitation (393mm/year).13 With a population of 4.2 million 
(15% of total), per-capita water availability is the highest of all five basins, at 7,412m³/year, well 
above the water stress threshold. In spite of this, water is not always available at the right place 
at the right time (i.e. in the tail ends of canals, and in downstream schemes, in the summer, due 
to inadequate water distribution structures and water allocation regimes, as opposed to a lack of 
water resources at a basin or river level). While agriculture is by far the main water users in the 
basin (over 98% of water use), the Basin has the lowest irrigated land area with 0.45 million ha 
under irrigation, accounting for 12% of a total of 3.8 million ha of irrigated land country-wide. Of 
this, only 0.18 million ha is intensively irrigated while the remaining is irrigated only if and when 
water  is  available.14 The  Basin  is  the  largest  wheat  producer,  with  over  1.28  million  tons  (1.0 
million tons of which from irrigated areas) produced in 2015, and the largest rice producer, with 
263,000 tons produced in 2015. The Basin also has significant potential for crop diversification, 
with  a  number  of  fruits,  perennial  crops  and  vegetables  already  grown.  As  such,  irrigation 
9  FAOSTAT. 2015. 
10 Rated as ‘Extreme’ in the Verisk Maplecroft Climate Change Vulnerability Index 2015. 
11 Stockholm Environment Institute. 2008. Socio-Economic Impacts of Climate Change in Afghanistan. Oxford. 
12 Islamic  Republic  of  Afghanistan.  2015.  Intended  National  Determined  Contribution.  Kabul.  (submitted  to  United 
National Framework Convention on Climate Change dated 21 September 2015). 
13 Source: National Water Master Plan weighted by river basin area. 
14 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2016. The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan:  Land Cover 
Atlas 2015. Rome. 
3 
development is a key factor for the Basin to maintain its leading position in production of staple 
food and diversification into higher value crops. 
7. 
Opportunities.  Improving  water  availability  for  irrigated  agriculture,  particularly  to 
downstream  and  tail-end  areas  through  improved  water  distribution,  will  have  a  significant 
impact  on  agricultural  productivity,  increasing  yields  of  wheat  and  rice  in  particular,  which  will 
result  in  improved  food  security,  reduced  poverty  and  import  substitution  (saving  significant 
forex  resources,  which  are  scarce). 
Improved  water  availability  will  also  make  crop 
diversification  easier,  allowing  farmers  to  diversify  into  more  higher-value  crops  including 
vegetables, fruit and nuts which have a comparative advantage, making up 52% of total exports 
of  $720  million.  When  compared  to  total  imports  of  $7.96  billion  this  is  a  narrow  export  base 
which can be improved with project interventions. 
8. 
Government's  Sector Strategy. The Strategic Policy Framework for the Water Sector, 
approved  in  2006,  guides  the  water  sector  operation.  The  policy  indicates  that  (i)  basin 
communities are responsible for planning and management of basin water resources, supported 
by Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW); (ii) water user associations (WUAs) have a key role in 
rehabilitating small and medium irrigation schemes; and (iii) users-pay principle will be adopted 
to  enable  cost  recovery.  To  support  this  policy,  in  2009  a  revised  Water  Law  was  enacted, 
which stipulates that (i) the river basin management approach for water resources planning will 
be followed, led by MEW through the establishment of (sub) river basin agencies (S/RBAs) and 
councils (S/RBCs); (ii) service providers (including WUAs) can charge for water delivery; and (iii) 
ownership  and  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  of  schemes  will  be  handed  over  to  WUAs 
and  irrigation  associations  (IAs).  The  National  Water  and  Natural  Resources  Development 
Program (NWNRDP) approved in 2010 acts as the government’s sector development plan. The 
key  implementing  agencies  of  NWNRDP  are  MEW  and  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock,  and 
Irrigation  (MAIL).  This  targets  improved  access  to  irrigation  for  300,000  ha;  establishing  and 
strengthening  S/RBAs,  S/RBCs  and  WUAs;  and  restoring  28,000  ha  of  rangeland  through 
community  management.  The  National  Irrigation  Program  (NIP)  (2016–2025)  builds  on  the 
NWNRDP,  and,  with  a  budget  of  US$1.5  billion,  aims  to  achieve  self-sufficiency  in  wheat 
through (i) improved irrigation services; (ii) enhanced extension services; and (iii) improved on-
farm water management, operation and maintenance.  NWNRDP implementation results so far 
suggest  that  the  2006  Policy  Framework  and  the  2009  revised Water  Law  are  appropriate for 
sector  needs,  but  can  be  improved  further  by  clarifying  roles  and  responsibilities  of  MEW  and 
MAIL,  and  ensuring the long-term  sustainability  of  infrastructure  through  regular  operation  and 
maintenance.  The  project  supports  this  through  the  establishment  and  strengthening  of  water 
user organizations, and development of an O&M policy (para. 32 of the RRP). NWNRDP results 
also  confirm  adequate  institutional  capacity  of  the  implementing  agencies—MEW  and  MAIL, 
which  are  also  implementing  agencies  of  the  project.  MEW  and  MAIL  have  implemented  a 
number  of  sector  projects,  and  have  acceptable  levels  of  capacity.  The  project  will 
provide additional  capacity  building  in  procurement  and  financial  management,  environmental 
impact assessment and social analysis in accordance with ADB procedures.  
9. 
The  project  is  consistent  with  ADB's  interim  country  partnership strategy  (CPS),  2014–
2015,  which  includes  investment  in  infrastructure,  including  energy,  transportation,  and 
agriculture and natural resources. ADB's strategic focus supports the government's priorities as 
set  out  in  this  new  government's  "Realizing  Self-Reliance"  paper,  and  is  aligned  with  the 
National Priority Programs of the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS), including 
the  National Water  and Natural  Resources  Development  Program.  The  project  is  aligned  with 
ADB's  long-term  strategic  framework  2008–2020  (Strategy  2020),  Water  Operational  Plan 
2011–2020, and Operational Plan for Agriculture and Natural Resources 2015–2020. 
4 
10. 
The  project  reflects  lessons  learnt  from  previous  and  on-going  donor-funded  water 
sector  projects  in  support  of  the  Government’s  sector  polices  and  strategies.  Key  initiatives 
include: ADB-financed Water Resources Development Investment Program (2009–2018); Panj-
Amu River Basin Programme (2009–2016) financed by the European Union (EU), Irrigation and 
Watershed  Management  Programme  (2012–2017)  financed  by  the  United  States  Agency  for 
International  Development;  and  three  World  Bank  financed  projects  including  Emergency 
Irrigation  Rehabilitation  Programme  (2004–2011),  Technical  Assistance  for  Water  Sector 
Capacity  Building    (2009–2011),  Irrigation  Restoration  and  Development  Project  (2011–2017), 
and On-Farm Water Management Project (2011–2016).15 Key lessons learnt call for the need to 
(i) increase government ownership, (ii) avoid setting-up parallel management structures, (iii) set 
up  realistic  implementation  plan,  (iv)    keep  interventions  simple  yet  effective;  and  (v)  embed 
community-based water management for effective water distribution and long-term O&M within 
schemes. 16  The  project  follows  the  fragile  and  conflict-affected  states  approach  in  that  it 
includes  (i)  sector  financing  allows  flexibility  in  subproject  selection  and  implementation  given 
security  concerns,  (ii)  streamlined  project management  office (PMO)  structure  helps long-term 
programmatic  sector  interventions,  and  (iii)  community  participation  in  procurement  and 
involvement  of  local  elders  throughout  subproject  cycles  minimize  interruptions  of  works 
contracts.  The  project  readiness  is  enhanced  by  the  use  of  advance  contracting,  and  ADB’s 
financing  of  taxes  and  duties  on  eligible  project  expenditures  in  accordance  to  R167-15: 
Enhancing Operational Efficiency of the Asian Development Bank (dated 24 November 2015). 
B. 
Impacts and Outcome 
The  impact  of  the  project  is  per-capita  income  increased  and  poverty  among  rural  and 
11. 
pastoral  communities  reduced.17 The  project’s  outcome  is  agricultural  productivity  in  the  Panj-
Amu River Basin increased.  
C. 
Outputs 
12. 
Output  1:  Water  allocation  and  availability  improved.  This  output  will  include  the 
following  activities:  (i)  rehabilitating  and  upgrading  head  works  and  main  canals  in  21  priority 
irrigation  schemes  covering  an  estimated  total  command  area  of  74,500  ha  in  three  northern 
provinces,  namely  Badakhshan,  Kunduz,  and  Takhar;18 (ii)  establishing  and  strengthening  the 
capacity  of  approximately  112  water  users’  associations  (WUAs) 19 to  operate  and  maintain 
(O&M) conveyance infrastructure in these schemes; and (iii) enhancing the capacity of Ministry 
of  Energy  and  Water  (MEW),  river  basin  agency  (RBA)  and  sub-basin  agencies  (SBAs)  for  
effective  water  allocation  between  schemes  to  benefit  downstream  users.  In  addition,  support 
will also be provided to Afghan members of the Afghanistan-Tajikistan transboundary technical 
working  group  to  prepare  them  for  technical  meetings  and  strengthen  their  ability  to  conduct 
negotiations regarding the set-up and operations of the Pyanj River Basin Commission. 
15 Development Coordination (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2 of the RRP). 
16 Lessons Learned and Synergies (accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2 of the RRP). 
17 Islamic  Republic  of  Afghanistan.  July  2010.  Afghanistan  National  Development  Strategy:  Prioritization  and 
Implementation Plan, Mid 2010–Mid 2013 (Volume 1). Kabul. 
18 Twenty-one schemes were selected as first priority schemes covering a command area of 74,500 ha in the Lower 
Kunduz, Taloquan, Kokcha and Lower Panj-Amu sub-basins. For feasibility study, each scheme is referred to as a 
subproject. A list of candidate subprojects is accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2 of the RRP. 
19 Including strengthening of WUAs already set up in schemes through previous EU assistance. 
Output 2: Command areas enhanced. This output will include the following activities:(i) 
13. 
rehabilitating secondary and tertiary canals in schemes identified for improvement under Output 
1 in order to secure an integrated approach; (ii) establishing and strengthening the capacity of 
approximately 105 irrigation associations (IAs) to operate and manage irrigation infrastructure in 
these schemes; and (iii) improving on-farm water management and agronomic techniques (such 
as land levelling, bed and furrow irrigation, and intercropping) with approximately 6,300 farmers 
having improved knowledge from 21 demonstration plots. 
5 
Output 3: Watersheds properly managed and protected. This output will include the 
14. 
following  activities:  (i)  preparing  a  community-based  natural  resources  management  technical 
manual and guidebook, (ii) training  staff of departments of agriculture, irrigation, and livestock 
(DAILs)  as  master 
identifying 
approximately  21  watershed  and/or rangeland  sites for restoration  and  protection, (iv)  creating 
catchment  management  associations  (CMAs) 
these  sites,  and  (v)  preparing  and 
implementing  natural  resource  management  plans  for  these  sites.  These  activities  will  help 
restore 10,500 hectares of forestry and/or rangeland in the vicinity of 21 prioritized schemes and 
protect irrigation structures under Outputs 1 and 2 from flash floods and sedimentation.  
trainers  who  will  conduct  training  of  communities,  (iii) 
for 
15. 
Using an integrated approach, on each of the 21 priority schemes, MEW will undertake 
rehabilitation  of  headworks  and  main  canals  while  MAIL  will  undertake  rehabilitation  of 
secondary  and  tertiary  canals,  on-farm  work,  and  watershed  protection  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
schemes.  The  project  will  provide  technical  resources  to  implementing  agencies  to  ensure 
proper  irrigation  management  and  transfer  (IMT).  Specifically,  the  project  assists  the  drafting, 
negotiation,  and  conclusion  of  pre-construction  O&M  agreements  and  hand-over  and/or  IMT 
agreements  between  SBAs  and  WUAs  (Output  1),  between  DAILs  and  IAs  (Output  2),  and 
between DAILs and CMAs (Output 3). 
D. 
Benefits and Beneficiaries 
16. 
Project  Benefits.  The  project  will  benefit  approximately  55,000  farming  households 
(over  400,000  people).  Project  benefits  are  multifaceted.  First,  farm  household  income  is 
expected to increase as a result of increased cropping intensities, higher crop yields,  and crop 
diversification.  The  analysis  of  three  representative  subprojects  indicates  that  incremental 
household incomes will have an average increase in the range of $123.0 (for head reach) and 
$615  (for  tail  reach)  per  annum.  Second,  incremental  crop  labor  will  create  an  equivalent  of 
8,994 full-time  rural jobs  per  annum  valued  at  $8.7 million,  and project construction  works  are 
expected to generate an equivalent of 1,700 full time rural jobs for 6 years with estimated value 
of $1.6 million. Most of this labor income goes to local workers drawn from low-income and poor 
households  who  may  or  may  not  have  land  within  the  project  command  area.  Third,  other 
economic  benefits  are  also  expected,  which  include  (i)  increased  food  security,  which  could 
arise  from  higher  production  of  staple  grain  crops,  i.e.,  wheat  and  rice;  (ii)  foreign  exchange 
savings,  which  could  result  from  the  substitution  of  imported  agricultural  products  because  of 
higher domestic production, especially in the case of wheat; (iii) reduced water conflicts within 
and  between  irrigation  schemes  due  to  increased  supply  of  water  for  agriculture,  households, 
and  industries;  and  (iv)  more  economic  opportunities  for  downstream  (input  suppliers)  and 
upstream  (processors  of  and  market  intermediaries  for  agricultural  products)  industries  in  the 
agricultural supply chain. 
Improved water availability will also make crop diversification easier, allowing farmers to 
17. 
diversify  into  more  water  dependent  crops  with  higher  average  unit  gross  margins,  including 
vegetables, fruit and nuts which have a comparative advantage, making up 52% of total exports 
6 
of  $720  million.  When  compared  to  total  imports  of  $7.96  billion  this  is  a  narrow  export  base 
which  can  be  improved  with  project  interventions.  For  example,  with  project  interventions  an 
additional 4,800 tons of apricots and peaches will be produced. 
  The  project 
is  categorized  as  some  gender  benefit  (SGE).  Gender  will  be 
18. 
mainstreamed  into  project  activities  to  the  extent  possible.  It  will  directly  benefit  farmers 
including poor households through increases in agricultural production and farm incomes. More 
equitable  water  distribution  within  and  between  schemes  will  reduce  conflict  over  water,  and 
reduce  income  inequality.  In  the  creation  of WUAs  and  IAs,  water  users  will  be  briefed  on the 
importance of female participation. Natural resource management (NRM) plans for watersheds 
will  be  prepared  with  due  regard  for  the  role  of  women  in  watershed  activities,  particularly 
income-generating  activities.  The  project  will  also  ease  women’s  water-fetching  and  laundry 
chores as it will install water access points along canals for household use. 
19. 
Beneficiaries.  The  key  beneficiaries  are  55,000  farming  households  (over  400,000 
beneficiaries)  in  the  project  area  who  will  have  increased  incomes  as  a  result  of  increases  in 
agricultural productivity. These are either those who own and manage their own land or landless 
farmers who sharecrop and wage laborers. Additional beneficiaries will include (i) women in the 
project  areas  who  will  benefit  from  domestic  water  access  points  built  along  canals  to  aid 
access  for  water  fetching  and  laundry;  (ii)  households  in  watersheds  adjacent  to  irrigation 
schemes who will benefit from alternative income-generating activities and improved agricultural 
production; (iii) government staff (in MEW, MAIL, RBAs, SBAs and DAILs) and contractors who 
will  be  trained by  the  project;  and (iv)  downstream  water  users  in other  non-targeted  irrigation 
schemes,  as  well  as  other  users  of  water  (environment,  domestic,  industry,  hydro),  who  will 
benefit from improved water availability (and in the case of reservoir/hydro operators, improved 
performance from reduced siltation due to watershed management and protection activities). 
A. 
Project Readiness Activities 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Table 1: Summary Project Readiness Activities 
Notes: The project readiness is enhanced by the use of advance contracting, and ADB’s financing of taxes and duties 
on  eligible  project  expenditures  in  accordance  to  R167-15:  Enhancing  Operational  Efficiency  of  the  Asian 
Development Bank (dated 24 November 2015). 
2017JuneJulyAugSepOctNovDecJanAdvance contracting actionsa, bMEWEstablish project implementation arrangementsbMEW/MAILADB Board approval (Oct 2016)ADBGrants signing (Nov 2016)ADB and MOFGovernment legal opinion providedMOJGovernment budget inclusion MOFGrant effectiveness (Jan 2017)ADBMOJ = Ministry of Justice.Source: Asian Deveopment BankADB = Asian Development Bank; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock; MEW = Ministry of Energy and Water; MOF = Ministry of Finance;Indicative Activities2016Responsible Agencya Including recruitement of implementation support consultancy, and works contracts for three representative subprojects. b With continued support of the PPTA consultants - Landell Mills Ltd. 
B. 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
The  Gantt  chart  recording  outputs  with  key  implementation  activities  on  a  quarterly  basis  is  in  Table  2.  This  chart  will  be  updated 
20. 
annually and submitted to ADB with contract and disbursement projections for the following year. 
Table 2: Overal Project Implementation Plan 
7
Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Grant approvalProject effectiveness1.     Output 1: Water allocation and availability improved1.1   Sub-component 1: Water conveyance infrastructure rehabilitated and upgraded(i)      Activity 1: Sub-project identification and selection(ii)     Activity 2: Tendering and contracting of a design firm(iii)    Activity 3: Preparation of TORs for call-down design services(iv)    Activity 4: Feasibility studies and detailed design of subprojectsFS and DD for package 2FS and DD for package 3FS and DD for package 4FS and DD for package 5FS and DD for package 6FS and DD for package 7FS and DD for package 8(v)     Activity 5: Tendering and Contracting of Construction FirmsTendering and contracting of package 1 (3 rep subporojects)Tendering and contracting of package 2Tendering and contracting of package 3Tendering and contracting of package 4Tendering and contracting of package 5Tendering and contracting of package 6Tendering and contracting of package 7Tendering and contracting of package 8(vi)    Activity 6: Construction and Construction SupervisionConstruction of package 1 (3 rep subprojects)Construction of package 2Construction of package 3Construction of package 4Construction of package 5Construction of package 6Construction of package 7Construction of package 8(vii)   Activity 7: Hand-over and future O&M1.2   Sub-component 2: WUAs established and strengthened(i)      Activity 1: Continued support, capacity building and mentoring of existing WUAs(ii)     Activity 2: Establishment of new WUAs1.3   Sub-component 3: Water resources planning and management strengthened(i)      Activity 1: Strengthening the water resources planning system;(ii)     Activity 2: Strengthened central-level inter-agency co-ordination;(iii)    Activity 3: Strengthening co-ordination between (S)RBA, DAIL and DRRD in river basin planning and management;(iv)    Activity 4: Support to Afghan members of the Afghan/Tajik transboundary technical working group to prepare for WG meetings.202120222023Activities2017201820192020 
Table 2 (continued) 
8
DAIL = Department of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock; FS = feasibility study; DD = detailed design; DRRD = Department of Rural Rehabilitation and Development; IA = irrigation association; 
ISC  =  implementation support  consultancy;  NRM  =  natural  resources management;  O&M  =  operations  and  maintenance; PES  =  payment  for  ecosystem  service;  PMO  =  project management 
office; PPMS = project performance monitoring system; RBA = river basin agency; TOR = terms of reference; WG = working group; WUA = water users association.  
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q22.    Output 2: On-farm water management enhanced2.1 Sub-component 1: On-farm Irrigation infrastructure rehabilitated and upgraded(i)      Activity 1: Sub-project identification and selection(ii)     Activity 2: Feasibility studies and detailed design of subprojectsFS and DD for package 1FS and DD for package 2FS and DD for package 3FS and DD for package 4FS and DD for package 5(iii)    Activity 3: Tendering and Contracting of Construction Firms (or through community-based work contracts)Tendering and contracting of package 1Tendering and contracting of package 2Tendering and contracting of package 3Tendering and contracting of package 4Tendering and contracting of package 5(iv)    Activity 4: Construction and Construction SupervisionConstruction of package 1Construction of package 2Construction of package 3Construction of package 4Construction of package 5(v)     Activity 5: Hand-over and future O&M2.2   Sub-component 2: IAs established and strengthened(i)      Activity 1: Establishment of IAs within the existing WUAs(ii)     Activity 2: Establishment of new IAs2.3   Sub-component 3: Efficiency of agricultural water use enhanced(i)      Activity 1: OFWM and agricultural extension3.     Output 3: Watersheds are properly managed and protected(i)      Activity 1: Preparation of a Community-based NRM Technical Manual and Guidebook(ii)     Activity 2: Identification of Sites (approx. 21)(iii)    Activity 3: Training of DAILs who can train communities(iv)    Activity 4: Creation and strengthening of community associations(v)     Activity 5: Preparation of natural resource management (NRM) plans(vi)    Activity 6: Implementation of NRM Plans (including one PES pilot).4.     Project management and implementation(i) Establishing and operationalizing PMO and PIOs(ii) Recruiting and mobilizing staff(iii) ISC firm recruited and mobilized(iv) Office equipment and vehicles procured(v) PPMS established and functioning(vi) Project reporting (quarterly, project completion)(vii) Annual audits(viii) ADB Project reviewsInception Annual ReviewsMid-term ReviewProject Completion ReportGrant Closing20222023Activities20172018201920202021 
9 
III. 
MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Executing Agency 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) 
Implementing Agencies 
Ministry of Energy and Water 
(MEW) 
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation 
and Livestock (MAIL) 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
MOF will be the executing agency and will be responsible for overall 
coordination and financial management of the Project. 
There will be two implementing agencies for the Project: 
  MEW will be responsible to oversee the implementation of 
Output 1. It will set-up a PMO in Kabul in the MEW main office. 
This PMO will be part of an overall ADB PMO responsible for all 
ADB projects and programs implemented by the Ministry. It will 
set up a PIO for basin-level activities in the RBA in Kunduz, 
embedded within the RBA office to avoid setting up a parallel 
structure and to strengthen government institutional capacity. 
The PIO will coordinate with the six SBAs, in which project 
personnel will also be based. 
  MAIL will be responsible to oversee the implementation of 
Outputs 2 and 3. It will set up a PMO in Kabul in the MAIL main 
office. This PMO will be stand-alone but in the future could be 
part of an overall ADB PMO responsible for all ADB projects and 
programs implemented by the Ministry, in line with the plan for 
MEW. It will set up PIOs for basin-level activities in the five 
provincial DAILs, embedded within the DAIL offices to avoid 
setting up a parallel structure and to strengthen government 
institutional capacity. The DAILs will coordinate with agricultural 
development officers at the district level. 
Program Management Offices  The PMO for each implementing agency will be responsible for the 
following: 
  overall management and coordination of the relevant outputs for 
the respective IA, and for coordination and liaison with each 
other, and with other relevant Ministries and agencies 
  guiding and overseeing the work of the PIOs 
  establishment and implementation of the project performance 
management system (PPMS) (consolidated by MEW PMO) 
  hiring of project staff 
  confirming subproject selection, feasibility studies and submitting 
to ADB for “no-objection” 
  procurement of goods, works and services specific to each PMO, 
following ADB procedures. MEW PMO will be responsible for 
recruitment of a firm for audit of program accounts (for both 
PMOs) and for recruitment of the implementation support 
consultancy (ISC) firm, with MAIL on the evaluation committee)  
  establishing and managing an imprest account, submission of 
withdrawal applications to ADB, retention of supporting 
documents, and overseeing sub-accounts of the PIOs 
  preparation of annual forecast of contract awards and 
disbursements 
  compilation of reports from the PIOs and preparation of project 
progress reports (consolidated by MEW PMO)  
  submission of progress reports and annual audit report and 
financial statements 
10 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Project Implementation 
Offices (PIOs) 
Financers 
Asian Development Bank 
  preparation of a project completion report (consolidated by MEW 
PMO) 
The PIO for each implementing agency will be responsible for the 
following: 
 
implementation of project activities at the basin level, under the 
management and leadership of the respective PMO at MEW and 
MAIL 
  coordination and liaison with each other, and with other relevant 
basin-level departments and agencies   
  establish and manage sub-accounts and retention of supporting 
documents 
  procurement of small shopping contracts 
ADB will: 
  provide a grant from the Asian Development Fund resources 
  administer EU grant 
 
  monitor project implementation arrangements, disbursement, 
issue “no-objection” for subproject feasibility studies for financing 
procurement, consultant selection, and reporting 
  monitor schedules of activities, including funds flow; 
 
 
  monitor effectiveness of safeguard procedures 
  analyze the outcome of the capacity building and training 
review compliance with agreed procurement procedures 
review compliance with grant covenants 
initiatives 
  monitor conformity with ADB anti-corruption policies; 
  undertake periodic review missions 
  undertake a joint midterm review mission with the government 
and EU. 
European Union 
  provide a grant to cofinance the project 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; DAIL = Department of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock; EU = European Union; 
ISC = implementation support consultancy; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock; MEW = Ministry 
of Energy and Water; MOF = Ministry of Finance; PIO = project implementation office; PMO = project management 
office; PPMS = project performance management system; RBA = river basin agency; SBA = sub-basin agency. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Executing Agency  
Ministry of Finance 
H.E. Mustafa Mastoor 
Deputy Minister of Finance 
Ministry of Finance 
Email address: _______________ 
Office Address: _______________  
Asian Development Bank 
Environment, Natural Resources 
and Agriculture Division (CWER),  
Central and West Asia 
Department (CWRD) 
Mission Leader 
Akmal Siddiq 
Director, CWER  
Telephone No.: +63 2 632 6234 
Fax No.: +63 2 636 2231 
Email address: asiddiq@adb.org 
Bui Minh Giap 
Senior National Resources and Agriculture Economist, CWER 
11 
Telephone No. +63 2 632 6900 
Email address: buigm@adb.org 
C. 
Project Organization Structure 
21.  Ministry  of  Finance (MOF)  will  be the  executing agency (EA) for  the  project,  and MEW 
and  MAIL  the  implementing  agencies  supported  by  a  project  management  office  (PMO)  for 
each.  Project  implementation  offices  (PIOs)  reporting  to  the  PMOs  will  be  established  at  the 
basin level. The overall project organization structure is in Chart 1. 
22. 
Project  management  and  implementation  will  be  embedded  in  exiting  government 
structures  to  prevent  setting  up  parallel  structures,  which  will  help  strengthen  government 
institutional capacity. At the PMO level, the project will build on structures set-up under the ADB 
Water  Resources  Development  Investment  Program  (WRDIP)  to  the  extent  possible.  This  will 
help  avoid  duplication  and  minimize  implementation  complexity.  There  will  be  no  project 
steering committee proposed as this is not necessary and would be an ‘artificial’ structure with 
lack of long-term ownership—this is part of the lessons learnt from past ADB and EU projects. 
An  ongoing  coordination  platform  exists  between  the  two  implementing  agencies,  MEW  and 
MAIL,  including  via  the  Supreme  Council  for  Land  and  Water  (SCLW)  which  includes 
representatives from  other  relevant  Ministries  such  as  the  Ministry  of  Rural  Rehabilitation  and 
Development (MRRD), and which is chaired by the First Vice-President of the Islamic Republic 
of Afghanistan. Ongoing coordination between MEW and MAIL will be strengthened, so that any 
overlaps can be avoided, synergies realized and policy gaps identified and addressed. In case 
of  disagreement  between  the  two  implementing  agencies,  the  MOF  in  the  role  of  the  EA,  will 
have a coordination role.    
23.  MEW will be responsible to oversee the implementation of Output 1. It will set-up a PMO 
in  Kabul  in  the  MEW  main  office  (Chart  2).  This  PMO  will  be  part  of  an  overall  ADB  PMO 
responsible for all ADB projects and programs implemented by the Ministry. It will set up a PIO 
for basin-level activities in the river basin agency (RBA) in Kunduz, embedded within the RBA 
office to avoid setting up a parallel structure and to strengthen government institutional capacity.  
The PIO will coordinate with the six sub-basin agencies (SBAs), in which project personnel will 
also be based (Chart 3). 
24.  MAIL will be responsible to oversee the implementation of Outputs 2 and 3. It will set up 
a PMO in Kabul in the MAIL main office (Chart 4). This PMO will be standalone but in the future 
could  be  part  of  an  overall  ADB  PMO  responsible  for  all  ADB  projects  and  programs 
implemented by the Ministry, in line with the plan for MEW. The PMO will work closely with the 
Irrigation Directorate, the Extension Directorate and the NRM Directorate. It will set up PIOs for 
basin-level  activities  in  the  five  provincial  DAILs,  embedded  within  the  DAIL  offices  to  avoid 
setting  up  a  parallel  structure  and  to  strengthen  government  institutional  capacity.  The  DAILs 
will coordinate with Agricultural Development Officers (ADOs) at the district level (Chart 5).  
The project organization structure is shown in  Chart 1 and associated PMOs and PIOs 
25. 
structures in Charts 2–5.  
Chart 1: Overall Project Organization Structure 
MEW 
Implementing Agency 
PMO 
Management Office 
MOF 
Executing Agency 
Implementation 
Support Consultants 
MAIL PMO 
Implementing Agency 
PMO 
Management Office 
RBA 
Implementation Unit 
PIO 
Implementation Office 
Implementation Support Consultants 
PIO 
Implementation 
Office 
DAIL 1 
Implementation 
Unit 
SBA 
Supervision Unit 
SBA 1 
Supervision Unit 
FS + Design 
Consultants 
SBA 
Supervision Unit 
SBA 
Supervision Unit 
SBA 
Supervision Unit 
Supervision 
Support 
Supervision 
Support 
WUA 
Beneficiary 
Build  
Contractor 
CDC 
Contractor 
Build 
Contractor 
IA / CMA 
Beneficiary 
Sub Project 
(Output 1) 
Sub Project 
(Output 2 or 3) 
Sub Project 
(Output 2 or 3) 
Government Organization Lines 
Project Management Lines 
1
2
DAIL 
DAIL 
DAIL 
DAIL 
ADB = Asian Development Bank;  CDC = community development council;  CMA = community management authority; DAIL = Department of Agriculture, Irrigation, and 
Livestock; IA = irrigation association; ISC = implementation support consultancy; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock; MEW = Ministry of Energy and 
Water; MOF = Ministry of Finance; PIO = project implementation office; PMO = project management office; RBA = river basin agency; SBA = sub-basin agency. ISC = 
Implementation Support Consultancy; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock; MEW = Ministry of Energy and Water; PIO = Project Implementation Office; 
PMO = Project Management Office; PPMS = Project Performance Management System; RBA = River Basin Agency; SBA = Sub Basin Agency 
13 
Chart 2: Project Management Office (PMO) Structure  
at the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) 
PMO Director 
Deputy Director 
Other Projects 
PMO Deputy Director 
 Project Manager 
Environment Safeguards 
Officer 
Contract and 
Procurement Officer 
Social Safeguards 
Officer 
Admin and HR Officer 
Finance Officer 
Driver 1 
Driver 2 
Clerk 1 
Clerk 2 
Senior Design and 
Supervision Engineer 
HR = human resource; MEW = Ministry of Energy and Water; PMO = project management office. 
14 
Chart 3: Project Implementation Office (PIO) Structure at the Ministry of Energy and 
Water (MEW)  
(1 PIO located in River Basin Agency [RBA]) 
PIO Director 
Administration Officer 
Finance Officer 
Driver 1 
SBA Drivers 
(4) 
SBA Finance Officers (6) 
Clerk 1 
Junior Supervision 
Engineers (SBAs) 
GIS/IT Officer 
Senior WUA Officer 
Junior WUA Officers  
(SBAs) (5) 
Senior River Basin 
Planning Officer 
Building Design 
Engineer 
GIS = geographic information system, IT = information technology; MEW = Ministry of Energy and Water; 
PIO = project implementation office; PMO = project management office; RBA = river basin agency; SBA = 
sub-basin agency; WUA = water users association. 
Chart 4: Project Management Office (PMO) Structure at the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL) 
15 
PMO Director 
Contract and 
Procurement Officer 
Admin and HR Officer 
Finance Officer 
Driver 1 
Driver 2 
Clerk 1 
Clerk 2 
Environment 
Safeguards Officer 
Social Safeguards 
Officer 
Senior NRM 
Coordinator 
Senior IA/OFWM 
Officer 
Irrigation Design 
Engineer 
HR = human resource; IA = irrigation association; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and 
Livestock; NRM = natural resources management; OFWM = on-farm water management; PMO 
= project management office. 
16 
Chart 5: Project Implementation Office (PIO) Structure at the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL)  
(5 PIOs located at 5 Departments of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock [DAILs]) 
PIO Director  
(DAIL) 
Administration Officer 
Finance Officer 
Driver 
Junior Agronomists 
Junior Irrigation 
Supervision Engineer 
Junior Watershed 
Management Officer 
Supported by the 
Senior IA/ OFWM 
Officer at PMO 
Senior Watershed 
Management Officer 
(1 only supporting all 
PIOs) 
Senior Rural 
Livelihoods Officer  
(1 only supporting all 
PIOs) 
DAIL = Department of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock; IA = irrigation association; OFWM = on-farm 
water management; PIO = project implementation office; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and 
Livestock. 
17 
26. 
Institutional responsibilities by project outputs and key activities are in Table 3. 
Table 3: Institutional Responsibilities by Outputs and Key Activities 
Responsible Agency(ies) 
Outputs and Activities 
1.     Output 1: Water allocation and availability improved 
1.1   Sub-component 1: Water conveyance infrastructure 
rehabilitated and upgraded 
(i)  Activity 1: Subproject identification and selection 
MEW PMO (in co-ordination with MAIL 
PMO) 
(ii)  Activity 2: Tendering and contracting of a design firm  MEW (PMO) 
MEW (PMO) 
(iii)  Activity 3: Preparation of TORs for call-down design 
services 
(iv)  Activity 4: Feasibility studies and detailed design of 
subprojects 
(v)  Activity 5: Tendering and contracting of construction 
Firms 
Feasibility study and detailed design 
firm contracted to MEW. Oversight by 
MEW (PMO) 
MEW (PMO) 
(vi)  Activity 6: Construction and construction supervision  Private firms contracted to MEW for 
construction. MEW (SBAs/PIO) for 
supervision. 
MEW (SBAs/PIO); WUAs 
(vii)  Activity 7: Hand-over and future O&M 
1.2   Sub-component 2: WUAs established and strengthened 
(i)  Activity 1: Continued support, capacity building and 
mentoring of existing WUAs 
(ii)  Activity 2: Establishment of New WUAs 
1.3   Sub-component 3: Water resources planning and 
management strengthened 
(i)  Activity 1: Strengthening the water resources 
planning system; 
(ii)  Activity 2: Strengthened central-level inter-agency 
co-ordination; 
MEW (SBAs/PIO) 
MEW (SBAs/PIO) 
MEW (Department of Water 
Resources) 
MEW (PMO) 
(iii)  Activity 3: Strengthening co-ordination between 
MEW (RBA/SBAs/PIO) 
(S)RBA, DAIL and DRRD in river basin planning and 
management; 
(iv)  Activity 4: Support to Afghan members of the 
MEW (PMO) 
Afghan/Tajik transboundary technical working group 
to prepare for WG meetings. 
2.    Output 2: On-farm water management enhanced 
2.1  Sub-component 1: On-farm Irrigation infrastructure 
rehabilitated and upgraded 
(i)  Activity 1: Subproject identification and selection 
(ii)  Activity 2: Feasibility studies and detailed design of 
subprojects 
(iii)  Activity 3: Tendering and contracting of construction 
firms (or through community-based work contracts) 
MAIL PMO (in coordination with MEW 
PMO) (with Irrigation Directorate) 
MAIL (PMO) (with Irrigation 
Directorate) 
MAIL (PMO)  
(iv)  Activity 4: Construction and construction supervision  Private firms contracted to MAIL for 
construction. MAIL (DAILs/PIOs) for 
supervision ((with Irrigation 
Directorate) 
Or community-based contracts through 
MAIL-CDC/IA contracts. MAIL 
(DAILs/PIOs) for supervision (with 
18 
Outputs and Activities 
(v)  Activity 5: Hand-over and future O&M 
2.2   Sub-component 2: IAs established and strengthened 
(i)  Activity 1: Establishment of new IAs 
2.3   Sub-component 3: Efficiency of agricultural water use 
enhanced 
(i)  Activity 1: OFWM and agricultural extension 
3.     Output 3: Watersheds are properly managed and 
protected 
(i)  Activity 1: Preparation of a community-based natural 
resources management technical manual and 
guidebook 
(ii)  Activity 2: Identification of sites (approx. 21) 
(iii)  Activity 3: Training of DAILs who can train 
communities 
Responsible Agency(ies) 
Irrigation Directorate). 
MAIL (DAILs/PIOs) (with Irrigation 
Directorate); IAs 
MAIL (DAILs/PIOs) (with Irrigation 
Directorate) 
MAIL (DAILs/PIOs) (with Extension 
Directorate) 
MAIL (PMO) (with NRM Directorate) 
MAIL PMO (in co-ordination with MEW 
PMO) (with NRM Directorate) 
MAIL (PMO) (with NRM Directorate) 
(iv)  Activity 4: Creation and strengthening of community 
MAIL (DAILs/PIOs)  
associations 
(v)  Activity 5: Preparation of natural resource 
management (NRM) plans 
(vi)  Activity 6: Implementation of NRM Plans (including 
one Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) pilot). 
Catchment management associations 
with assistance from MAIL 
(DAILs/PIOs)  
Catchment management associations 
with assistance from MAIL 
(DAILs/PIOs). Works to be contracted 
by MAIL (PMO) to private firms or 
CDCs (community-based contracting) 
4.     Project Management 
(i)  Establishment and operationalization of PMOs and 
MEW and MAIL 
PIOs 
(ii)  Recruitment of project staff 
(iii)  Recruitment of ISC firm 
(iv)  Procurement of office equipment and vehicles 
(v)  PPMS establishment and operationalization 
(vi)  Project reporting (quarterly and project completion) 
(vii)  Annual project financial audits 
(viii) Project reviews 
MEW and MAIL PMOs 
MEW PMO (with MAIL’s membership 
on technical evaluation committee) 
MEW and MAIL PMOs 
MEW and MAIL PMOs (MEW PMO to 
consolidate) 
MEW and MAIL PMOs (MOF to 
consolidate) 
Annual audit by independent auditing 
firm(s) 
ADB 
CDC  =  commune  development  council;  DAIL  =  Department  of  Agriculture,  Irrigation  and  Livestock;  ISC  = 
implementation  support  consultancy;  MAIL  =  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Irrigation  and  Livestock;  MEW  =  Ministry  of 
Energy  and  Water;  MOF  =  Ministry  of  Finance;  NRM  =  natural  resource  management;  O&M  =  operation  and 
maintenance;  OFWM  =  on-farm  water  management;  PES  =  payment  for  ecosystem  services;  PIO  =  project 
implementation  office;  PMO  =  project  management  office;  PPMS  =  project  performance  monitoring  system;  RBA  = 
river basin agency; SBA = sub-basin agency; TOR = terms of reference; WG = working group. 
19 
D. 
Subproject Selection Process 
27. 
Selection  Criteria.  Eligibility  criteria  were  used  to  shortlist  55  eligible  subprojects from 
an initial list of 408 subprojects. These criteria are: (i) an irrigation rehabilitation and upgrading 
subproject  (i.e.,  not  a  river  training  project,  dam  or  building);    (ii)  no  significant  potential 
environmental impact as outlined in the ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (June 2009); more 
specifically,  exclusions  from  the  list  are  ADB’s  Category  A  subprojects,  the  Government’s 
Category  1  and  Category  2  subprojects  for  which  National  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
(NEPA)  requires  environmental  impact  assessment  (EIA);  (iii)  not  in  an  environmentally 
protected  area;  (iv)  approved  by  government  (i.e.  government  priority);  (v)  no  major  social 
impact,  i.e.,  no  significant  resettlement  or  land  compensation  implications  as  outlined  in  the 
ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (June 2009) for categories B or C for resettlement, nor any 
outstanding social safeguard issues. 
28. 
Prioritization  criteria  were  then  used  to  select  a  list  of  21  first  priority  (candidate) 
subprojects,  24  second  priority  subprojects,  and  11  third  priority  subprojects.  Prioritization 
criteria are: (i) command area size: small - less than 400ha (0 points), medium - 400-3,000 ha (3 
points),  >3,000ha  (6  points);  (ii)  command  area  of  sub-basin  (>3,000ha,  3  points,  <3,000ha  0 
points);  (iii)  accessibility:  within  2  hours  of  Sub-basin  Agency  (SBA)  office  (1  point);  (iv) 
accessibility:  no  major  winter  cut-off  (1  point).  Subprojects  classified  as  Category  A  for 
involuntary  resettlement  and  environment  will  not  be  financed.  In  order  to  prioritize,  irrigation 
schemes are grouped together and not geographically dispersed to ensure economies of scale 
making supervision easier without wasting time travelling. 
It is important to note that the above eligibility and prioritization criteria are to be used to 
29. 
determine subprojects on which to undertake further feasibility studies. Inclusion of subprojects 
as priority subprojects does not necessarily mean they are technically, environmentally, socially 
and  economically  feasible.  For  these  aspects  to  be  determined,  feasibility  studies  will  be 
undertaken  to  determine  that  the  subproject  (i)   is  pro-poor  (i.e.  benefits  will  mainly  accrue  to 
poor  farming  households);  (ii) has  demonstrated  water  availability  in  sufficient  quantity  and 
quality to ensure the intended benefits of the project can be achieved; (iii) works are technically 
feasible;  (iv)  has  demonstrated  commitment  from  local  government  authorities;  (v)  has 
commitment  from  water  users  to  establish  a  water  users’  association  to  operate  and  maintain 
rehabilitated  and/or  updated  structures  and  to  distribute  water  in  an  equitable  manner;  and 
(vi)   is  economically  feasible,  i.e.,  base-case  economic  internal  rate  of  return  (EIRR)  being 
greater  than  12%.  ADB  has  supported  the  preparation  of  feasibility  of  three  representative 
subprojects as models for the remaining subprojects. ADB will review, comment, and clear the 
feasibility  studies  of  three  other  subprojects  to  ensure  adequate  PMO  capacity  in  selecting 
viable  subprojects  for  project  financing.  For  the  remaining  subprojects,  PMO  shall  be 
responsible for the final feasibility studies and submit to ADB for ‘no objection”. 
30. 
Selection  and  Implementation  Processes.  In  November  2015,  MEW and  MAIL,  with 
assistance  of  the  project  preparation  consultants,  prepared  a  long  list  of  408  potential 
subprojects  in  all  six  sub-basins,  having  an  estimated  total  cost  of  US$164 million.  This  list 
comprised  potential  subprojects  identified  by  MEW,  MAIL,  and  by  other  donor  projects.  MEW 
and MAIL prioritized the list leaving a more manageable list of subprojects for assessment. The 
list was reduced to 55 subprojects. Surveys were undertaken on each of these to determine the 
subproject  location  and  command  area  and  generate  a  description  of  its  R&U  needs.  With 
assistance  of  the  project  preparation  consultants,  MEW  and  MAIL  evaluated  each  subproject 
using the set of eligibility and prioritization criteria as described in paras. 28–29 and selected 21 
20 
first  priority  subprojects  as  candidate  subproject  for  feasibility  study.  The  list  of  candidate 
subprojects is in Annex 1.20 
31. 
The  RBA  and  SBAs  then  identified  three  representative  subprojects  (RSPs),  of  high 
priority  in  relatively  secure  and  accessible  areas,  to  be  the  first  studied  and  designed  during 
project  preparation  and  rehabilitated  and  upgraded  during  project  implementation.  The  three 
identified were Sharawan-Takhar, Seyaab, and Laqi (a second priority subproject chosen before 
completion of the ranking). These have been designed during the PPTA and will be tendered by 
MEW PMO as the first civil works construction package (package 1).  
32. 
Feasibility study and detailed design of the remaining 19 subprojects will be outsourced 
to a feasibility study and detailed design firm (FSDD) to evaluate the subproject viability against 
the  criteria  stated  in  para.  30.  Design  will  be  done  on  a  package  by  package  basis.  Seven 
packages  are  proposed  (packages  2–8).  These  19  sub-projects  will  be  grouped  in  a  logical 
manner  and  then  the  contracted  FSDD  firm  will  start  design  work  on  a  package  by  package 
basis. Given the time needed to undertake feasibility studies and DD for each package, as well 
as  preparing  tender  documents  (approximately  6  months),  packages  will  be  undertaken  one 
after the other. However, there may be some overlap depending on the speed and resources of 
the FSDD firm. Grouping of packages will be done based on location (with subprojects grouped 
according  to  sub-basin  to  the  extent  possible),  as  well  as  total  estimated  works  contract  size. 
Viable  subprojects  will  then  be  approved  by  MEW  and  MAIL,  and  have  works  contracts 
tendered  using  logical  geographical  and  contract  size  grouping.  Taking  into  account  security 
concerns in the North, civil works will start wherever security is less of a concern.  
Since works in schemes will be undertaken in an integrated manner (with MEW working 
33. 
on the main canal and headworks, and MAIL on the secondary and tertiary canals),  MEW and 
MAIL  will  take  a  joint  decision  on  the  sequencing  of  schemes  for  R&U.  The  MEW  PMO  and 
MAIL  PMO  Irrigation  Design  Engineers,  with  support  from  the  ISC  Team  Leader  and  ISC  on-
farm  water  management  specialist,  will  assess  and  reach  agreements  on  implementation 
sequencing. The MEW and MAIL PMO Directors will then give joint final approval. MEW PMO 
will then instruct the FSDD firm to commence work. Decisions can be made on a package-by-
package basis to allow flexibility and changing circumstances—i.e. there is no need to agree on 
the sequencing of all subprojects at the start of the project. However, a decision will be made at 
least  three  months  prior  to  the  FSDD  starting  its  work  so  it  has  time  to  mobilize  appropriate 
resources and plan its work. 
In  case  additional  subprojects  are  identified  during  the  implementation,  the  above 
34. 
mentioned eligibility and selection criteria and processes described above shall be followed. 
20 Notes: two subprojects (No. 14 and 15) in the list are in the same scheme  – Sharawan-Takhar. Due to the size of 
this scheme additional work will be undertaken representing an additional subproject. Hence, 21 schemes but 22 
subprojects. 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
A. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category  
35. 
Detailed cost estimates by expenditure category are in Table 4. 
Table 4: Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
21 
 % Total (Afg '000)(US$ '000)BaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalCosts I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works 1. Representative Subprojects 136,603.627,427.4164,031.02,008.9403.32,412.23.02. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MEW) /a 2,353,226.0415,275.22,768,501.234,606.36,107.040,713.356.03. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MAIL) /b 545,429.796,252.3641,682.08,021.01,415.59,436.513.04. WUAs Office Buildings /c 15,606.01,734.017,340.0229.525.5255.00.05. RBA Office Building 16,068.42,835.618,904.0236.341.7278.00.0Subtotal 3,066,933.7543,524.53,610,458.245,102.07,993.053,095.072.0B. Catchment Protection 179,520.00.0179,520.02,640.00.02,640.04.0C. Vehicles & Equipment 1. Vehicles /d 6,215.224,860.831,076.091.4365.6457.01.02. Machinery /e 4,760.019,040.023,800.070.0280.0350.00.03. Equipment 11,035.78,769.319,805.0162.3129.0291.30.0Subtotal 22,010.952,670.174,681.0323.7774.61,098.32.0D. Capacity Development 66,776.70.066,776.7982.00.0982.01.0E. Implementation Consultancy Services 1. For Output 1 44,778.0154,020.0198,798.0658.52,265.02,923.54.02. For Ouput 2 21,093.649,218.470,312.0310.2723.81,034.01.03. For Output 3 0.022,372.022,372.00.0329.0329.00.0Subtotal 65,871.6225,610.4291,482.0968.73,317.84,286.56.0F. External Monitoring (Safeguards) 1. For Output 1 2,040.00.02,040.030.00.030.00.02. For Ouput 2 2,040.00.02,040.030.00.030.00.0Subtotal 4,080.00.04,080.060.00.060.00.0G. Financial Audits 4,760.00.04,760.070.00.070.00.0Total Investment Costs 3,409,952.9821,805.04,231,757.850,146.412,085.462,231.786.0II. Recurrent Costs A. Incremental Project Staff (PMO / PIO) 590,646.80.0590,646.88,686.00.08,686.012.0B. Office Accommodation 41,616.00.041,616.0612.00.0612.01.0C. Office Running Cost 29,131.20.029,131.2428.40.0428.41.0D. Vehicle Running Costs 50,836.80.050,836.8747.60.0747.61.0E. Equipment Running Costs 3,468.00.03,468.051.00.051.00.0Total Recurrent Costs 715,698.80.0715,698.810,525.00.010,525.014.0Total BASELINE COSTS 4,125,651.7821,805.04,947,456.660,671.312,085.472,756.7100.0Physical Contingencies 91,106.417,693.6108,800.01,339.8260.21,600.02.0Price Contingencies 150,501.312,240.0162,741.32,213.3180.02,393.33.0Total PROJECT COSTS 4,367,259.4851,738.55,218,997.964,224.412,525.676,750.0105.0 \a Ministry of Energy & Water (MEW).\b Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation & livestock (MAIL).\c Water Users Associations (WUAs).\d Including River Boat & Trailer (Component 1.3).\e Rented Machinery (Component 2.3).Source: ADB estimates. 
22 
B. 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds  
36. 
The  government  has  requested  a  grant  not  exceeding  $26  million  from  the  ADB’s 
Special Funds resources to help finance the project. 21 The European Union (EU) is expected to 
finance a grant not exceeding equivalent of EUR45 million (equivalent to $50 million), which will 
be  administered  by  ADB.  The  government  will  contribute  $0.75  million  by  way  of  office  space 
and utilities for project implementation. Allocation and withdrawal of grant proceeds are in Table 
5. 
1.  ADB ADF Grant 
Table 5: Allocation and withdrawal of grant proceeds 
Number 
Item 
Outputs 1, 2, and 3 (all expenditure categories  
including recurrent costs) 
Panj-Amu River Basin Project 
CATEGORY 
Amount Allocated                                            
[$] 
Category 
26,000,000 
Subcategory 
ADB ADF GRANT FINANCING 
Percentage and Basis for Withdrawal from  
the Grant Account 
 34.2 percent of total expenditure claimed 
Total 
26,000,000 
Source: ADB estimates. 
2.  EU Grant 
Panj-Amu River Basin Project 
CATEGORY 
Number 
Item 
1 
2 
2.1. 
2.2. 
Outputs 1, 2, and 3 (all expenditure categories  
including recurrent costs) 
Unallocated  
Foreign exchange reserves 
ADB Administrative fees 
Total 
Source: ADB estimates. 
11,000,000 
              7,500,000  
              3,500,000  
50,000,000 
Amount Allocated                                            
[$] 
Category 
Subcategory 
39,000,000 
EU GRANT FINANCING 
Percentage and Basis for Withdrawal from  
the Grant Account 
65.8 percent of total expenditure claimed 
21 ADB will finance taxes and duties, which include the business receipt tax, estimated at 4%; fixed import tax of 2%–
7%;  and  custom  duties  of  2.5%–16%.  They  do  not  represent  an  excessive  share  of  the  financing  plan  and  are 
within  applicable  country  partnership  strategy  parameters.  ADB.  2005.  Innovation  and  Efficiency  Initiative—Cost 
Sharing and Eligibility of Expenditures for Asian Development Bank Financing: A New Approach. Manila. 
C. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
37. 
Detailed cost estimates by financier are in Table 6. 
Table 6: Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier ($’000) 
23 
 EU (Grant) \fADB (Grant) \gThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%AmountI. Investment Costs A. Civil Works 1. Representative Subprojects 1,893.565.8984.634.20.00.02,878.12. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MEW) /a 26,785.065.813,928.234.20.00.040,713.33. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MAIL) /b 6,208.265.83,228.334.20.00.09,436.54. WUAs Office Buildings /c 205.865.8107.034.20.00.0312.85. RBA Office Building 219.765.8114.234.20.00.0333.9Subtotal 35,312.265.818,362.434.20.00.053,674.6B. Catchment Protection 2,228.965.81,159.034.20.00.03,387.9C. Vehicles & Equipment 1. Vehicles /d 318.965.8165.834.20.00.0484.82. Machinery /e 256.765.8133.534.20.00.0390.13. Equipment 205.665.8106.934.20.00.0312.5Subtotal 781.265.8406.234.20.00.01,187.4D. Capacity Development 744.665.8387.234.20.00.01,131.8E. Implementation Consultancy Services 1. For Output 1 2,134.065.81,109.734.20.00.03,243.72. For Ouput 2 750.065.8390.034.20.00.01,140.03. For Output 3 232.065.8120.634.20.00.0352.6Subtotal 3,116.065.81,620.334.20.00.04,736.3F. External Monitoring (Safeguards) 1. For Output 1 22.665.811.834.20.00.034.42. For Ouput 2 22.665.811.834.20.00.034.4Subtotal 45.265.823.534.20.00.068.7G. Financial Audits 54.765.828.434.20.00.083.1Total Investment Costs 42,282.865.821,987.134.20.00.064,269.9II. Recurrent Costs A. Incremental Project Staff (PMO / PIO) 6,759.165.83,514.734.20.00.010,273.8B. Office Accommodation 0.00.00.00.0750.0100.0750.0C. Office Running Cost 334.665.8174.034.20.00.0508.7D. Vehicle Running Costs 584.065.8303.734.20.00.0887.6E. Equipment Running Costs 39.565.820.534.20.00.060.0Total Recurrent Costs 7,717.261.84,012.932.2750.06.012,480.1Total PROJECT COSTS 50,000.065.126,000.033.9750.01.076,750.0 \a Ministry of Energy & Water (MEW).\b Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation & livestock (MAIL).\c Water Users Associations (WUAs).\d Including River Boat & Trailer (Component 1.3).\e Rented Machinery (Component 2.3).\f Including ADB's administration fee, audit cost, and bank charges and foreign exchange reserves.\g Including taxes and duties.Source: ADB estimates. 
24 
D. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Output 
38. 
Detailed cost estimates by output are in Table 7. 
Table 7: Detailed Cost Estimates by Output 
 Output 1:Output 2:Output 3: WaterCommandWatersheds Allocation &AreasProperlyAvailabilityEnhancedManaged &Improved(MAIL)Protected(MEW)(MAIL)Total I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works 1. Representative Subprojects 2,878.10.00.02,878.12. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MEW) /a 40,713.30.00.040,713.33. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MAIL) /b 0.09,436.50.09,436.54. WUAs Office Buildings /c 312.80.00.0312.85. RBA Office Building 333.90.00.0333.9Subtotal 44,238.19,436.50.053,674.6B. Catchment Protection 0.00.03,387.93,387.9C. Vehicles & Equipment 1. Vehicles /d 209.5275.20.0484.82. Machinery /e 0.0390.10.0390.13. Equipment 178.868.165.6312.5Subtotal 388.4733.465.61,187.4D. Capacity Development 637.7401.292.91,131.8E. Implementation Consultancy Services 1. For Output 1 3,243.70.00.03,243.72. For Ouput 2 0.01,140.00.01,140.03. For Output 3 0.00.0352.6352.6Subtotal 3,243.71,140.0352.64,736.3F. External Monitoring (Safeguards) 1. For Output 1 34.40.00.034.42. For Ouput 2 0.034.40.034.4Subtotal 34.434.40.068.7G. Financial Audits83.10.00.083.1Total Investment Costs 48,625.411,745.43,899.164,269.9II. Recurrent Costs A. Incremental Project Staff (PMO / PIO) 4,726.54,971.8575.510,273.8B. Office Accommodation 206.0372.0171.9750.0C. Office Running Cost 309.2199.50.0508.7D. Vehicle Running Costs 402.3485.40.0887.6E. Equipment Running Costs 16.629.114.360.0Total Recurrent Costs 5,660.66,057.7761.712,480.1Total PROJECT COSTS 54,286.017,803.24,660.876,750.0  \a Ministry of Energy & Water (MEW).\b Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation & livestock (MAIL).\c Water Users Associations (WUAs).\d Including River Boat & Trailer (Component 1.3).\e Rented Machinery (Component 2.3).Source: ADB estimates. 
E. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
39. 
Detailed cost estimates by year are in Table 8. 
Table 8: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
25 
201720182019202020212022Total I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works 1. Representative Subprojects 845.12,033.00.00.00.00.02,878.12. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MEW) /a 928.55,304.69,931.79,931.79,131.75,485.040,713.33. Allocation for Other Subprojects (MAIL) /b 352.1352.11,273.23,115.52,194.42,149.49,436.54. WUAs Office Buildings /c 0.0150.8162.00.00.00.0312.85. RBA Office Building 32.7301.20.00.00.00.0333.9Subtotal 2,158.48,141.711,366.913,047.211,326.17,634.353,674.6B. Catchment Protection 0.0532.9752.11,297.3805.60.03,387.9C. Vehicles & Equipment 1. Vehicles /d 423.461.40.00.00.00.0484.82. Machinery /e 62.763.664.565.566.467.4390.13. Equipment 204.535.772.30.00.00.0312.5Subtotal 690.7160.7136.865.566.467.41,187.4D. Capacity Development 283.9234.2173.9158.0163.0118.81,131.8E. Implementation Consultancy Services 1. For Output 1 680.8743.6550.5560.5351.2357.13,243.72. For Ouput 2 388.0268.5144.0146.895.497.21,140.03. For Output 3 124.2126.0102.30.00.00.0352.6Subtotal 1,193.11,138.2796.9707.3446.6454.24,736.3F. External Monitoring (Safeguards) 1. For Output 1 6.46.66.97.17.40.034.42. For Ouput 2 6.46.66.97.17.40.034.4Subtotal 12.813.313.714.214.70.068.7G. Financial Audits12.913.213.614.014.414.983.1Total Investment Costs 4,351.810,234.213,253.915,303.512,836.98,289.664,269.9II. Recurrent Costs A. Incremental Project Staff (PMO / PIO) 1,585.81,730.31,782.31,777.11,674.11,724.110,273.8B. Office Accommodation 121.6125.3129.2133.1137.3103.5750.0C. Office Running Cost 78.881.183.485.988.491.1508.7D. Vehicle Running Costs 137.5141.5145.6149.9154.3158.9887.6E. Equipment Running Costs 9.810.110.410.711.08.260.0Total Recurrent Costs 1,933.42,088.22,150.92,156.72,065.12,085.812,480.1Total PROJECT COSTS 6,285.212,322.415,404.817,460.214,902.110,375.476,750.0 \a Ministry of Energy & Water (MEW).\b Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation & livestock (MAIL).\c Water Users Associations (WUAs).\d Including River Boat & Trailer (Component 1.3).\e Rented Machinery (Component 2.3).Source: ADB estimates. 
26 
F. 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curves 
40. 
The forecasted contract award and disbursement profile at project design stage is shown 
in  Table  9  (ADB  ADF  grant)  and  Table  10  (EU  grant).  Projections  of  contract  awards  and 
disbursements will be confirmed with the MOF, MEW, and MAIL during ADB inception mission 
and the PAM will be updated accordingly.  
Table 9: Contract and Disbursement (ADB ADF Grant) 
Asian Development Fund (grant) 
  ($ million equivalent) 
Projections for Contract Award 
Q3  
 Q2  
 Q4  
 Q1  
Projections for Disbursement  
 Q3  
 Q4  
 Q2  
 Q1  
 Total  
2.1 
7.6 
5.2 
5.1 
4.9 
1.2 
26.0 
0.0 
0.7 
1.0 
0.8 
1.0 
0.2 
3.7 
0.8 
2.0 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
0.5 
7.8 
0.7 
4.5 
2.0 
2.0 
1.5 
0.2 
10.9 
0.6 
0.4 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
0.3 
3.6 
Contract Awards 
Disbursement 
Year 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Total 
 Total  
6.2 
6.5 
4.0 
4.0 
3.5 
1.8 
26.0 
0.0 
0.5 
2.0 
1.0 
0.5 
0.8 
4.8 
4.7 
2.0 
0.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
9.7 
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
0.0 
6.0 
0.5 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
0.0 
5.5 
$ million 
30.0 
25.0 
20.0 
15.0 
10.0 
5.0 
0.0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Year 
Source: ADB estimates. 
Table 10: Contract and Disbursement (EU Grant) 
27 
Projections for Contract Award 
Q3  
 Q2  
 Q4  
 Q1  
Projections for Disbursement  
 Q3  
 Q4  
 Q2  
 Q1  
European Union (grant) 
  ($ million equivalent) 
 Total  
4.1 
4.6 
10.1 
12.2 
9.9 
9.1 
50.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
0.5 
1.5 
5.5 
0.8 
1.0 
4.0 
5.0 
4.0 
3.0 
17.8 
1.1 
1.0 
4.0 
4.0 
4.0 
3.0 
17.1 
1.7 
1.6 
1.1 
2.2 
1.4 
1.6 
9.6 
Contract Awards 
Disbursement 
Year 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Total 
 Total  
6.5 
10.0 
12.0 
12.0 
7.5 
2.0 
50.0 
1.5 
2.0 
3.0 
3.0 
1.0 
0.0 
10.5 
2.0 
2.0 
3.0 
3.0 
2.0 
0.0 
12.0 
2.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
1.0 
15.0 
1.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
1.5 
1.0 
12.5 
$ million 
30.0 
25.0 
20.0 
15.0 
10.0 
5.0 
0.0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Year 
Source: ADB estimates. 
28 
G. 
Fund Flow Diagram 
Chart 8: Fund Flow Diagram 
ADB  
Asian Development 
Fund (ADF) 
EU 
Official Development 
Assistance (ODA) 
Direct Payment 
ADB  
Replenishment 
Replenishment 
Imprest Account 
Output 1 
s
t
n
e
m
y
a
P
l
a
c
o
L
s
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
I
t
n
e
m
y
a
P
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
A
t
e
g
d
u
B
Withdrawal  
Application 
Grant 
Agreement 
MOF 
Executing Agency 
l
a
w
a
r
d
h
t
i
W
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
A
l
a
w
a
r
d
h
t
i
W
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
A
s
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
I
t
n
e
m
y
a
P
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
A
t
e
g
d
u
B
Imprest Account 
Outputs 2 and 3 
s
t
n
e
m
y
a
P
l
a
c
o
L
MEW 
Implementing Agency 
MAIL 
Implementing Agency 
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
t
c
a
r
t
n
o
C
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
t
c
a
r
t
n
o
C
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
t
c
a
r
t
n
o
C
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
t
c
a
r
t
n
o
C
i
e
c
o
v
n
I
t
c
a
r
t
n
o
C
Goods 
(Vehicles, 
Equipment), 
Service 
(Capacity 
Building) 
PMO/PIO Project 
Staff 
Individuals 
Goods 
(Vehicles, 
Equipment), 
Service 
(Capacity 
Building) 
Civil Works 
Component 1.1 – 1.3 
Contractors 
Consultants: FS and DD / ISC / Topo 
surveys / Audit / EMA 
Firm 
Civil Works 
Component 2.1/3.0 
Contractors  
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  DD  =  detailed  design;  EMA  =  external  monitoring  agency,  EU  =  European  Union;  FS  =  feasibility  study;  MOF  = 
Ministry of Finance; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock; MEW = Ministry of Energy and Water; PIO = project implementation office; 
PMO = project management office. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
     29 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
Financial Management Assessment 
A Financial Management Assessment (FMA) of the proposed project was conducted in 
41. 
April  2016  in  accordance  with  Asian  Development  Bank’s  (ADB)  “Guidelines  for  the  Financial 
Management and Analysis of Projects”22 and the “Financial Due Diligence: A Methodology Note 
(January  2009),  Technical  Guidance  Note  on  Financial  Management  Assessment  (May 
2015).”23 The  FMA  considered  the  role  of  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Water  (MEW)  and  the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Irrigation,  and  Livestock  (MAIL)  as  implementing  agencies  for  the 
proposed project. 
Based  on  the  assessment,  the  key  financial  management  risks  identified  are  (i) 
42. 
incomplete  and  inaccurate financial reports  due to manual system  and  unreconciled  accounts; 
(ii)  delaying  in  producing  financial  reporting.  These  could  undermine  the  assessment  of  MEW 
and MAIL’s project budget and financial status during the implementation. 
43. 
It  is  concluded  that  the  overall  pre-mitigation  financial  management  risk  of  MEW  and 
MAIL is substantial. MEW and MAIL have agreed to implement an action plan as key measures 
to address the deficiencies. The financial management action plan is in Table 11. 
Table 11: Financial Management Action Plan 
Action 
Responsibility 
Resources 
Appoint a PMO Director  
MAIL 
Establish a MAIL PMO 
PMO Director 
Hire a deputy director and 
accounting staff for MEW PMO 
MEW-PMO 
MAIL (HR 
Department)  
MAIL (HR 
Department)  
PMO Director 
and staff 
Timing 
Q1 2017 
Q1 2017 
Q1 2017 
Hire one accounting staff each for 
MEW PMO and MAIL PMO to 
handle project financial 
bookkeeping and accounting 
MEW-PMO 
MEW and MAIL 
(HR Department) 
Q1 2017 
Add a unit under MEW-PMO to be 
in charge of the project 
MEW-PMO Deputy 
Director 
PMO Director 
and Staff 
Upgrade project accounting, 
information system [i.e. acquisition 
of standard accounting software] 
Accounting staff with 
support of ISC financial 
management 
Project 
procurement 
team 
Q1 2017 
Q2 2017 
22 ADB. 2005. Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Project. Manila. 
23 ADB. 2015. Financial Management Technical Guidance Note. 
30      
Action 
Responsibility 
Resources 
Timing 
Provide project training for MEW’s 
and MAIL’s finance personnel and 
project Staff on: 
Accounting staff with 
support of ISC financial 
management 
Q2 2017 – Q1 
2018 
MEW and MAIL 
finance 
personnel; and 
staff of ADB-
funded projects  
Both PMOs at MEW and 
MAIL 
Project funds 
Q4 2017 
  use of spreadsheets 
  use of accounting system 
  ADB disbursement 
procedures 
Engage Internal Audit Department 
to expand role to include internal 
audit of projects funded by the 
official development assistance 
budget 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Disbursement 
44. 
Grant  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook (February 2015, as amended from time to time). To expedite implementation of the 
project through the timely release of funds, four imprest accounts will be established two in US 
Dollar  for  the  ADF grant  and  two  in  Euro  for  the  EU  grant  at  Da  Afghanistan  Bank  (DAB,  the 
Central Bank of Afghanistan) for exclusive use by the two PMOs (two at MEW and two at MAIL). 
The  imprest  accounts  will  be  managed,  replenished,  and  liquidated  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
Loan Disbursement Handbook, and detailed arrangements agreed to by the Recipient and ADB. 
The total outstanding advance to the imprest accounts will not exceed six months of estimated 
expenditure  to  be  paid  through  the  respective  imprest  accounts.  The  ADB  statement  of 
expenditure  procedures  will  be  used  for  individual  payments  valued  at  $100,000  or  less.  The 
minimum  value  per  withdrawal  application  is  set  in  accordance  with  the  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook.  Individual  payments  below  this  amount  should  be  paid  (i)  by  the  PMOs  and 
subsequently claimed from ADB through reimbursement; or (ii) from the imprest account, unless 
otherwise accepted by ADB.    
C. 
Accounting 
45.  MEW and MAIL will maintain, or cause to be maintained, separate books and records by 
funding  source  for  all  expenditures  incurred  on  the  project.  MEW  and  MAIL  will  prepare 
separate project financial statements in accordance with the government's accounting laws and 
regulations which are consistent with international accounting principles and practices. MAIL will 
submit its project financial statements to MEW by the end of each February. MOF24 will prepare 
a  consolidated  project  financial  statements  of  MEW  and  MAIL  in  accordance  with  the 
government's  accounting  laws  and  regulations  which  are  consistent  with  international 
accounting principles and practices.  
D. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
46.  MEW will cause the detailed consolidated project financial statements of MEW and MAIL 
to be audited in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and with the Government's 
24 A  general  project  coordination  unit  is  currently  serving  the  ADB  financed  Water  Resources  Development 
Investment Program (WRDIP). This unit will also undertake the consolidated reporting for this project. 
     31 
audit  regulations,  by  an  independent  auditor  acceptable  to  ADB.  The  audited  project  financial 
statements will be submitted in the English language to ADB within six months of the end of the 
fiscal year by MOF.  
The annual audit report for the project accounts will include an audit management letter 
47. 
and  audit  opinions  which  cover  (i)  whether the project financial  statements  present  a  true  and 
fair  view  or  are  presented  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable 
financial reporting framework; and (ii) whether grant proceeds were used only for the purposes 
of the project or not. 
48. 
Compliance  with  financial  reporting  and  auditing  requirements  will  be  monitored  by 
review  missions  and  during  normal  program  supervision,  and  followed  up  regularly  with  all 
concerned, including the external auditor.  
49. 
The Government, MOF, MEW, and MAIL have been made aware of ADB’s approach to 
delayed submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of the audited 
project financial statements.25 ADB reserves the right to require a change in the auditor, or for 
additional  support  to  be  provided  to  the  auditor,  if  the  audits  required  are  not  conducted  in  a 
manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits are substantially delayed.  ADB reserves the right to 
verify  the  project's  financial  accounts  to  confirm  that  the  share  of  ADB’s  financing  is  used  in 
accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
50. 
ADB  shall  disclose  the  annual  audited  financial  statements  for  the  Project  and  the 
opinion  of  the  auditors  on  the  financial  statements  no  later  than  14  calendar  days  of  ADB’s 
confirmation  of  their  acceptability  by  posting  them  on  ADB’s  website.  The  management  letter 
will not be disclosed. 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting and Retroacting Financing 
All  advance  contracting  will  be  undertaken  in  conformity  with  ADB’s  Procurement 
51. 
Guidelines  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time) 26  and  the  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of 
Consultants  by  Asian  Development  Bank  and  its  Borrowers  (2013,  as  amended  from  time  to 
time).27   The  issuance  of  invitations  to  bid  under  advance  contracting  will  be  subject  to  ADB 
approval.  The EA has been advised that undertaking of advance contracting does not commit 
ADB to finance the project. 
25 ADB approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited project financial statements:  
  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  by  the  due  date,  ADB  will  write  to  the  executing 
agency  advising  that  (i)  the  audit  documents  are  overdue;  and  (ii)  if  they  are  not  received  within  the  next  six 
months,  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  imprest  accounts, 
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will 
withhold  processing  of  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of 
imprest  accounts,  processing  of  new  reimbursement,  and  issuance  of  new  commitment  letters.  ADB  will  (i) 
inform  the  executing  agency  of  ADB’s  actions;  and  (ii)  advise  that  the  grant  may  be  suspended  if  the  audit 
documents are not received within the next six months. 
  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may 
suspend the grant. 
26 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Procurement/Guidelines-Procurement.pdf 
27 Available at: http://www.adb.org/documents/guidelines-use-consultants-asian-development-bank-and-its-borrowers 
32      
Advance  contracting  will  be  used  for  recruitment  of  consulting  services,  and  pre-
52. 
construction  activities  such  as  prequalification  bidding,  and  bid  evaluation  for  civil  works 
packages. 
53. 
There is no retroactive financing envisaged in this project.  
B. 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
All  procurement  of  goods  and  works  will  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
54. 
Procurement  Guidelines.  Key  features  of  the  procurement  of  civil  works  and  goods  are 
summarized  in  the  following  paragraphs.    The  procurement  plan  indicates  review  procedures, 
goods, works and consulting service contract packages and national competitive bidding (NCB) 
guidelines.  National competitive bidding (NCB) procedures will be used for civil works contracts 
estimated to cost more than $100,000 and international competitive bidding (ICB) for those that 
cost  more  than  $5,000,000.  Similarly,  NCB  procedure  will  also  be  used  for  goods  contracts 
estimated  to  cost  $100,000  or  more.  Shopping  procedures  will  be  used  for  contracts  for 
procurement  of  small  works  and  equipment  worth  less  than  $100,000.  A  procurement  action 
plan is in Table 12. 
Table 12: Procurement Action Plan 
Action 
Responsibility 
Resources 
Procurement of project 
implementation support 
consultancy service, including 
financial management and 
procurement 
Both PMOs at MEW and 
MAIL 
Procurement 
Department 
Timing 
Q4 2016 
Provide project training for MEW’s 
and MAIL’s project staff on: 
  ADB procurement 
procedures 
Accounting staff with 
support of ISC financial 
management/procurement 
specialist 
MEW and MAIL 
finance 
personnel; and 
staff of ADB-
funded projects  
Q2 2017 – Q1 
2018 
Consultants will be recruited according to ADB’s Guidelines on the Use of Consultants.  
55. 
The  terms  of  reference  for  the  implementation  support  consultancy  (ISC)  firm  is  included  in 
Annex  1.  The  Project  Management  Office  under  MEW  (Ministry  of  Energy  and  Water)  in 
cooperation  with  the  MEW  Procurement  Department  will  conduct  the  procurement  with  the 
assistance of the PPTA Consultants. 
C. 
Procurement Plan 
Various packages of the procurement plan are presented in the following sections.  The 
56. 
basic data of the Project is given in Table 13. 
Project Name: Panj-Amu River Basin Project 
Project Number: 48042-001-AFG 
Approval Number: 
Table 13: Basic Data 
Country: Afghanistan 
Executing Agency: Ministry of Finance 
     33 
Project Financing Amount: US$ 76,750,000 
Implementing Agency: 
ADB Financing: US$ 26,000,000 
Ministry of Energy and Water 
Cofinancing (ADB Administered): US$ 50,000,000  Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock 
Government Contribution (in-kind): US$750,000 
Date of First Procurement Plan: Q3 2016 
Date of this Procurement Plan:  
5 September 2016 
2. 
Process Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan 
a. 
Project Procurement Thresholds 
Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the following process thresholds given in the table 
57. 
below shall apply to procurement of goods and works. 
Table 14: Thresholds for Procurement of Goods and Works 
Method 
Threshold 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) for Works 
US$ 5,000,001 and Above 
International Competitive Bidding for Goods 
US$ 1,000,001 and Above 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) for Works 
Between US$ 100,001 to US$ 5,000,000  
National Competitive Bidding for Goods 
Between US$ 100,001 to US$ 1,000,000  
Shopping for Goods 
Shopping for Works 
Community Participation in Procurement a 
Up to US$ 100,000 
Up to US$ 100,000 
Up to US$ 100,000 
a   The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL) will coordinate with irrigation associations within project 
sites to identify subprojects on rehabilitation of small scale irrigation infrastructure and on-farm water management 
activities (OFWM) as well as agricultural extension. Once the subprojects are identified, MAIL PIOs in DAILs will 
directly  contract  the  registered  community  development  councils  (CDCs)  within  the  respective  irrigation 
associations  to  implement  the  subproject.  The  procurement  process  follows  the  procurement  procedure  for  ADB 
financed  projects  used  by  the  Ministry  of  Rural  Rehabilitation  and  Development  (MRRD)  using  community 
participation in procurement (CPP). 
b. 
ADB Prior or Post Review  
Except  as  ADB  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following,  given  in  the  table  below,  prior  or 
58. 
post review requirements apply to the various procurement and consultant recruitment methods 
used for the project. 
34      
Table 15: Review Requirements for Various Procurement and Consultant Recruitment 
Method 
Procurement Method 
Prior or Post 
Comments 
Procurement of Goods and Works 
NCB Works 
NCB Goods 
Shopping for Works 
Shopping for Goods 
Community Participation in Procurement 
Prior 
Prior 
Post 
Prior 
Prior 
Recruitment of Consulting Firms 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) 
Prior 
Other Selection Methods: Consultant’s 
Qualification Selection (CQS), Least Cost 
Selection (LCS), Fixed Budget (FBS) and 
Single Source (SSS)  
Recruitment of Individual Consultants 
Prior 
Individual Consultants Selection (ICS) 
Prior 
Prior review applies to the procurement of the 
first  two  NCB  contracts.  If  the  first  two 
contracts  are  procured  satisfactorily  it  will  be 
determined  by  ADB  if  post-review  may  be 
used. 
Prior review applies to the procurement of the 
first two NCB contracts. If the first two 
contracts are procured satisfactorily it will be 
determined by ADB if post-review may be 
used. 
Prior review applies to the procurement of the 
first two CPP contracts. If the first two 
contracts are procured satisfactorily it will be 
determined by ADB if post-review may be 
used. 
Quality and cost based on 90:10 quality – 
cost weighting. Applied in accordance with 
Guidelines on the Use of Consultants (March 
2013, as amended from time to time) 
c. 
18-Month Procurement Plan28 
i. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost More than $1 Million 
Table 16 lists goods and works contracts for which procurement activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 
59. 
18 months. 
Table 16: Works and Goods to be Procured During First 18 Months 
ii. 
Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost More Than $100,000 
Table  17  lists  consulting  services  contracts  for  which  procurement  activity  is  either  ongoing  or  expected  to  commence  within  the 
60. 
next 18 months. 
Table 17: Consulting Services to be Procured During First 18 Months 
28  All cost estimates are inclusive of taxes and duties, but exclusive of contingencies.  
3
5
Package General Estimated Value Procurement Review (Prior/ PostBidding Advertisement Date  CommentsNumberDescription(US $ ‘000)Method/Post [Sample])Procedure(Quarter/ Year)MEW/P-ARBP/ NCB/01Representative subproject works (Laqi Canal; Sharawan Takhar Canal; and Seyaab Canal)2,412NCBPrior1S1EQ4 / 2016Prequalification of Bidders: N; Bid Document: Small WorksPackage General Estimated Value Recruitment Review Type of Advert. Date CommentsNumberDescription(US$ ‘000)Method(Prior / Post)Proposal(Quarter/ Year)MEW/P-ARBP/ CONS/02Feasibility & design for other subprojects3,200QCBSPriorSTPQ1 / 2017Quality-cost ratio (90:10)International; quality-cost ratio (90:10)Q4 / 2016MEW/P-ARBP/ CONS/01Implementation support consultants (ISC)4,287QCBSPriorFull 
iii. 
Goods  and  Works  Contracts  Estimated  to  Cost  Less  than  $1  Million  and  Consulting  Services 
Contracts Less than $100,000 
Table 18 groups smaller-value goods, works and consulting services contracts for which procurement activity is either ongoing or 
61. 
expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Table 18: Smaller Value Contracts Estimated to Cost Less than $1,000,000 
3
6
Goods and worksPackage General Estimated Value Procurement Review (Prior/ Post/ Bidding Advert. Date NumberDescription(US$)MethodPost [Sample])Procedure(Quarter/ Year)MAIL/P-ARBP/ NCB/01Motor vehicles for MAIL PMO and 5 PIOs (DAILs)260,000NCBPrior1S1EQ1 / 20172 units saloon cars + 5 units twin cabsMEW/P-ARBP/ NCB/02RBA office building250,000NCBPrior1S1EQ2 / 2017This can start since the detailed design was completed Prequalification of bidders: NMEW/P-ARBP/ SHP/01Motor vehicles for MEW PMO60,000ShoppingPrior1S1EQ1/2017MEW/P-ARBP/ SHP/02Motor vehicles for MEW PIO (RBA)80,000ShoppingPrior1S1EQ1/2017MEW/P-ARBP SHP/03Equipment (for MEW PMO, PIO, RBA)66,300ShoppingPrior1S1EQ1/2017MEW/P-ARBP/ SHP/04River boat and trailer (for RBA PIO)57,000ShoppingPrior1S1EQ2/2018MEW/P-ARBP/ SHP/05Staff gauges, ArcGIS Spatial Analyst, rain/ snow gauges/ relocation of existing staff gauges99,200ShoppingPrior1S1EQ2/2018MAIL/P-ARBP SHP/01Equipment (for MAIL PMO, DAILs)63,750ShoppingPrior1S1EQ1/2017MAIL/P-ARBP SHP/02Office equipment (for 5 DAIL NRM offices)62,000ShoppingPrior1S1EQ1/2017Consulting servicesMEW/P-ARBP/ CQS/01Survey, design & supervision RBA office building28,000CQSPrior1S1EQ2/2017MEW/P-ARBP/ CQS/02Project financial audit70,000CQSPrior1S1EQ4/2016MEW/P-ARBP/ CQS/03External monitoring (safeguards)60,000CQSPrior1S1EQ4/2016MAIL/P-ARBP/ CQS/01Topographical surveys225,000CQSPrior1S1EQ3/20174-5 packagesComments 
3. 
Indicative Lists of Packages Required under the Project 
Table 19 provides and indicative list of goods, works, and consulting services contracts over the life of the project, other than those 
62. 
mentioned in previous sections (i.e. those expected beyond the current period).  
Table 19: Goods and Works 
3
7
Package General Estimated Value Number of Procurement Review Bidding Advertisement Date CommentsNumberDescription(US$)ContractsMethod(Prior/ Post)Procedure(Quarter/ Year)MEW/P-ARBP/ NCB/ ContractsSubprojects works (with completed FS and DD based on list of priority subprojects)37,513,2538NCBPost1S1EQ2/2018Maximum value for an individual contract:  $5.0 millionMEW/P-ARBP/ NCB/ ContractsWUA office building contract255,0001NCBPost1S1EQ3/2018MAIL/P-ARBP/ NCB/ ContractsOn-farm irrigation subprojects 8,711,5005NCBPost1S1EQ1/2018First three subprojects will be subject to prior review; and post review thereafter. Maximum value for an individual contract:  $1.6 millionMAIL/P-ARBP/ CPP/ ContractsCommunity-based subprojects500,0005CPPPostDirectQ1/2018MAIL/P-ARBP/ CPP/ ContractsCatchment protection2,600,00026CPPPostDirectQ1/2018First three subprojects will be subject to prior review; and post review thereafter. Maximum value for an individual contract:  $0.1 millionMAIL/P-ARBP/ CPP/ ContractsPES pilot40,0001CPPPostDirectQ1/2018 
38        
D. 
National Competitive Bidding 
1. 
General 
National  competitive  bidding  for  the  procurement  of  goods  and  related  services  shall 
63. 
conform  to  the  provisions  for  Open  Tender  without  prequalification  as  prescribed  in  the 
Procurement  Law  of  October  2005  and  elaborated  in  the  Rules  of  Procedure  for  Public 
Procurement  issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in  April  2007,  with  the  clarifications  and 
modifications described in the following paragraphs required for compliance with the provisions 
of the ADB Procurement Guidelines. 
2. 
Registration and Other Pre-Bid Requirements 
(i) 
(ii) 
Bidding shall not be restricted to Shortlists or Standing Lists; 
No bid shall be declared as ineligible of the grounds of debarment without ADB’s prior 
concurrence; 
(iii)  No  bid  shall  be  declared  ineligible  on  the  grounds  of  government  regulations  that 
restrict sources without ADB’s prior concurrence; and 
(iv)  Foreign  suppliers  and  contractors  shall  be  allowed  to  bid,  without  registration, 
licensing,  and  other  government  authorizations.    However,  in  case  these  foreign 
suppliers  and  contractors  are  declared  winning  bidders,  the  requirements  may  be 
completed after award and before signing of contract, without unreasonable costs or 
additional requirements. 
3. 
Prequalification 
Post  qualification  shall  be  used  unless  prequalification  is  explicitly  provided  for  in  the 
64. 
Grant  Agreement/procurement  plan. 
(whether 
prequalification or post qualification), no domestic or foreign contractor shall be precluded from 
participation. 
the  procedure  applied 
Irrespective  of 
65. 
If  prequalification  is  undertaken,  the  prequalification  criteria  should  include  "Eligibility 
Requirements",  "Financial  Situation",  "Pending  Litigation",  and  "Experience".    Technical 
Capacity (personnel and equipment) should not be part of the prequalification criteria. 
Interested  bidders  shall be given  a  minimum  period  of  28  days for  the  preparation and 
66. 
submission of prequalification applications. 
4. 
Advertising 
67. 
Bidding of NCB contracts estimated at $500,000 or more for goods and related services 
and  NCB  contracts  estimated  at  $1,000,000  or  more  for  works  shall  be  advertised  on  ADB’s 
website via the posting of the Procurement Plan. 
5. 
Bidding Documents 
Procuring  entities  shall  use  standard  bidding  documents  acceptable  to  ADB,  based 
68. 
ideally on the standard bidding documents issued by ADB. 
39 
6. 
Bidding Period 
69. 
Procuring entities shall allow for a minimum of four weeks for submission of bids. 
7. 
Bid Security 
70.  Where  required,  bid  security  shall  be  in the  form  of  a  bank  guarantee  or  check  from  a 
reputable bank and should not be more than two percent of the estimated value of contract to 
be procured. 
8. 
Preferences 
No  preference  of  any  kind  shall  be  given  to  domestic  bidders  or  for  domestically 
71. 
manufactured goods. 
9. 
Evaluation 
No bid shall be rejected on the grounds of price, or for any other reason not related to 
72. 
the evaluation and qualification criteria, without ADB’s prior concurrence. 
73. 
Prompt payment discounts offered by bidders shall not be considered in bid evaluation. 
10. 
Price Negotiations 
74. 
Price negotiation shall be allowed only after receiving ADB’s prior concurrence. 
11. 
Advance Payments 
No advance payment shall be made without an advance payment security in the form of 
75. 
a bank guarantee or check from a reputable bank. 
12. 
Government-Owned Enterprises 
76. 
Government-owned enterprises in Afghanistan shall be eligible to participate only if they 
can  establish that they  are  legally  and financially  autonomous,  operate  under commercial  law, 
and are not a dependent agency of the procuring entity, or the Project Executing Agency, or the 
Implementing Agencies.  
13. 
Right to Inspect/Audit 
A provision shall be included in all NCB works and goods contracts financed by the Bank 
77. 
(ADB) requiring suppliers and contractors to permit ADB to inspect their accounts and records 
and other documents relating to the bid submission and the performance of the contract, and to 
have them audited by auditors appointed by ADB. 
14. 
Anti-Corruption Policy 
(i) 
The  Recipient  shall  reject  a  proposal  for  award  if  it  determines  that  the  bidder 
recommended  for  award  has,  directly  or  through  an  agent,  engaged  in  corrupt, 
fraudulent, collusive, or coercive practices in competing for the contract in question. 
3
9
40        
(ii) 
ADB will declare a firm or individual ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period, 
to be awarded a contract financed by ADB, if it at any time determines that the firm or 
individual has, directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, 
or  coercive  practices  in  competing  for,  or  in  executing,  ADB-financed  contract,  as 
indicated in paragraph 1.14 (a) of ADB's Procurement Guidelines. 
15. 
Disclosure of Decision on Contract Awards 
78. 
At the same time that notification of award of Contract is given to the successful bidder, 
the  results  of  bid  evaluation  shall  be  published  in  a  local  newspaper  or  well-known  freely 
accessible website identifying the bid and lot numbers and providing information on (i) name of 
each bidder who submitted a Bid; (ii) bid prices as read out at bid opening; (iii) name of bidders 
whose  bids  were  rejected  and  the  reasons  for  their  rejection;  and  (iv)  name  of  the  winning 
bidder, and the price it offered, as well as duration and summary scope of the contract awarded. 
The executing agency and/or implementing agency and/or contracting authority shall respond in 
writing to  unsuccessful bidders  who  seek explanations  on the grounds on  which their  bids  are 
not selected. 
16.  Member Country Restriction 
79. 
Universal procurement applies. No member country restriction. 
E. 
Consultant’s Term of Reference 
Detailed  terms  of  reference  of  implementation  support  consultancy  are  provided  in 
80. 
Annex 2.  
A. 
Environment Safeguards 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
The  Project  is  classified  environment  Category  B.  The  Environmental  Assessment  and 
81. 
Review Framework (EARF) (Linked Document  11) describes the measures required to ensure 
that  potential  environmental  impacts  are  identified,  avoided,  reduced,  and  mitigated  in 
accordance  with  ADB  SPS  (2009)  and  the  laws  and  regulations  of  Afghanistan.  The  EARF 
Initial  Environmental 
covers  subproject  screening,  categorization,  and  preparation  of 
Examinations (IEEs) for each Category B subproject. Each IEE will include impact assessment 
and  mitigation,  public  consultation,  information  disclosure,  and  an  environmental  management 
plan  (EMP).  EMPs  consist  of  plans  for  mitigation,  monitoring,  reporting,  and  stakeholder 
communication during pre-construction, construction, and operation phases.  
82. 
The  IEE  prepared  for  the  three  representative  subprojects  (RSPs  Laqi,  Sharawan, 
Seyaab (Supplementary  Document  10)  describes  RSP  screening,  categorization,  assessment, 
public  consultation,  anticipated  environmental  adverse  impacts,  required  mitigation  and 
monitoring measures, and roles and responsibilities of implementing agency staff, consultants, 
and  contractors.  The  IEE  concluded  that  the  impacts  of  the  implementation  of  representative 
subprojects with EMP  will be environmentally acceptable. The MEW has disclosed IEE results 
relevant  to  stakeholders  through  the  relevant  sub-basin  agency  offices  in  a  Dari  language 
booklet (combined with the public disclosure booklet for the LARPs). RSP clearance certificate 
applications will be submitted to NEPA by the PMOs prior to works contracts being signed; EMP 
41 
measures  have  been  incorporated  into  civil  works  designs  (in  the  case  of  physical  measures) 
and contracts. 
83. 
Subprojects prepared during Project implementation will follow the safeguard procedures 
set  forth  in  the  EARF.  Responsibility  for  supervision  of  EARF  implementation  rests  with  the 
PMOs  of  the  MEW  and  the  MAIL.  The  environment  specialist(s)  of  the  feasibility  study  and 
design team  contracted  by  MEW,  and the  environment  safeguards  officer  contracted  by  MAIL 
will screen and classify MEW and MAIL civil works proposals respectively, as ADB Category A, 
B, or C. They will then prepare an IEE with EMP for each Category B subproject and a summary 
of  environmental  implications  for  each  Category C  subproject.  MEW  and  MAIL  PMOs  will 
ensure  that  IEE  findings  are  locally  disclosed;  IEEs  are  submitted  to  ADB  for  review  and 
clearance  unless  exempt;  clearance  certificate  applications  are  submitted  to  NEPA;  EMP 
measures are incorporated into civil works designs and contracts, and that their PIOs undertake 
required  environmental  monitoring  and  reporting,  and  perform  their  assigned  roles  in  the 
grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
B. 
Social Safeguards 
The project is classified Category C for indigenous peoples. Project preparation activities 
84. 
have determined that there will be no indigenous peoples issues associated with the project. 
85. 
The project is classified as category B for involuntary resettlement impacts.  
86. 
The  Land  Acquisition  and  Resettlement  Framework  (LARF)  (Linked  Document  15) 
describes  the  measures  required  to  ensure  that  potential  land  acquisition  and  resettlement 
impacts are identified, avoided, reduced, and mitigated in accordance with ADB SPS (2009) and 
the laws and regulations of Afghanistan. The LARF covers subproject screening, categorization, 
and  preparation  of  Land  Acquisition  and  Resettlement  Plans  (LARPs  or  RPs)  for  each 
Category B  subproject.  Each  LARP  will  include  impact  assessment  and  mitigation,  public 
consultation, and information disclosure. The LARF specifies that subprojects with major social 
impacts, i.e., significant resettlement impact as outlined in the ADB Safeguard Policy Statement 
(June  2009)  for  category  A  for  resettlement,  and  involving  physical  displacement  and  loss  of 
livelihood for category B will not be considered. 
87. 
The  LARPs  prepared  for  the  three  representative  subprojects  (RSPs  Laqi,  Sharawan, 
Seyaab  (Linked  Documents  12–14)  describes  RSP  screening,  categorization,  assessment, 
public consultation, anticipated adverse impacts, required mitigation and monitoring measures, 
and  roles  and  responsibilities  of  implementing  agency  staff,  consultants,  and  contractors.  The 
LARPs  concluded  that  the  impacts  of  the  implementation  of  representative  subprojects  with 
minimal  consisting  only  of  the removal  of trees along  the right  of  way  of  the  canals, for  which 
compensation  is  required.  The  MEW  has  disclosed  LARP  results  relevant  to  stakeholders 
through  the  relevant  sub-basin  agency  offices  in  a  Dari  language  booklet  (combined  with  the 
public  disclosure  booklet  for  the  IEEs).  Compensation  will  be  undertaken  by  contractors  once 
they are recruited.  
88. 
Subprojects prepared during Project implementation will follow the safeguard procedures 
set  forth  in  the  LARF.  Responsibility  for  supervision  of  LARF  implementation  rests  with  the 
PMOs  of  the  MEW  and  MAIL.  The  social  safeguard  specialist(s)  of  the  feasibility  study  and 
design  team  contracted  by  MEW,  and  the  social  safeguards  officer  contracted  by  MAIL  will 
screen and classify MEW and MAIL civil works proposals respectively, as ADB Category A, B, 
or  C.  They  will  then  prepare  a  LARP  for  each  Category B  subproject  and  a  summary  of  land 
4
1
42        
acquisition  and  resettlement  implications  for  each  Category C  subproject.  MEW  and  MAIL 
PMOs  will  ensure  that  LARP  findings  are  locally  disclosed;  LARPs  are  submitted  to  ADB  for 
review and clearance unless exempt; compensation measures are incorporated into civil works 
designs  and  contracts,  and  that  their  PIOs  undertake  required  mitigation  monitoring  and 
reporting, and perform their assigned roles in the grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
Pursuant  to  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement (2009)  (SPS),29 ADB funds may  not  be 
89. 
applied  to the  activities described  on the  ADB  Prohibited  Investment  Activities List  set forth at 
Appendix 5 of the SPS. The implementing agencies will ensure that the project is in compliance 
with applicable national laws and regulations and will apply the prohibited investment activities 
list to the project financed by ADB. 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
90. 
Project  interventions  will  be  done  in  a  manner  whereby  the  neutral  role  of  the  project 
cannot be questioned, which may otherwise put the project and staff in a security risk. Specific 
gender-related activities implemented by the project will include the following (i) promotion of the 
involvement  of  women  membership  in  WUAs/IAs  and  specific  training  for  men  where 
appropriate  to  raise  awareness  on  the  importance  of  gender  involvement  in  WUAs/IAs,  and 
specific training for women members of WUAs/IAs to increase their skill sets; (ii) construction of 
domestic  (and  livestock)  water  access  points  along  canals;  (iii)  inclusion  of  women  in  training 
demonstrations  given  to  farms  on  improved  on-farm  water  management  and  agronomic 
techniques, and specific training for women on household plot vegetable and fruit growing; and 
(iv)  NRM  plans  prepared  with  due  regard  for  the  role  of  women  in  watershed  activities, 
particularly  income-generating  activities.  All  training  for  women  will  be  conducted  by  female 
trainers to ensure willingness to participate.  
91. 
The  project  will  also  ease  women’s  water-fetching  and  laundry  chores  as  it  will  install 
water access points along canals for household use. In addition, structures such as offtakes will 
be adapted as footbridges at appropriate locations along the canals to facilitate movements of 
human  and  farm  produces.  The  PIOs  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  such  activities  are 
undertaken.  PMOs  will  lead the  implementation and monitoring and reporting quarterly  reports 
of gender-inclusive design features. 
92. 
The  cost  for  implementing  the  activities  is  incorporated  in  the  cost  allocation  for  each 
project  output.  The  above  mentioned  public  disclosure  document  for  the  IEEs  and  LARPs  for 
the three representative subprojects also includes information on gender related activities. 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
93. 
The  implementing  agencies,  MEW  and  MAIL  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  project 
progress and evaluating project outputs. Monitoring and evaluation shall be in accordance with 
the  DMF  and  each  implementing  agency  will  be  responsible  for  regular  reporting,  with  MEW 
producing consolidated report and submit to MOF and ADB.  
29 Available at: http://www.adb.org/documents/safeguard-policy-statement. 
A. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Impacts the Project is Aligned with  
Per  capita  income  increased  and  poverty  among  rural  and  pastoral  communities  reduced.  (Afghanistan 
National Development Strategy)a  
43 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Agricultural 
productivity in the 
Panj-Amu River 
Basin increased 
Outputs  
1. Water allocation 
and availability 
improved 
2. Command areas 
enhanced 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanism 
Risks 
a–b. PPMS and crop 
production surveys at 
the end of project 
Extreme climate 
events hamper 
agricultural 
production 
Security 
deteriorates 
Increased security 
concerns in project 
areas hampers 
engagement of 
competent 
contractors 
Community-
contracting not 
possible due to 
political 
interference from 
CDCs 
1a. PPMS and project 
progress reports 
1b. Signed O&M 
agreements 
1c. MEW registrar 
2a. PPMS and project 
progress reports 
a. Cropping intensities 
increased by 20.3% (baseline 
2016: 148.1%; target 2023: 
168.4%) in total command area 
of 74,500 ha b 
b. Crop yields for wheat and 
rice increased by 7.0% 
(baseline 2016: wheat 3.081 
tons/ha, rice 3.320 tons/ha; 
target 2023: wheat 3.297 
tons/ha, rice 3.552 tons/ha)b 
By 2022: 
1a. Head works and main 
canals rehabilitated and 
upgraded in approximately 21 
schemes (including 
approximately 84 domestic and 
21 livestock access points) 
(baseline 2016: 0) 
1b. O&M agreements signed by 
WUA for all completed works, 
or with government assurance 
of continued O&M (baseline 
2016: 0) 
1c. 112 WUAs established and 
officially registered with MEW 
(baseline 2016: 0) 
By 2022: 
2a.  Secondary and tertiary 
canals rehabilitated and 
upgraded in approximately 21 
schemes (including 
approximately 21 domestic and 
21 livestock access points) 
(baseline 2016: 0) 
2b. O&M agreements signed by 
IAs for all completed works 
(baseline 2016: 0) 
2b. Signed O&M 
agreements  
4
3
44        
Results Chain 
3. Watersheds 
properly managed 
and protected 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
2c. Approximately 106 IAs 
established and officially 
registered with MAIL (baseline 
2016: 0) 
2d. Approximately 6,300 
farmers (including women) 
adopted  on-farm water 
management techniques 
(baseline 2016: 0) 
By  2022: 
3a. Approximately 
10,000hectares of forestry 
and/or rangeland   restored 
and/or protected c  
(baseline 2016: 0) 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanism 
2c. MAIL registrar 
Risks 
2d. PPMS and project 
progress reports 
3a. PPMS and project 
progress reports 
3b. Twenty-one catchment 
management associations 
established and registered with 
MAIL (baseline 2016: 0) 
3b. MAIL registrar 
3c. Twenty-one NRM plans 
prepared and implemented 
(baseline 2016: 0) 
3c. Approved NRM plan 
and PPMS 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1. Output 1: Water allocation and availability improved  
1.1 Commence construction of three representative subprojects by Q2 2017. 
1.2 Conduct feasibility and detailed design studies for other subprojects by Q3 2017. 
1.3 Commence construction for other subprojects started by Q4 2017. 
1.4 Establish river basin model and put in use by Q3 2019. 
1.5 Commission and hand over all works completed to WUAs or SBAs by Q4 2022. 
2. Output 2:  Command areas enhanced 
2.1 Tender designed works by Q1 2018. 
2.2 Train DAIL’s staff to become trainers by Q4 2017. 
2.3 Establish approximately 21 crop production demonstrations by Q2 2018. 
2.4 Commission and hand over all works completed to IAs by Q4 2022. 
3. Output 3: Watersheds are properly managed and protected 
3.1 Identify watersheds in the vicinity of subprojects by Q4 2017. 
3.2 Prepare community-based NRM Technical Manual and Guidebook by Q1 2018. 
3.3 Prepare 21 NRM plans (plus one pilot PES plan) by Q2 2018. 
3.4 Assist 21 catchment management associations in consultation, establishment, and registration by Q3 
2018. 
3.5 Complete restoration and/or protection of selected watersheds by Q4 2022. 
Project management activities 
Set up PPMS by Q4 2016. 
Mobilize implementation support consultants by Q1 2017. 
Purchase office equipment, furniture, and vehicles by Q2 2017. 
Prepare project completion report by Q4 2022. 
45 
Inputs 
ADB: $26.0 million (grant) 
EU: $50.0 million (grant) 
Government: $0.75 million 
Assumptions for Partner Financing: Not Applicable 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;  ADF  =  Asian  Development  Fund;  CDC  =  commune  development 
council;  DAIL  =  Department  for  Agriculture  and  Livestock;  EU  =  European  Union;  IA  =  irrigation 
association; MAIL = Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock; MEW = Ministry of Water and Energy; 
NRM  =  natural  resources  management;  O&M  =  operations  and  maintenance;  PES  =  payments  for 
ecosystem services;  PPMS  = project  performance monitoring system; Q = quarter; WUA =  water users 
association. 
a  Islamic  Republic  of  Afghanistan.  July  2010.  Afghanistan  National  Development  Strategy,  Prioritization 
and Implementation Plan, Mid 2010-2013, Volume 1. Kabul, Afghanistan.  
b  Based on financial and economic analysis estimates (para 84, Supplementary Document 5). 
c  All are in watersheds adjacent to irrigation schemes under Outputs 1 and 2. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Monitoring 
Project  Performance  Monitoring.  The  MEW  will 
94. 
the  development  of 
comprehensive  project  performance  monitoring  systems  (PPMS)  with  inputs  from  MAIL,  and 
closely monitor the progress of project activities, outputs, and outcomes based on the PPMS in 
accordance  with  the  DMF  and  subsets  of  indicators  as  detailed  in  Supplementary  Documents 
22,  23,  and  24.  In  particular,  the  PPMS  will  assess  the  following  outputs  and  indicators  (i) 
progress  of  planned activities  according  to  the  milestones,  and  (ii)  progress  in  achieving  each 
project  output  and  project  outcome  according  to  the  performance  targets  and  indicators 
indicated in the DMF.  
lead 
95. 
Information and data gathered during the project implementation period will be analyzed 
and  measured  against  the  targets.  The  IAs  will  submit  quarterly  progress  reports,  covering 
progress and achievements during the period against milestones and indicators in the DMF, and 
a project completion report at the last year of project implementation, outlining the achievements 
and lessons learned. MEW will prepare a consolidated report. 
Compliance monitoring. All project assurances will be monitored through the quarterly 
96. 
progress reports, and during ADB review missions. 
97. 
ADB  will  also monitor the  progress  of  achievement  of each output  and outcome  based 
on performance indicators with targets, and each activity based on milestones indicated in the 
DMF through a project management information system (i.e. e-Ops).   
98. 
Environmental  impact  and  mitigation  monitoring. The  EMP  of  each  subproject IEE 
includes a monitoring plan. During the construction phase, the general approach will be for the 
environmental monitoring plan to be integrated into the work plans, schedules, procedures, and 
checklists of PIO construction supervisors. ISC and PMO specialists and/or officers will provide 
on-the-job training and backstopping to construction supervisors as required.  The environment 
safeguards  officers  will  provide  inputs  into  quarterly  and  annual  progress  reports  detailing 
environmental safeguard progress, and prepare and submit to ADB semi-annual Environmental 
Safeguard Reports.   
4
5
46        
Involuntary  resettlement  monitoring.  Monitoring  of  each  subproject  LARP  will  be 
99. 
undertaken  by  PIO  construction  supervisors.  ISC  and  PMO  specialists  and/or  officers  will 
provide on-the-job training and backstopping to construction supervisors as required. The social 
safeguards  officers  will  provide  inputs  into  quarterly  and  annual  progress  reports  detailing 
environmental  safeguard  progress,  and  prepare  and  submit  to  ADB  semi-annual  Social 
Safeguard Reports.   
C. 
Evaluation 
100. 
Inception  Mission.  ADB  will  conduct  an  inception  mission  within  3  months  of  grant 
signing to  assess  project readiness  and  implementation  arrangements  including  establishment 
of  PMO,  PIOs,  opening  of  an  imprest  account,  status  of  the  development  of  the  PPMS,  and 
progress  of  advance  procurement  actions  including  recruitment  of  the  ISC  firm  and  the 
contractor for the first three representative subprojects.  
101.  Review  Mission.  ADB  will  field  review  missions  at  least  once  a  year  to  (i)  assess  the 
progress of project activities and outputs and effectiveness of implementation arrangements, (ii) 
monitor  safeguard  compliance  with  ADB  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009),  (iii)  review 
compliance with grant agreements and related matters, (iv) follow up on decisions and actions 
agreed during previous review missions, and (v) resolve any project implementation issues that 
may arise.  
102.  Midterm  Review  Mission.  ADB  will  conduct  a  midterm  review  in  the  fourth  year  of 
project  implementation.  The  midterm  review  will  (i)  assess  the  project  performance  and 
achievement  against  targets  and  milestones  in  the  DMF;  (ii)  review  the  initial  outcomes, 
benefits,  and  impact  of  the  project,  and  (iii)  identify  gaps,  if  any,  and  recommend  necessary 
changes to strengthen implementation arrangements or modify project design.   
103.  Project  Completion  Review  Mission.  ADB  will  field  a  project  completion  review 
mission  upon  physical  completion  of  the  project  to  commence  preparation  of  ADB’s  project 
completion report (PCR). The mission will (i) assess the project performance against all targets, 
indicators,  and  benchmarks  (including  any  revised  at  the  midterm  review);  (ii)  evaluate  initial 
benefits,  and  outcome  of  the  project  across  outputs;  and  (iii)  identify  any  incomplete  activities 
and agree on the necessary actions.  
D. 
Reporting  
104.  The implementing agencies through the PMOs will submit to ADB the following reports 
(i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with ADB's standards; and (ii) annual reports 
including  (a)  progress  achieved  by  output  as  measured  through  the  indicator's  performance 
targets, (b) key implementation issues and solutions, (c) updated procurement plan, (d) issues 
concerning environment and social safeguards (through semi-annual reports); and (e) updated 
implementation plan for next the 12 months.  
105.  The implementing agencies through the PMOs will submit a government’s PCR within 6 
months  of  physical  completion  of  the  project,  which  will  be  consolidated  into  one  report  by 
MEW.  The  government’s  PCR  will  evaluate  the  performance  and  achievements  of  the  project 
47 
against  the  indicators,  expected  benefits,  and  outcome,  and should  include  information  on  (a) 
project implementation, and (b) the use of grant funds to ADB.30 
E. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
106.  The  EARF  and  LARF  contain  a  public  consultation  and/or  information  disclosure  plan 
and  grievance reporting mechanism.  Public  consultation meetings  will  be  held  as  part  of  each 
subproject  feasibility  study,  with  findings  relevant  to  local  stakeholders  disclosed  in  a  form, 
place, and language accessible to them prior to tendering. During construction, PIO construction 
supervisors  will  liaise  frequently  with  WUAs  and  IAs  where  these  exist  (and  with  community 
leaders  where  they  do  not)  to  disclose  information,  receive  and  respond  to  questions  and 
comments,  and  to  record  and  address  grievances;  unresolved  issues  can  be  progressively 
escalated  to  PIOs  and  PMOs  progressively.  During  operation  and  maintenance,  WUAs,  IAs, 
SBAs,  DAILs,  district  governors,  and  PMOs  will  exchange  information  about  subproject 
performance, including environmental and social impact and mitigation information. 
Project Documents 
Table 20: ADB Public Communications Strategy 
Responsible 
Party 
Means of 
Communication 
Project data sheet (PDS) 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Design and Monitoring 
Framework (DMF) 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Initial Environmental 
Examination 
Resettlement Planning 
Documents 
Reports and 
Recommendations of the 
President 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Legal and Grant Agreements 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Summary of Poverty 
Reduction and Social 
Strategy 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Documents Produced under 
Technical Assistance 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Frequency 
Initial PDS posted on the 
website no later than two 
weeks after approval of 
the concept paper; 
updated at least twice a 
year 
Key information from the 
draft reflected in project 
data sheet; final version 
posted on the website at 
the same time it is 
circulated to the Board 
for approval, subject to 
the concurrence of the 
government 
Post fact-finding mission 
and for all Category B 
projects  
Post fact-finding mission 
and for all Category B 
projects 
Posted on the website 
within 14 days of Board 
approval of the grant 
No later than 14 days of 
signing 
Posted on the website at 
the same time it is 
circulated to the Board 
for approval, subject to 
concurrence of the 
government 
within 2 weeks of 
completion 
Audience(s) 
General Public 
General Public 
General Public, 
project-affected 
people in particular 
General Public, 
project-affected 
people in particular 
General Public 
General Public 
General Public  
General Public 
30 Project  completion  report  format  is  available  at:  http://www.adb.org/Consulting/consultants-toolkits/PCR-Public-
Sector-Landscape.rar. 
4
7
48        
Project Documents 
Project  Administration 
Manual 
Social and Environmental 
Safeguard Monitoring Reports 
Audited project financial 
statements and the auditors’ 
report 
Means of 
Communication 
Responsible 
Party 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Frequency 
Posted on the website 
within 14 days of Board 
approval of the grant 
Within 1 month after 
each 6 month monitoring 
period 
Audience(s) 
General Public 
General Public, 
project-affected 
people in particular 
General Public 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Within 30 days of receipt 
Project Completion Report 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Evaluation Report 
ADB’s website 
ADB 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Within two weeks of 
circulation to the Board 
for information 
Within two weeks of 
circulation to 
Management and the 
Board 
General Public 
General Public 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
107.  ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  project. 31  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  shall  include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
implementing  agencies  and  all  project  contractors,  suppliers,  consultants  and  other  service 
providers.  Individuals  and/or  entities  on  ADB’s  anticorruption  debarment  list  are  ineligible  to 
participate in ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project. 32 
108.  To  support  these  efforts,  relevant  provisions  are  included  in  the  grant  agreements  and 
the  bidding  documents  for  the  project.  The  Government,  through  MOF,  MEW  and  MAIL,  will 
ensure  that  the  anticorruption  provisions  acceptable  to  ADB  are  included  in  all  bidding 
documents and contracts including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine 
the records and accounts of the executing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, 
and other service providers as they relate to the Project.  
109.  The  IAs  will  preferably  provide  updated  information  on  the  project  on  their  websites, 
including information on the performance of the project, business opportunities, bidding process 
and guidelines, outcome of biddings and summary progress reports of the project.  
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
110.  People  who  are,  or may  in the future  be,  adversely  affected  by the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  accountability  mechanism  provides  an 
independent  forum  and  process  whereby  people  adversely  affected  by  ADB-assisted  projects 
can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  accountability 
mechanism, affected people should make a good faith effort to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.  Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, should they approach the accountability mechanism.33 
31 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf 
32 ADB's Integrity Office web site is available at: http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp   
33 For further information see: http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp. 
XII. 
RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
111.  All  revisions  and/or  updates  during  the  course  of  implementation  should  be  retained  in 
this  Section  to  provide  a  chronological  history  of  changes  to  implemented  arrangements 
recorded in the PAM. 
49 
# 
Description of Revision 
Initial draft for discussion 
Fact Finding Mission 
Incorporating comments from cross-departmental review 
Incorporating comments from Management Review Meeting 
Incorporating comments from Grant Negotiations 
Date 
May 2016 
June 2016 
July 2016 
August 2016 
5 September 2016 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
4
9
5
0
5
0
Sub-Basin 
Province 
District 
Canal Name 
ANNEX 1: LIST OF CANDIDATE SUBPROJECTS 
Surveyed 
Command 
Area (ha) 
Summary 
Description 
MEW – 
headworks 
($) 
MEW - main 
canal 
conveyance 
and 
distribution ($) 
MAIL-
secondary 
and tertiary 
canals ($) 
Total ($) 
Total 
scheme 
cost $/ha 
Estimated 
# hh 
Estimated # 
beneficiaries 
1 
Kokcha 
Badakhshan 
Baharak 
Kocha Hasar 
715 
2 
Kokcha 
Badakhshan 
Baharak 
Sar-e-Shar 
1,703 
3 
Kokcha 
Badakhshan 
Baharak 
Farhad 
519 
4 
Kokcha 
Badakhshan 
Kishim 
Seyaab* 
400 
5 
Lower Panj 
Takhar 
Dashtqala 
Dashtqala 
6,247 
6 
Lower Panj 
Takhar 
Darqad 
Qaghni 
466 
7 
Lower Panj 
Takhar 
Khojabahauddin 
Qataqjar 
1,907 
8 
Lower Panj 
Takhar 
ChaAb 
Yatim Tepa 
12,200 
Headwork, 
offtakes, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection, 5 
culverts 
Cross-regulator, 
offtakes, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection, 1 culvert 
Headwork, 
offtakes, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection, 5 
culverts 
Cross-regulators, 
offtakes, wash 
protection, bank 
protection 
Offtakes, bank 
protection, canal 
extension 
Headwork, 
offtakes, wash 
protection, bank 
protection, 2 
culverts 
Off-takes, bank 
protection, 1 culvert 
Cross-regulators, 
offtakes, canal 
lining, bank 
protection, 2 
350,000** 
500,500** 
71,500 
922,000 
1,290 
536 
4,440 
1,192,100 
170,300 
1,362,400 
800 
1,277 
10,576 
350,000 
363,300 
51,900 
765,200 
1,474 
389 
3,223 
406,742 
40,000 
446,742 
1,117 
300 
2,142 
2,186,450 
624,700 
2,811,150 
450 
4,685 
28,580 
350,000 
326,200 
46,600 
722,800 
1,551 
350 
2,219 
1,334,900 
190,700 
1,525,600 
800 
1,430 
13,730 
4,270,000 
1,220,000 
5,490,000 
450 
9,150 
52,155 
Sub-Basin 
Province 
District 
Canal Name 
Surveyed 
Command 
Area (ha) 
Summary 
Description 
MEW – 
headworks 
($) 
MEW - main 
canal 
conveyance 
and 
distribution ($) 
MAIL-
secondary 
and tertiary 
canals ($) 
Total ($) 
Total 
scheme 
cost $/ha 
Estimated 
# hh 
Estimated # 
beneficiaries 
9 
Lower Panj 
Takhar 
Khojabahauddin 
Arpoli 
724 
10 
Lower Panj 
Takhar 
Khojabahuddin 
11 
Taloqan 
Takhar 
Taloqan center 
Momen 
Abad 
Nar e 
Chaman 
1,449 
culverts 
Headwork , 
spillway, cross-
regulators, offtakes, 
bank protection 
Cross-regulators, 
offtakes, canal 
lining, bank 
protection, 2 
culverts 
350,000** 
506,800** 
72,400 
929,200 
1,283 
543 
5,213 
1,014,300 
144,900 
1,159,200 
800 
1,087 
10,433 
1,014 
Bank protection  
709,800 
101,400 
811,200 
800 
761 
5,605 
12 
Taloqan 
Takhar 
Taloqan Center 
Shorab 
842 
13 
Taloqan 
Takhar 
Taloqan center 
Qulbars 
835 
14 
Taloqan 
Takhar 
Taloqan Center 
Sharawan-
Takhar 
11,122 
15 
Taloqan 
Takhar 
TaloqanCenter 
Sharawan-
Takhar* 
1,831 
16 
Taloqan 
Kunduz 
Kunduz Center 
Naqi Kunduz 
647 
17 
Taloqan 
Kunduz 
Kunduz Center 
Gul Tepa 
6,063 
Headwork, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection, spillway, 
controlled gate and 
sluice gate 
Bank protection  
Cross-regulators, 
off-takes, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection  
Cross-regulators, 
off-takes, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection  
Cross-regulators, 
off-takes, wash 
protection, bank 
protection  
Headworks, off-
takes, wash 
protection, bank 
350,000 
589,400 
84,200 
1,023,600 
1,216 
632 
4,654 
584,500 
83,500 
668,000 
800 
626 
4,615 
3,892,700 
1,112,200 
5,004,900 
450 
8,342 
61,477 
2,006,978 
183,100 
2,190,078 
1,196 
1,373 
10,121 
452,900 
64,700 
517,600 
800 
485 
3,945 
500,000 
2,122,050 
606,300 
3,228,350 
532 
4,547 
36,969 
5
1
5
1
5
2
5
2
Sub-Basin 
Province 
District 
Canal Name 
Surveyed 
Command 
Area (ha) 
Summary 
Description 
MEW – 
headworks 
($) 
MEW - main 
canal 
conveyance 
and 
distribution ($) 
MAIL-
secondary 
and tertiary 
canals ($) 
Total ($) 
Total 
scheme 
cost $/ha 
Estimated 
# hh 
Estimated # 
beneficiaries 
18 
Lower 
Kunduz 
19 
Lower 
Kunduz 
20 
21 
22 
Lower 
Kunduz 
Lower 
Kunduz 
Lower 
Kunduz 
Kunduz 
Chardara 
Chardara 
15,904 
Kunduz 
Qalazal 
Qala I Zal 
4,120 
Kunduz 
Qalazal 
Aqtepa 
4,260 
Kunduz 
Aliabad 
Abdullah 
1,367 
Kunduz 
Aliabad 
Laqi* 
163 
protection, 2 
controlled spillway 
and 1 divider  
Headwork, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection  
Headwork, 
spillway, intake 
retaining wall, 
cross-regulators, 
off-takes, canal 
lining, wash 
protection, bank 
protection  
Headwork, cross-
regulators, off-
takes,   bank 
protection, dividers 
and spillway  
Off-takes, bank 
protection, three 
spillways 
Headwork, cross-
regulators, off-
takes,  canal lining, 
wash protection, 
bank protection  
500,000 
5,566,400 
1,590,400 
7,656,800 
481 
11,928 
87,074 
500,000 
1,442,000 
412,000 
2,354,000 
571 
3,090 
24,813 
500,000 
1,491,000 
426,000 
2,417,000 
567 
3,195 
25,656 
956,900 
136,700 
1,093,600 
800 
1,025 
8,581 
200,000 
160,349 
16,300 
376,649 
2,311 
122 
1,023 
74,498 
3,950,000*** 
32,076,269**** 
7,449,800 
43,476,069 
584 
55,874 
407,245 
* Representative subprojects. Note that Laqi is in fact a second-priority subproject but has been included on this list since it will be included in the first contract package. 
** The design and construction of headworks and main canal for Kocha Hasar and Arpoli schemes will be undertaken by MAIL as a pilot to test their capacity to implemented larger scale 
more complex irrigation R&U works.  
*** Approximately $3,250,000 through MEW and $700,000 through MAIL.  
**** Approximately $31,068,969 through MEW and $1,007,300 through MAIL 
Note:  Two  subprojects  (14  and  15  in  the  list  above)  are  in  the  same  scheme  –  Sharawan-Takhar.  Due  to  the  size  of  this  scheme  additional  work  will  be  undertaken  representing  an 
additional subproject. Hence, 21 schemes but 22 subprojects. 
53 
ANNEX 2: IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT CONSULTANCY (ISC) SERVICES 
1. 
The Project. The proposed project will increase agricultural productivity in the Panj-Amu 
River Basin1 through improving access and use of water at farm, scheme and river levels.2 The 
project  will  support  the  government  strategy,  which  aims  to  increase  per-capita  income  and 
reduce  poverty  among  rural  and  pastoral  communities. 3 It  will  improve  cropping  intensities, 
irrigated  areas,  and  crop  yields  on  a  command  area  of  74,500  hectares  (ha)  and  as  a  result, 
increase  annual  farm  incomes  in  the  range  $123–$615  per  household  (or  11%–55%)  for  over 
55,000  households,  and  create  approximately  11,000  full-time  rural  jobs  per  annum,  with  an 
estimated value of $10.4 million. The project will also improve food security, substitute imports 
for wheat, and improve self-sufficiency, and increase in exports of high-value products such as 
fruit  and  nuts.  The  project  will  also  create  more  economic  opportunities  for  agribusiness 
development,  particularly  for  input  suppliers  and  processors  of  and  market  intermediaries  for 
agricultural products. 
2. 
Impact  and  Outcome.  The  impact  of  the  project  is  to  increase  per-capita  income  and 
reduce  poverty  among  rural  and  pastoral  communities  (footnote  3).  The  project’s  outcome  is 
increased agricultural productivity in the Panj-Amu river basin.  
3. 
Outputs. The project has three outputs outlined below.  
4. 
Output  1:  Water  allocation  and  availability  improved.  This  output  will  provide  the 
capacity  and  resources  for  MEW,  and  associated  river  basin  agency  (RBA),  and  sub-basin 
agencies (SBAs) in the Panj-Amu River Basin, to (i) improve the conveyance and allocation of 
water  to  irrigated  areas  through  rehabilitating  and  upgrading  head  works  and  main  canals  in 
priority schemes with command area over 400 ha;4 (ii) establish and strengthen the capacity of 
approximately  112  water  users  associations  (WUAs) 5  to  operate  and  maintain  (O&M) 
conveyance infrastructure in these schemes to better distribute water between the head, middle 
and  tail  end  of  canals  more  equitably;  and  for  them  to  work  with  RBA  and  SBAs  to  facilitate 
water  sharing  between  schemes;  and  (iii)  enhance  the  capacity  of  MEW,  RBA  and  SBAs  for 
more  effective  water  allocation  between  schemes  to  benefit  downstream  users.  In  addition, 
support  will  also  be  provided  to  Afghan  members  of  the  Afghanistan-Tajikistan  transboundary 
technical  working  group  to  prepare  them  for  technical  meetings  and  strengthen  their  ability  to 
conduct negotiations regarding the set-up and operations of the Pyanj River Basin Commission. 
5. 
Output  2:  Command  areas  enhanced.  This  output  will  provide  the  capacity  and 
resources for MAIL, and associated DAILs in the Panj-Amu river basin to: (i) improve irrigation 
infrastructure  at  the  secondary  and  tertiary  canal  level  in  schemes  identified  for  improvement 
under  Output  1  in  order  to  secure  an  integrated  approach;  (ii)  establish  and  strengthen  the 
capacity  of  approximately  105  IAs  to  operate  and  manage  irrigation  infrastructure  in  these 
schemes to improve distribution of water within schemes; and (iii) improve water use efficiency 
by improved on-farm water management and agronomic techniques (such as land levelling, bed 
1  Covering the provinces of Badakshan, Baghlan, Kunduz, Takhar, and partially Bamyan. 
2  European Union (EU) provided project preparatory technical assistance for the proposed project. 
3  Government of Afghanistan. 2010. Afghanistan National Development Strategy: Prioritization and Implementation 
Plan, Mid 2010-Mid2013 (Volume 1). Kabul. 
4  Twenty-one  schemes  were  selected  as  first  priority  schemes  covering  a  command  area  of  74,500  ha  in  the 
Kokcha, Lower Kunduz, Lower Panj-Amu sub-basins, and Taloquan. For feasibility study, each scheme is referred 
to as a subproject. A list of candidate subprojects is accessible from the list of linked documents in Appendix 2. 
5  Including strengthening of WUAs already set-up in schemes through previous EU assistance. 
5
3
5
3
54 
and  furrow  irrigation,  and  intercropping)  with  approximately  6,300  farmers  having  improved 
knowledge from 21 demonstration plots. 
6. 
Output 3: Watersheds properly managed and protected. This output will provide the 
capacity and resources for MAIL, and associated DAILs in the Panj-Amu River Basin to improve 
community-based watershed management. This output includes (i) preparation of a community-
based  natural  resources  management  technical  manual  and  guidebook;  (ii)  training  of  DAILs’ 
staff  as  master  trainers  who  will  conduct  training  of  communities;  (iii)  identification  of 
approximately  21  watershed  and/or rangeland  sites for restoration  and  protection; (iv)  creation 
of catchment management associations for these sites; and (v) preparation and implementation 
of natural resource management plans for these sites. These activities will help restore 10,500 
hectares  of  forestry  and/or  rangeland  in  the  vicinity  of  21  prioritized  schemes  and  protect 
irrigation structures under Outputs 1 and 2 from flash floods and sedimentation.  
7. 
Using  an  integrated  approach  on  each  of  the  21  schemes,  MEW  will  undertake 
rehabilitation  of  headworks  and  main  canals  while  MAIL  will  undertake  rehabilitation  of 
secondary and tertiary canals, on-farm work, and watershed protection work in the vicinity of the 
schemes to protect them from being washed away. For all three outputs, the project will provide 
technical  resources  to  implementing  agencies  to  ensure  proper  irrigation  management  and 
transfer  (IMT).  Specifically,  the  project  assists  the  drafting,  negotiation,  and  conclusion  of  pre-
construction  O&M  agreements  and  hand-over  and/or  IMT  agreements  between  SBAs  and 
WUAs  (Output  1),  between  DAILs  and  IAs  (Output  2),  and  between  DAILs  and  catchment 
management associations (Output 3). 
The project will be implemented over a period of  6 years. The Executing Agency is the 
8. 
Ministry  of  Finance  (MOF).  The  Implementing  Agencies  are  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and Water 
(MEW)  and  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Irrigation  and  Livestock  (MAIL).  MEW  will  set-up  a 
Project  Management  Office  (PMO)  in  its  central  office  in  Kabul  with  a  Project  Implementation 
Office (PIO) in the Panj-Amu River Basin Agency (RBA) in Kunduz. MAIL will set-up a PMO in 
its  central  office  in Kabul  with PIOs  in the  provincial  Departments  of  Agriculture, Irrigation  and 
Livestock  (DAILs)  in  the  five  project  provinces  (Badakshan,  Baghlan,  Bamyan,  Kunduz,  and 
Takhar).  MEW  will  be  the  implementing  agency  for  output  1  and  MAIL  the  implementing 
agencies  for  output  2.  Both  ministries  will  need  to  coordinate  together  in  an  effective  and 
efficient manner.  
9. 
General  Scope  of  Work.  The  consultant  (implementation  support  consultancy  (ISC) 
firm)  will  assist  MEW  and  MAIL  in  overall  project  implementation.  Key  aspects  of  the 
consultant’s work will be:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
to build capacity of staff in the PMOs and PIOs to undertake their tasks;  
to  deliver  training  jointly  with  the  PMOs  and  PIOs  to  government  agencies 
involved  in  project  implementation  (notably  the  Panj-Amu  RBA  and  Sub-basin 
Agencies  (SBAs),  the  Department  of  Water  Resources  under  the  DG  Water 
Affairs in MEW, and DAILs in the five project provinces;  
to  help  set-up  systems  and  procedures  (including  relevant  management  and 
monitoring templates) for the PMOs and PIOs to follow;  
to provide  technical  oversight  and guidance  on technical  aspects  of  the project; 
and 
to help to foster  coordination and synergy of project interventions between MEW 
and MAIL. 
55 
Consulting  services  are  for  international  consultants  only  since  allocation  has  been 
10. 
made  for  incremental  project  staff  to  be  engaged  by  PMOs  as  and  when  needed.  The  ISC 
comprises  a  total  of  214  person-months  of  international  specialists  over  a  period  of  6  years. 
Advance  action  for  recruitment  of  ISC  will  be  requested  to  facilitate  the  timely  mobilization  of 
consultants.  The  ISC  will  be  fielded  shortly  after  loan  effectiveness.  All  months  will  be  field 
months  (i.e.  in  Afghanistan).  Home  days  during  project  implementation  may  be  allowed  on  a 
case-by-case  if justification  is  given,  and with prior  contracting  authority approval.  Consultants 
will be based in various locations, as provided in the table below. Working days are Saturday to 
Thursday.  In  Kabul,  Thursdays  can  be  worked  from  the  consultant’s  place  of  stay  (i.e. 
guesthouse  or  hotel).  Additionally,  the  ISC  firm  will  hire  adequate  support  staff  to  support  its 
consultants  in  undertaking  their  duties  in  an  effective  and  efficient  manner.  The  planning  and 
deployment of manpower shall be arranged in coordination with the respective PMOs such that 
the  person-months  allocations  shall  be  optimum.  The  summary  input  schedule  is  given  in  the 
table below. 
Summary Input Schedule for Implementation Support Consultancy 
The ISC will be selected and engaged in accordance with ADB’s Guidelines on the Use 
11. 
of Consultants (2013, as amended from time to time). The MEW, with MAIL as a member of the 
bid  evaluation  committee,  will  recruit  the  ISC  following  the  quality-  and  cost-based  selection 
(QCBS) procedure with a standard quality to cost ratio of 80:20. The Terms of References of the 
ISC are outlined below. 
12. 
Team Leader/Design and Supervision Engineer (international, 55 person-months). 
The international design and supervision engineer will be the team leader and, thus responsible 
for  overall  team  coordination,  and  delivery  of  quality  and  timely  outputs.  Technically  (s)he  will 
support MEW in the delivery of Output 1, sub-component 1.1. (S)he will be a qualified engineer 
(preferably  civil  engineer)  with adequate experience  in  the  design  and  supervision  of  irrigation 
rehabilitation  and  upgrading  works.  (S)he  will  have  had  experience  in  setting  up  supervision 
systems  and  procedures  with  appropriate  quality  control.  Experience  with  traditional  irrigation 
systems,  experience  in  the  region  (South  and/or  Central/West  Asia),  experience  in  providing 
training on irrigation R&U design and supervision, and experience in coordinating and managing 
teams  will  be  preferable.  (S)he  will  report  to  the  MEW  PMO  Project  Manager  and  will  work  in 
close co-ordination with the Senior Design and Supervision Engineer. (S)he will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Be responsible for overall direction of the consultant team, and coordination and 
management of inputs, in consultation with ISC sub-component leaders; 
Manage the ISC relationships with government, the ADB and other stakeholders; 
Identify  tasks  on  the  critical  path  for  output  1,  sub-component  1.1,  and  ensure 
that implementation schedules follow an integrated approach; 
5
5
5
5
PositionUnit201720182019202020212022TotalTeam Leader / Design & Supervision Engineer P Month10.010.010.010.08.07.055.0Supervision Engineer P Month10.010.010.010.08.07.055.0On Farm Water Management Specialist P Month9.09.06.06.06.06.042.0Procurement & Financial Management Specialist P Month8.05.00.00.00.00.013.0Hydrologist / Modeler P Month3.03.03.03.05.04.021.0GIS Specialist P Month3.03.00.00.00.00.06.0Trans Boundary Specialist P Month1.01.01.01.00.00.04.0Environmental Safeguards Specialist P Month1.01.00.00.00.00.02.0Social Safeguards Specialist P Month1.01.00.00.00.00.02.0Watershed Management Specialist P Month5.05.04.00.00.00.014.0Total 51.048.034.030.027.024.0214.0Source: ADB estimates.  
56 
(iv) 
(v) 
Ensure  close  coordination  with  other  component  teams  so  that  an  integrated 
approach is realized; 
Assist the Senior Design and Supervision Engineer to coordinate with MAIL PMO 
staff  under  output  2  to  agree  on  priority  subprojects  (using  the  list  prepared  by 
the PPTA team as a basis) such that both outputs work in the same schemes (at 
different levels); 
Select logical packages of subprojects for design and construction packages; 
(vi) 
(vii)  Unless  already  undertaken  at  start-up  by  the  PPTA  team,  prepare  terms  of 
reference  for  the  Feasibility  Study  and  Detailed  Design  consulting  contract 
(tendered  as  an  international  QCBS  tender).  Assist  in  tender  evaluation  if 
requested.  Once  contracted  (by  MEW),  this  firm  will  be  responsible  for 
undertaking  feasibility  study  and  detailed  design  of  irrigation  R&U  works  (for 
headworks and main canal structures), plus preparation of tender documents, for 
subprojects selected by the PMO on a  package-by-package basis. The firm will 
mobilize  staff  for  each  package  on  a  demand-led  basis  according  to  specific 
instructions from the MEW PMO; 
(x) 
(ix) 
(viii)  Assist the Senior Design and Supervision Engineer, working with the SBAs and 
water users, to select priority structures for R&U in each scheme, on a package 
by package basis. Assist the PMO in requesting the feasibility study and design 
firm to then mobilize resources to prepare the designs and tenders for the works 
for the specific package; 
Provide oversight to the work of the feasibility study  and detailed design firm by 
checking and commenting on deliverables;  
In  coordination  with  the  feasibility  study  and  detailed  design  firm,  assist  the 
Senior  Design  and  Supervision  Engineer  in  organizing  and  conducting  training 
courses  in  irrigation  R&U  design  (using  the  P-ARBP  User’s  Manual  and  excel 
sheet)  for  staff  from  MEW,  RBA,  SBAs  (and  possibly  national  companies  and 
staff from MAIL/DAILs) so that they are aware of the design process;  
Act as a member on evaluation committees if requested to do so; 
Assist  the  Senior  Design  and  Supervision  Engineer  in  setting-up  supervision 
systems,  following  the  supervision  manual  and  practices  set-up  under  the  EU-
funded Panj-Amu River Basin Programme.  Organize training for SBA engineers 
(and  private  contractors)  in  such  systems.  Such  training  could  be  outsourced 
(e.g. to Kabul Polytechnic) to build local long-term capacity; 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii)  Prepare  pro-formas 
for  pre-construction  O&M  agreements  and  hand-
over/irrigation  management  transfer  (IMT)  between  SBAs  and  WUAs,  and 
provide oversight to ensure these are initiated for each subproject;   
(xiv)  Assist  MEW  and  MAIL  in  drafting  O&M  policy  to  facilitate  this  policy’s 
operationalization  by  2020  to  guide  the  O&M  and  handover/IMT  of  all  irrigation 
structures nation-wide; 
(xv)  Assist the Senior Design and Supervision Engineer in providing oversight of the 
construction works, and hand-over to the WUA; 
(xvi)  Assist the Output 1, sub-component 1.2 team, and Output 2, sub-component 2.2 
team,  as  requested,  in  conducting  training  for  WUAs/IAs  in  operation  and 
maintenance (O&M); 
(xvii)  Provide assistance to the PMO and PIO in project monitoring and reporting;  
(xviii)  Assist in the implementation of gender development activities; and 
(xix)  Prepare ISC quarterly progress reports (the first one of which will replaced by an 
inception report and the final one by a final report), plus brief monthly summary 
reports (5 pages max) with support as required from other team members. 
57 
Supervision  Engineer 
(international,  55  person-months).  The 
international 
13. 
supervision  engineer  will  support  MEW  in  the  delivery  of  Output  1,  sub-component  1.1.  (S)he 
will  be  a  qualified  engineer  (preferably  civil  engineer)  with  adequate  experience  in  the 
supervision  of  hydraulic  work  construction  (preferably  irrigation  works).  (S)he  will  have  had 
experience  in  setting  up  supervision  systems  and  procedures  with  appropriate  quality  control. 
Experience  of  working  with  civil  engineering  companies  or  water  agencies  on  hydraulic 
rehabilitation  and  upgrading  projects  in  developed  or  developing  countries  will  be  preferable. 
Willingness to work in the RBA and SBAs in the project area, security permitting, is preferable. 
(S)he will report to the ISC team leader and/or design and supervision engineer, and will work in 
close coordination with the Senior Design and Supervision Engineer and SBAs. (S)he will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Assist the Team Leader and Senior Design and Supervision Engineer in working 
with  stakeholders  to  select  priority  subprojects  (using  the  list  prepared  by  the 
PPTA  team  as  a  basis).  Select  logical  packages  of  subprojects  for  design  and 
construction packages; 
Assist  the  Team  Leader  and  Senior  Design  and  Supervision  Engineer,  working 
with  the  SBAs  and  water  users,  to  select  priority  structures  for  R&U  in  each 
scheme, on a package by package basis; 
Assist the Team Leader and Senior Design and Supervision Engineer in setting-
up  supervision  systems,  following  the  supervision  manual  and  practices  set-up 
under  the  EU-funded  Panj-Amu  River  Basin  Programme.  Help  to  organize 
training  for  SBA  engineers  (and  private  contractors)  in  such  systems.  Such 
training  could  be  outsourced  (e.g.  to  Kabul  Polytechnic)  to  build  local  long-term 
capacity; 
Assist the Senior Design and Supervision Engineer in providing oversight of the 
construction works, and hand-over to the WUA; 
Assist the Output 1, sub-component 1.2 team, and Output 2, sub-component 2.2 
team, as requested, in conducting training for WUAs and/or IAs in operation and 
maintenance (O&M); and 
Provide  assistance  to  the  team  leader,  PMO  and  PIO  in  project  monitoring  and 
reporting.   
Hydrologist/River  Basin  Modeler 
(international,  21  person-months).  The 
14. 
hydrologist/modeler will be responsible for team coordination, and delivery of quality and timely 
outputs, under Output 1, sub-component 1.3. (S)he will have a relevant educational background 
with at least ten years’ experience in hydrology and river basin modelling, including knowledge 
of WEAP. (S)he should be highly proficient in MS Excel (including the use of pivot tables) and 
MS Access. Experience in the region (South and/or Central/West Asia), experience in providing 
training on river basin planning tools, and experience of using ArcGIS will be preferable. (S)he 
will report to the Director of the Water Management Department under the DG Water Affairs in 
MEW. (S)he will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Be  responsible  for  overall  direction  of  the  Output  1,  sub-component  1.3 
consultant team, and co-ordination and management of inputs; 
Identify  tasks  on  the  critical  path  for  output  1,  sub-component  1.3,  and  ensure 
that implementation schedules follow an integrated approach; 
Ensure  close  coordination  with  other  component  teams  so  that  an  integrated 
approach is realized; 
5
7
5
7
58 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
farmers 
through  preparation  and 
Provide support and on-the-job training6 to the Department, working with the RBA 
and  SBAs,  in  strengthening  the  water  resources  planning  system.  This  will 
include:  (a)  strengthening  data  collection  and  storage  systems  including 
developing a knowledge base (linked to GIS, working with the GIS specialist); (b) 
setting  up  a  river  basin  model  (building  on  the  WEAP  model  already  prepared 
under  a  previous  project  [AWARD] 7)  in  order  to  produce  more  accurate  and 
timely  water  availability  forecasts;  (c)  improve  data  dissemination  to  the  RBA, 
SBA  and  farmers  through  the  preparation  and  implementation  of  a  water 
resources  data  management  and  dissemination  policy  and  plan  (with  the 
assistance  of  the  senior  river  basin  planning  and  management  officer);  (d) 
working  with  the  senior  river  basin  planning  and  management  officer  to  ensure 
such  information  is  used  and  converted  into  field-level  actions  (by  RBA/SBAs) 
implementation  of  water  sharing 
and 
arrangements  to  aid  more  equitable  water  distribution  between  and  within 
schemes. This will require support to the RBA/SBAs in creating rating curves for 
each  main  canal.  Also  by  ensuring  that  water  availability  information  reaches 
farmers  in  the  most  appropriate  manner,  so  that  they  can  change  farm 
management  practice  (with  support  from  output  2,  sub-component  2.3).  (e) 
ensuring  data from  the  model  is  accessible  to  other  stakeholders  (in  MEW  and 
other ministries, plus other donors and projects) to assist them in preparing river 
basin investment and management plans; 
Assist  in  preparing  technical  specifications  for  equipment  (and  works)  to  be 
procured  under  this  output  including:  mobile  staff  gauges  for  un-gauged  river 
tributaries  (e.g.  in  Upper  Panj);  relocation  of  six  existing  permanent  gauging 
stations; 12 automatic rain and snow gauges (to only be procured once adequate 
capacity has been built in the department to undertake effective water resources 
planning; ARcGIS Spatial Analyst software; and a boat and trailer for water flow 
monitoring  on  the  Panj-Amu  river  (in  support  of  agreements  made  with 
Government  of  Tajikistan  under  the  Afghan/Tajik  transboundary  technical 
working  group).  In  addition,  provide  support  for  the  identification  of  sites  for  the 
gauges; 
Guide  and  oversee  the  senior  river  basin  planning  and  management  officer  in 
his/her  tasks  which  are  to  (a)  help  strengthen  central-level  inter-agency  co-
ordination; and (b) help strengthen co-ordination between (S)RBA/DAIL/DRRD in 
river basin planning and management; and 
Provide  assistance  to  the  team  leader,  PMO  and  PIO  in  project  monitoring  and 
reporting.   
15. 
GIS Specialist (international, 6 person-months). The GIS Specialist will support MEW 
in  the  delivery  of  Output  1,  sub-component  1.3.  (S)he  will  have  a  relevant  educational 
background with at least ten years’ previous experience in GIS (including ArcGIS). (S)he should 
be highly proficient in MS Excel (including the use of pivot tables) and MS Access. Experience 
in  the  region  (South  and/or  Central/West  Asia),  of  using  GIS  for  water  resources  planning,  in 
providing training on GIS, and of using all various modules of ArcGIS, including spatial analyst 
is preferable. (S)he will report to the Director of the Water Management Department under the 
DG  Water  Affairs  in  MEW,  and  will  work  closely  with  the  international  hydrologist/river  basin 
modeler. (S)he will: 
6  Plus formal training in short 1-2 day courses for problem areas.  
7  And in the longer-term possibly linked to snowmelt and rainfall-run off models. 
59 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Provide support and on-the-job training to the Department, working with the RBA 
and SBAs, in strengthening the GIS system and/or knowledge base set-up in the 
RBA  under  the  EU-funded  Panj-Amu  River  Basin  Programme,  combining  this 
with  the  GIS  and/or  knowledge  base  set-up  under  the  World  Bank  funded 
AWARD  project  to  ensure  that  a  consolidated  GIS/knowledge  base  is  used  by 
MEW; 
Ensure  that  data  from  all  project  components  is  included  in  the  GIS  and/or 
knowledge base and is utilized by them for their needs; 
Provide  assistance  to  the  hydrologist/river  basin  modeler  in  setting  up  a  river 
basin model (using WEAP) based on the knowledge base/GIS;  
Provide assistance to the hydrologist/river basin modeler in the preparation and 
implementation of a water resources data management and dissemination policy 
and plan (with the assistance of the senior river basin planning and management 
officer); 
Assist in preparing presentation materials (e.g. schematics, maps) which can be 
utilized for project purposes and also for use by RBAs/SBAs and farmers for their 
decision-making processes; 
Assist  in  preparing  technical  specifications  for  ArcGIS  Spatial  Analyst  software 
for the procurement tender; and 
Provide  assistance  to  the  team  leader,  PMO  and  PIO  in  project  monitoring  and 
reporting.   
16. 
Transboundary  Specialist  (international,  4  person-months).  The  transboundary 
specialist  will  support  MEW  in the  delivery  of  Output  1,  sub-component  1.3.  (S)he  will  have  a 
relevant educational background with at least ten years’ experience in facilitating transboundary 
dialogue  and  negotiations  on  water  analysis,  sharing  and  use.  Experience  of  supporting  and 
providing training to governments in the region (South and/or Central/West Asia), knowledge of 
the  Amu  Darya  river  basin,  and  experience  of  drafting  the  water  law  is  preferable.  (S)he  will 
report to the PMO Project Manager in MEW. (S)he will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Assess  whether  additional  members  should  be  included  in  the  Afghan/Tajik 
transboundary  technical  working  group  from  the  Afghan  side  (such  as  from  the 
Ministry of Foreign affairs); 
Provide training to Afghan members of the Afghan/Tajik transboundary technical 
working group to prepare for WG meetings to be held in Dushanbe. Training will 
cover  transboundary  issues,  in  particular  on  agenda  points  that  will  come  up  in 
meetings,  including  providing  assistance  to  the  working  group  to  review  and 
comment  on  the  proposed  agreement  for  the  set-up  of  a  Pyanj  River  Basin 
Commission.  Such  training  would  likely  be  undertaken  twice  per  year  for  four 
years  prior  to  the  working  group  meetings  taking  place.  First  training  will  be 
provided over a two day period, and then a pre-working group meeting will take 
place over 2 days; and 
Provide  assistance  to  the  team  leader,  PMO  and  PIO  in  project  monitoring  and 
reporting.   
17. 
On-farm  water  management  specialist  (international,  42  person-months). The  on-
farm water management specialist will support MEW in the delivery of Output 1, sub-component 
1.2  (approximately  20%  of  time)  and  MAIL  in  the  delivery  of  Output  2  (all  sub-components) 
(approximately  80%  of  time).  (S)he  will  be  a  qualified  engineer  (preferably  irrigation  engineer, 
agricultural engineer or civil engineer) with adequate experience in the design and supervision 
the 
of  secondary  and 
irrigation  rehabilitation  and  upgrading  works; 
tertiary  canal 
in 
5
9
5
9
60 
establishment and strengthening of community-based water management organizations; and in 
on-farm  water  management  (such  as  land  levelling  and  improved  agricultural  techniques). 
Experience in the region (South and/or Central/West Asia) is preferable. (S)he will report to the 
Project Manager in MEW PMO and the Project Director in MAIL PMO. (S)he will: 
18. 
Assist in coordination between MAIL and MEW as follows: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Ensure  close  coordination  with  other  component  teams  so  that  an  integrated 
approach is realized; 
Assist the Irrigation Design Engineer to co-ordinate with MEW staff under output 
1 to agree on priority subprojects (using the list prepared by the PPTA team as a 
basis)  such  that  both  outputs  work  in  the  same  schemes  (at  different  levels)). 
Select logical packages of subprojects for construction packages. 
19. 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Provide support to MAIL in implementation of output 2 as follows: 
(iii) 
Identify  tasks  on  the  critical  path  for  output  2,  (all  sub-components)  and  ensure 
that implementation schedules follow an integrated approach; 
Assist  the  Irrigation  Design  Engineer,  working  with  DAILs  and  water  users,  to 
select priority structures for R&U in each scheme (at the secondary and tertiary 
level), on a package by package basis; 
Assist  the  Irrigation  Design  Engineer,  and  MAIL  and  DAIL  design  teams,  to 
prepare designs and tender packages for the works, following standard designs 
as exist in for example the FAO design manual; 
Assist  the  Irrigation  Design  Engineer  in  organizing  and  conducting  training 
courses in irrigation R&U design for staff from MAIL/DAILs; 
Act as a member on evaluation committees if requested to do so; 
(ix) 
(vii) 
(viii)  Assist  the  PMO,  together  with  the  international  procurement  and  financial 
management  specialist,  in  organizing  training  for  CDCs  and  IAs  in  community-
based contracting; 
Set-up supervision systems, following the supervision manual and practices set-
up under the EU-funded Panj-Amu River Basin Programme. Organize training for 
DAIL  engineers  (and  private  contractors,  and  in  the  case  of  community-based 
contractors, CDC personnel) in such systems. Such training could be outsourced 
(e.g. to Kabul Polytechnic) to build local long-term capacity; 
Together  with  the  team  leader,  prepare  pro-formas  for  pre-construction  O&M 
agreements and hand-over/irrigation management transfer (IMT) between DAILs 
and IAs, and provide oversight to ensure these are initiated for each subproject;   
Together with the team leader, assist MAIL in drafting O&M policy to facilitate this 
policy’s  operationalization  by  2020  to  guide  the  O&M  and  handover/IMT  of  all 
irrigation structures nation-wide. 
Assist  the  PMO  and  PIOs  in  providing  oversight  of  the  construction  works,  and 
hand-over to the IAs; 
(xii) 
(xi) 
(x) 
(xiii)  Provide  support  to  the  senior  IA  &  OFWM  officer  in  assisting  DAILs  (including 
through training of trainers courses) in the establishment and training of IAs; 
(xiv)  Assist in the implementation of gender development activities; and 
(xv)  Provide support to the senior IA & OFWM officer in assisting DAILs in the set-up 
of demonstrations for farmers on OFWM and improved agronomic techniques. 
20. 
Provide support to MEW in implementation of output 1 as follows: 
61 
(xvi) 
Identify  tasks  on  the  critical  path  for  output  1,  sub-component  1.2,  and  ensure 
that implementation schedules follow an integrated approach; 
(xvii)  Provide  support  to  the  senior  WUA  officer  in  assisting  SBAs  (including  through 
training of trainers courses) the establishment and training of WUAs; and 
21. 
General support: 
(xviii)  Provide  assistance  to  the  team  leader,  PMO  and  PIO  in  project  monitoring  and 
reporting.   
22. 
Community-based  watershed  management  specialist  (international,  14  person-
months).  The  community-based  watershed  management  specialist  will  support  MAIL  in  the 
delivery  of  Output  3.  (S)he  will  have  a  relevant  educational  background  with  adequate 
experience  in  community-based  watershed  management,  including  forestry  and  rangeland 
management  and  the  establishment  and  support  of  catchment  management  groups  (e.g. 
forestry groups or rangeland groups).  Experience with erosion control structures such as gully 
plugs and bunds; experience with fostering alternative livelihood activities, and experience in the 
region  (South  and/or  Central/West  Asia)  is  preferable.  (S)he  will  report  to  the  Senior  NRM 
Coordinator. (S)he will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Identify  tasks  on  the  critical  path  for  Output  3  and  ensure  that  implementation 
schedules follow an integrated approach; 
Ensure  close  coordination  with  other  component  teams  so  that  an  integrated 
approach is realized; 
Prepare a Community-based Natural Resources Management Technical Manual 
and Guidebook and provide training on this to MEW and DAIL staff; 
Assist the Senior NRM Coordinator to select sites for project interventions, using 
the  list  of  subprojects  agreed  on  under  Outputs  1  and  2,  based  on  field  work 
undertaken by DAIL staff, together with the Senior Community-based Watershed 
Management  Officer,  Senior  Rural  Livelihood  Officer  and  Junior  Watershed 
Management Officers;   
Provide assistance to undertake training of trainers courses for DAIL staff, so that 
they  are  able  to  work  with  communities  to  set-up  and  strengthen  community-
based catchment management associations; 
Provide  guidance  in the preparation  of  NRM  plans,  and  in  the most  appropriate 
form  of  contracting.  Propose  ideas  for  an  appropriate  Payment  for  Ecosystem 
Services (PES) pilot initiative; 
(vii)  Help to set-up systems for the monitoring and oversight of plan implementation; 
and   
(viii)  Provide  assistance  to  the  team  leader,  PMO  and  PIO  in  project  monitoring  and 
reporting.   
23. 
Procurement  and  Financial  Management  Specialist  (international,  13  person-
months).  The  procurement  and  financial  management  specialist  will  provide  support  to  MEW 
PMO  (approximately  60%  of  the  time)  and  MAIL  PMO  (approximately  40%  of  time),  although 
exact  time  allocation  will  be  needs-based.  (S)he  will  have  a  relevant  educational  background 
with  adequate  experience  in  ADB  procurement  and  financial  management  procedures. 
Experience  of  Afghan  finance  and  procurement  systems  is  preferable.  (S)he  will  report  to  the 
MEW PMO Project Manager. (S)he will: 
6
1
6
1
62 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Ensure  that  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  procurement  directives  and 
norms, described in the Grant Agreement, are fully respected in all stages of the 
procurement of goods, works and services for the Project; 
Assist the PMOs in preparing bidding documents for the procurement of goods, 
works  and  services  in  accordance  with  ADB  guidelines  taking  into  account  the 
Afghanistan  Procurement  Law.  Coordinating  and  supervising  all  project 
procurement  activities, 
in  close  coordination  with  corresponding  relevant 
procurement department (MEW and/or MAIL) and ADB; 
Review tender documents with particular reference to the commercial aspects to 
ensure ADB comments are incorporated in the final version; 
Assist in evaluation of bids and proposals if requested, and in the preparation of 
any relevant evaluation reports; 
Assist  the  project  director  in  regular  update  of  the  procurement  plan  in 
coordination  with  the  work  plan  and  time  schedule  of  the  Project  and  the 
financing plan; 
Support  MEW  and  MAIL  PMOs  during  contract  negotiations  and  ensure 
meetings  are  properly  recorded  and  ADB  norms  and  applicable  national 
regulations are followed and that these are attached as annexes to the contract 
form; 
(vii)  Develop systems to train and transfer finance and procurement skills on various 
aspects  of  ADB’s  procedures  for  PMOs  and  the  Ministries’  procurement 
department and finance department; 
(ix) 
(viii)  Verify that correct documentation for each disbursement related to the execution 
of the contracts is maintained and that the corresponding contractual obligations 
have been fulfilled; 
Help  MEW  and  MAIL  PMOs  establish  and  maintain  a  financial  management 
system,  including  books  and  accounts  for  the  projects,  adequate  to  reflect  the 
operations,  resources  and  expenditures  related  to  the  projects  in  a  detailed 
manner  to  facilitate  accurate,  detailed  and  timely  project  reporting.    Ensure 
proper  asset  management,  compliance  of  expenditures  with  ADB  fiduciary 
requirements,  and  that  the  accounting  meets  the  applicable  government  and 
donor standards); 
Assist in the planning and budgeting for the project program, taking the lead role 
in the financial plan and budgets and ensuring that the assumptions, parameters, 
guidelines and policies in planning are complied with; and 
Ensure timely preparation and submission of financial reports, including provision 
of  supporting  documentation  necessary  to  facilitate  internal  and  external  audits 
(the  reporting  framework  should  enable  maintenance  of  accurate  and  updated 
accounting  records  and  documents,  including  vouchers,  bank  statements, 
agreements, receipts, etc.). 
(xi) 
(x) 
24. 
Environmental  Safeguards  Specialist  (international,  2  person-months).  The 
environmental safeguards specialist will provide support to MAIL PMO (and to some extent the 
MEW  PMO).  (S)he  will  have  a  relevant  educational  background  with  adequate  experience  in 
environmental  safeguard  procedures for  donor  organizations  such  as  ADB  or the World  Bank. 
(S)he will report to the MAIL PMO Project Director. (S)he will: 
(i) 
Provide course-based (and on the-job) training to the environmental safeguards 
officer  in  environmental  due  diligence  of  irrigation  R&U  works  under  Output  2, 
following  the  procedures  set-out  in  the  EARF  (and  representative  subproject 
63 
(ii) 
IEEs), and in the preparation of IEEs including Environmental Management and 
Monitoring Plans (EMPs); and 
Help set-up monitoring systems, procedures and templates for the environmental 
safeguards officers (in MAIL and MEW PMOs) to adhere to, ensuring that EMPs 
are undertaken by contractors, and provide training. 
Social  Safeguards  Specialist 
25. 
(international,  2  person-months).  The  social 
safeguards  specialist  will  provide  support  to  MAIL  PMO  (and to some extent the  MEW  PMO). 
(S)he will have a relevant educational background (preferably in a social science) with adequate 
experience 
for  donor 
in  resettlement  and,  social  and  gender  safeguard  procedures 
organizations  such  as  ADB  or  the  World  Bank.  (S)he  will  report  to  the  MAIL  PMO  Project 
Director. (S)he will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Provide course-based (and on the-job) training to the social safeguards officer in 
resettlement,  social  and  gender  due  diligence  of  irrigation  R&U  works  under 
output  2,  following  the  procedures  set-out  in  the  LARF  and  SPRSS  (and 
representative subproject LARPs), and in the preparation of LARPs; and 
Help  set-up  monitoring  systems,  procedures  and  templates  for  the  social 
safeguards officers (in MAIL and MEW PMOs) to adhere to, ensuring that LARPs 
ae implemented as planned.  
6
3
6
3
64 
ANNEX 3: INCREMENTAL STAFF REQUIREMENTS 
PositionNTA GradeBaseNumber of PersonsNumber of Person- monthsProject Incremental Staff (person months)Output/Component 1: Water allocation and availability improvedSub-Component 1.1: Water conveyance infrastructure rehabilitated and upgradedHead of Design and Supervision TeamBMEW PMO17272Supervision EngineersCSBAs (4)1272864Senior GIS/IT OfficerDRBA, Kunduz17272Senior WUA OfficerDRBA, Kunduz17272Junior WUA OfficersESBAs (5)536180Sub-Component 1.3: Water resources planning and management strengthenedSenior RB Planning and Management OfficerCRBA, Kunduz17272Building Design Engineer CRBA, Kunduz111Sub-total Output 11,333Output/Component 2: Command area enhancedSub-Component 2.1: On-farm irrigation infrastructure rehabilitated and upgradedSenior Irrigation Design EngineerCMAIL PMO17272JIrrigation Supervision Officers (Engineers)DDAILs (5)572360Sub-Component 2.2: IAs established and strengthenedSenior IA & OFWM OfficerCMAIL PMO (or RBA Kunduz or DAIL Kunduz)17272AgronomistsDDAIL (5)572360Sub-Component 2.3: Efficiency of agricultural water use enhancedIncluded in SC2.2Sub-total Output 2864Output/Component 3: Watersheds properly managed and protectedSenior NRM Co-ordinatorBNRM Directorate, MAIL14848Senior Community based Watershed Management OfficerCDAIL (TBD)14848Senior Rural Livelihood OfficerCDAIL (TBD) 14848Watershed Management OfficersDDAIL (5)548240Sub-total Output 3384Staffing List continued (next page)Sub-Component 1.2: WUAs established and strengthened 
65 
Note:  
*The Department of Hydrology under the DG Water Affairs (MEW) is based in a building near the airport, not in the 
main MEW building on Dar-ul-aman road where the PMO is.  
**Guards and cleaners are in-kind government contributions. 
6
5
6
5
Staffing List continued from the previous pagePositionNTA GradeBaseNumber of PersonsNumber of Person- monthsProject Incremental Staff (person months)MOF PCUSenior Project OfficerCMOF PCU17272Sub-total MOF PCU72MEW PMO PMO Director B14242Project Manager (Deputy Director)B-Step 417272Contracts and Procurement OfficerC17272Finance OfficerD17272Admin & HR OfficerD17272Environment Safeguards Officer C14242Social Safeguards Officer D14242ClerksF272144Drivers G272144Sub-total MEW PMO702MAIL PMO Project ManagerB17272Senior Contracts and Procurement OfficerC17272Senior Finance OfficerC17272Senior Admin & HR OfficerC17272Senior Environment Safeguards Officer C12525Senior Social Safeguards Officer C13333ClerksF272144Drivers G272144Sub-total MAIL PMO634MEW PIO - RBA (1 PIO)PIO Manager C17272Finance OfficerD17272Admin OfficerD17272ClerkF17272SBA Finance Officers D672432Drivers G472288Sub-total MEW PIO - RBA1,008MAIL PIO - DAIL (5 PIOs)PIO Manager C572360Finance Officer(s)D572360Admin Officer(s)D572360Driver(s)G572360Sub-total MAIL PIO - DAIL1,440Grant Total6,437 
