Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 48322-001 
Grant Number: GXXXX  
November 2015 
Myanmar: Economic Empowerment of the Poor and 
Women in the East-West Economic Corridor Project 
(Financed by the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABBREVIATIONS 
I. 
A.
B.
C.
II. 
A.    
B.   
III. 
A.  
B.  
C.  
IV. 
A.
B.  
C.  
D.  
E.  
F.
G.
V. 
A.
B.
C.
VI. 
A.
B.
C.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Project Readiness Activities 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Project Implementation Organizations – Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Project Organization Structure 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-curve 
Fund Flow Diagram 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
Advance Actions 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
IX. 
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
X. 
XI. 
XII. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND 
COMMUNICATION 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
1 
1 
3 
3 
5 
5 
6 
7 
7 
12 
13 
14 
15 
15 
16 
16 
17 
17 
18 
18 
18 
20 
21 
22 
22 
23 
23 
37 
38 
39 
39 
42 
43 
44 
45 
45 
46 
46 
APPENDIXES 
1.  Mawlamyine Market General Specifications 
2.  Terms of Reference for Financial Audit Consulting Services (Auditor) 
3.  Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous People Safeguards Guidelines 
4.  Gender Action Plan Monitoring Report Template 
5.  Guidelines and Template for Project Progress Reports 
6.  Framework and Guidelines in Calculating Project Progress 
7.  Grant Status Report Template 
8.  Financial Reporting and Audit Requirements and Guidelines 
9.  Detailed Cost Estimates 
10. Financial Management and Assessment Report 
11. Project Procurement Risk Assessment Report 
47 
50 
62 
65 
66 
70 
72 
75 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
1.  The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes 
the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with  Government  and  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  policies  and  procedures.  The  PAM 
should include references to all available templates and instructions either through linkages to 
relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM. 
2.  The Ministry of Hotels and Tourism (MOHT) and the Office of the Chief Minister, Mon State are 
wholly  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  ADB  financed  project,  as  agreed  jointly  between 
the  grant  recipient  and  ADB,  and  in  accordance  with  Government  and  ADB’s  policies  and 
procedures. ADB staff is responsible to support implementation including compliance by MOHT 
and Office of the Chief Minister, Mon  State,  of their obligations and responsibilities for project 
implementation in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
3.  At  Grant  Negotiations  the  Government  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  the  PAM  and  ensure 
consistency with the Grant agreement. Such agreement shall be reflected in the minutes of the 
Grant Negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the 
Grant Agreement, the provisions of the Grant Agreement shall prevail. 
4.  After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP) 
changes  in  implementation  arrangements  are  subject  to  agreement  and  approval  pursuant  to 
relevant Government and ADB administrative procedures (including the Project Administration 
Instructions) and upon such approval they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM. 
 ABBREVIATIONS 
Asian Development Bank 
community based organization 
civil society organization 
environmental management plan  
East West Economic Corridor 
gender action plan 
Greater Mekong Sub-region 
initial environmental examination 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction  
micro and small enterprises 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises 
Ministry of Hotels and Tourism 
nongovernment organization 
operations and maintenance  
project implementation unit 
project management unit 
statement of expenditure  
training needs analysis 
village focal point representatives 
-  
- 
- 
-  
- 
-   
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  
- 
ADB  
CBO 
CSO 
EMP 
EWEC  
GAP 
GMS 
IEE 
JFPR   
MSEs   
MSMEs 
MOHT  
NGO 
O&M 
PIU 
PMU 
SOE 
TNA 
VFPR   
A.
Rationale  
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Project Context. In Mon State, more than 39% of the population is underemployed and 
1. 
more than 16% of families are classified as poor; despite rapidly increasing trade and tourism in 
the area.1 Approximately 55% of the population in Mon state is self-employed, operating micro 
and small enterprises (MSEs) and selling agricultural products such as processed foods  (e.g., 
fruit/vegetable  juice,  jams  and  dried  goods)  and  handicrafts,  including  bamboo  and  woven 
products.  However,  these  MSEs  are  constrained  by  low  productivity  and  make  limited 
contributions  to  household  poverty  reduction.  They  face  various  challenges,  including  (i) 
insufficient product knowledge, low access to appropriate processing technology and a shortage 
of  skilled  employees;  (ii)  lack  of  business  management  skills  and  access  to  business 
development  services;  (iii)  limited  access  to  finance  and  markets2  and;  (iv)  insufficient 
infrastructure  and  weak  institutional  support.  The  above  constraints  prevent  the  residents  of 
Mon  state  from  developing  productive  enterprises  that  could  supply  value-added  products  to 
expanding local and regional markets.  
2. 
About  15.1%  of  the  2.3  million  Myanmar  nationals  migrating  to  Thailand  in  search  of 
better  paying  jobs  are  from  Mon  state.3  Currently,  total  remittances  sent  by  Myanmar  migrant 
workers in Thailand amounts to $ 1.7 billion nationally, of which more than $ 588 million is sent 
to Mon  state  annually.4  However,  these remittances are  mostly  used  to  support  basic  survival 
needs and the use of these funds for investment and other productive purposes would maximize 
their development impact and support poverty reduction of households impacted by migration.  
3. 
Tourism  in  Mon  state  has  strong  potential  for  growth.  The  proposed  project  site  near 
Kyaikthiyo  (the  Golden  Rock  Pagoda)  is  one  of  the  top  tourist  destinations  in  Myanmar,  with 
more  than  one  million  visitors  in  2013.5  Mawlamyine  and  Mudon  with  the  country’s  largest 
reclining Buddha, pagodas, old churches, caves, and huge rock formations are also increasingly 
popular tourist sites.6 The State government plans to promote Mon as an area for cultural and 
community  based  tourism  and  significant  investment  in  new  hotels  and  tourist  facilities  are 
underway. It is expected that these opportunities, together with increased connectivity resulting 
from  improvements  to  the  East-West  Economic  Corridor  road  network  will  result  in  a  sharp 
increase in international tourism and trade in the proposed project areas.7   
1  Government  of  Myanmar,  Ministry  of  National  Planning  and  Economic  Development;  Swedish  International 
Development Cooperation Agency; United Nations Children’s Fund; and United Nations Development Programme. 
2011. Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey in Myanmar (2009–2010). Nay Pyi Taw. 
2    In  Mawlamyine  Township,  there  is  no  dedicated  craft  or  souvenir  market  for  tourists  to  buy  local  products.  A 
number of CSO/ NGOs have small craft outlets dispersed on the outer edge of the city far from the main tourist site. 
A key reason for this is that these less ideal locations offer affordable rents. However, annual rental fees are often 
required in advance. 
3  A large number of the migrants are males who leave behind females to head the households. 
4    International  Organization  for  Migration.  Presentation  on  Assessing  Potential  Changes  in  Migration  Patterns  of 
Myanmar Migrants and their Impacts on Thailand - Analysis of findings for stakeholders in Myanmar, 24 February 
2014.  
5  Ministry of Hotels and Tourism. 2013. Myanmar Tourism Master Plan 2013-2020. Nay Pyi Taw.  
6  Among the tourist attractions in Mawlamyine and Mudon are  famous pagodas, such as Santawshin Pagoda, also 
named mountain top pagoda, and Kyaikkami Pagoda, perched on rocks by the sea; caves of Kawgoon and Payon, 
known for its numerous Buddha  images, stalagmites and stalactites; Kyauktalon Taung, a flat rock formation 300 
feet in height with a Buddhist shrine situated on top; and Win Sein Taw Ya, the largest reclining Buddha in the world 
which is 30 meters high and 180 meters in length.  
7 ADB. 2015. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Republic 
of  the  Union  of  Myanmar  for  the  Greater  Mekong  Subregion  East–West  Economic  Corridor  Eindu  to  Kawkareik 
2 
To  prepare  local  producers  of  agricultural  products  and  handicrafts  to  exploit  income 
 4. 
generation and employment opportunities associated with new markets and facilitate access to 
established  local  and  tourist  markets  in  Mon,  Yangon  and  at  the  Myawaddy-Mae  Sot  border, 
investments in training, capacity building and small infrastructure are needed.  
5. 
Project  Beneficiaries  and  Location.  The  project  will  support  900  households  in  12 
villages to access livelihood support and employment. Project areas are situated in Mon State’s 
Kyaikhto,  Mawlamyine,  Mudon  and  Chaungzon  townships.  The  project  will  promote  pro-poor, 
microenterprise  development,  focusing  on  locally  made  handicrafts  and  processed  foods  for 
local  and  tourist  markets.  The  project  will  provide  technical  training  primarily  to  women  MSE 
entrepreneurs together with business development and management skills, and facilitate access 
to  finance,  markets,  and  business  support  services.8  This  will  enable  MSEs  to  establish 
productive  businesses  or  expand  into  higher  value  production.  MSE  development  will  create 
new  jobs  and  support  skills  development  aligned  to  labor  market  needs.  This  will  help  the 
unemployed and the poor and marginalized residents, especially women, to enter the workforce. 
Support  to  strengthen  local  government  and  key  stakeholder  capacity  and  institutional 
arrangements will improve the business enabling environment.  
6. 
Final selection of target villages will take place after field surveys at project inception and 
will be based on the following selection criteria: (i) villages have poverty rates of at least 16%; 
(ii) communities have sufficient basic skills to produce crafts and food products; (iii) at least 75% 
of products selected will be produced mainly by women in women-led enterprises; (iv) there is 
proven  market  demand  for  the  type  of  products  that  can  be  produced  in  target  villages;  (v)  
families of migrants who are interested in setting up small business with the use of remittances 
are  eligible;  (vi)  female-headed  households,  in  particular  for  skills  training  to  increase 
employability  in  MSEs,  very  poor  community  members,  and/or  women  from  ethnic  groups  will 
be  prioritized,  (vii)  participation  in  the  project  is  endorsed  by  community  leaders  and  the  
intended project recipients. 
7. 
Linkage  to  country/regional  strategy.  The  proposed  project  is  aligned  with  the 
Government’s  priority to  create jobs  and generate income  to  reduce  poverty,  as  highlighted  in 
Myanmar’s  National  Comprehensive  Development  Plan  2011–2031.  The  Government’s 
Framework  for  Economic  and  Social  Reforms  9  emphasizes  transition  from  predominantly  low 
productive agriculture to higher value products through promoting micro-, small-, and medium-
sized  enterprises  (MSMEs)  and  trade,  as  one  channel  to  facilitate  inclusive  growth.  It  is 
consistent  with ADB’s  Myanmar  Interim  Country Partnership Strategy  2015–2016  that focuses 
on inclusive economic growth and job creation, and support for rural livelihoods.  10 The project 
will complement other ADB assistance11 and will be coordinated with other development partner 
interventions.12 
Road  Improvement  Project.  Manila.  The  road  improvements  will  ensure  a  good  road  network  stretching  from 
Myawaddy on the Thai border and linking it to Hpa-an Kyaikhto and Mawlamyine, and Yangon, by 2018. 
8 Trainings will also be provided to unemployed persons, especially women and the poor. 
9  Government  of  Myanmar.  2012.  Framework  for  Economic  and  Social  Reforms:  Policy  Priorities  for  2012–2015 
towards the Long-Term Goals of the National Comprehensive Development Plan. Yangon. 
10ADB.  2012,  extended  in  2014.  Interim  Country  Partnership  Strategy:  Myanmar  2012–2014,  extended  to  2016. 
Manila.  
11 Footnote 7.  
12 The project complements SwissContact’s Myanmar Vocational Skills Development Program, which includes Kayin   
    and Mon states. Complementarities and synergies will be sought with ongoing local interventions in project sites. 
3 
B.
Impact and Outcome 
8. 
The  project  impact  is  increased  employment  and  income  of  owners  and  employees  of 
micro and small enterprises in southeast Myanmar. The outcome is micro and small enterprises 
are enabled to increase business activities in project areas.  
C.
Outputs 
9. 
Output  1.  Skills  and  management  capacity  of  micro  and  small  enterprises  and 
their employees developed. This output will undertake: (i) a value chain analysis that will be 
used in the final selection of crafts and local food products to be developed; (ii) a market study 
of local and tourist consumer demand for specific product lines to be supported by the project; 
(iii)  village  consultations  and  awareness  raising  seminars  with  producers  and  retailers  to 
information  about  consumer 
establish  producer  and  retailer  groups  and  disseminate 
preferences and market demand for products; (iv) village consultations with producers and raw 
materials  suppliers  about  availability  and  sustainability  of  raw  materials;  (v)  design  technical 
training  programs  to  improve  existing  and  create  new  product  lines  based  on  the  baseline 
studies.  Briefings  on  gender  equality,  safe  migration  and  life  skills,  will  be  included  as  a 
standardized  training  package.  Master  trainers will  be  trained  by  existing  training  entities  (e.g. 
vocational training institutes, government agencies, NGOs) and provided with training materials 
and  equipment,  as  needed.  In  addition,  the  project  will  train  master  trainers  from  producer 
groups  for  each  product  line  and  deliver  technical  training  related  to  food  processing  and 
handicrafts, including quality standards and food safety. Stipends or transport allowance will be 
provided  to  support  men  and  women’s  attendance  in  training.  Training  will  be  implemented 
through appropriate government and civil society agencies to ensure sustainability. 
10.   Deliverables: (i) at least 12 villages are selected for inclusion in the project; (ii) market 
study,  and training  needs  assessments  are  completed; (iii)  value  chain analysis  conducted for 
12  products  with  potential  for  commercialization;  (iv)  at  least  1,700  people  are  trained  to 
produce and market quality products, of which at least 60% are women; (v) 100 master trainers 
from government, CSOs and producer groups trained in improved production techniques (60% 
are women); and (vi) 300 new enterprises are formed.   
11.   Output  2.  Access  to  business  services,  credit  and  commercial  networks 
strengthened.  This  output  will  identify  input  suppliers,  business  development  training  service 
providers, microfinance providers, and the feasibility of credit access and commercial networks 
to strengthen market linkages. It will develop training courses and deliver training to MSEs on 
business  development,  management,  and  accounting  that  culminate  in  individual  business 
plans.  Activities  will  strengthen  the  access  of  MSEs  and  retailers  to  affordable  credit  by 
introducing them to local microfinance institutions, while implementing training modules to train 
MSEs  and  retailer  groups  to  create  independent  savings  and  credit  groups.  Support  for 
participation  in  trade  fairs  and  business-matching  workshops  will  strengthen  commercial 
networks  involving  MSEs,  suppliers,  wholesalers,  and  retail  outlets  and  markets  in  Mon  and 
Yangon. Support to develop a ―Made in Mon, Myanmar‖ brand, product design competitions for 
innovative  handicrafts,  and  related  marketing  and  promotion  programs  will  increase  market 
awareness of products produced in the project area. 
Deliverables:  (i)  At  least  900 producers  have increased knowledge  of  sound  business 
12. 
development and management practices (60% are women); (ii) 90% of producers have access 
to affordable credit (60% are women); (iii) at least 7 products produced in the Mon state will be 
marketed and sold through retail outlets in Yangon or other major cities.  
4 
to  promote 
Output  3.  Infrastructure  to  support  access  to  markets  and  processing  facilities 
13. 
improved. This  component  will  provide  retailers and traders  with a  custom-built  public market 
facility13 in Mawlamyine and a multi-function processing center in Kyaikhto. Both facilities will be 
operated  under  public-private-community  partnership  models  (PPCP) 
local 
ownership  while  ensuring  effective  management  and  long-term  financial  sustainability.  This 
output will: (i) develop a local product and craft market with amenities in Mawlamyine, including 
directional  signage  and  vehicle  parking;  (ii)  establish  a  market  management  committee 
comprising  local  community  members,  retailers,  small-scale  producers,  and  local  government 
authorities.  It  is  envisaged  that  a  private  or  CSO-managed  social  enterprise  with  relevant 
experience  will  operate  the  market  under  a  PPCP  management  agreement.  A  vendor 
association  will  be  established  to  enhance  bargaining  power  of  women,  poor  producers,  and 
retailers to leverage collective interests in market operations. Establishment of the multi-function 
processing center will provide producers with suitable space for hygienic processing, packaging, 
and  distributing food  and  handicrafts  to traders.  A  management  committee  will  be  established 
comprising  producers  and  local  government  representatives  who  may  partner  with  a 
private/social enterprise to manage the facility. Suitable processing equipment will be provided 
based on need.   
14. 
The land for the market and multi-function processing facility will be vacant, unused and 
unoccupied  state-owned  land  free  of  encumbrances,  to  be  identified  and  provided  by  the 
government.  Operations  and  maintenance  (O&M)  plans  for  the  market  and  processing  facility 
will be prepared to ensure sustainability and financing of recurrent costs. This output will provide 
direct  employment  for  vendors,  vendor  employees,  site  managers  and  maintenance  staff. 
Indirect  employment  will  be  generated  for  suppliers  and  transportation  providers.  General 
specifications for the market facility are in Appendix 1. 
15. 
Deliverables: (i) craft and local product market developed  with at least 25 vendors; (ii) 
the  market  is  operational,  well  maintained,  and  financially  sustainable;  (iii)  a  market 
management committee and vendor association established (60% of members are women); (iv) 
a  multi-function  processing  center  established;  and  (v)  O&M  plans  for  the  market  and 
processing facility are prepared and implemented.  
Output 4. Capacity of executing and implementing agencies, and key stakeholders 
16. 
enhanced.  This  output  will  strengthen  management  capacity  of  the  project  management  unit 
and  project  implementation  unit.  It  will  support  institutional  capacity  building  and  interagency 
coordination for smooth project implementation, including bi-annual project review and planning 
meetings with participation of project staff, village focal point representatives, and other project 
stakeholders.  Sex-disaggregated  project  performance  and  monitoring  systems  will  be 
established  to  monitor  key  performance  indicators,  safeguards  compliance,  and  the  gender 
action plan. Project staff and consultants  will receive training to build their capacity to  address 
gender issues in enterprise development. Quarterly project progress reports will be prepared by 
the  project  team  and  submitted  to  the  government  and  ADB  based  on  agreed  annual  work 
plans.  Output  4  will  also  support  the  preparation  of  baseline,  midterm  and  a final  poverty  and 
social  impact  assessments  to  measure  project  performance,  preparation  of  annual  audited 
financial  statements,  and  the  project’s  exit  and  sustainability  strategy.  Project  documents  and 
reports will be made freely available by establishing project-specific web pages on the Ministry 
of Hotels and Tourism website.  
13 Accessibility of the market to women producers, MSEs and retailers will be a key criterion.   
Deliverables:  (i)  project  supervision,  management,  and  implementation  arrangements 
17. 
established;  (ii)  project  counterpart  staff,  consultants,  and  village  focal  point  representatives  
appointed  and  performing  agreed  duties  (35%  women  staff);  (iii)  sex  disaggregated  project 
performance  and  management  system  established;  (iv)  all  counterpart  staff,  consultants  and 
implementing partners trained in gender issues in enterprise development. 
5 
Innovation.  The  project  will  demonstrate  how 
18. 
local  people  access 
socioeconomic benefits associated with growing tourism in Mon State and road improvements 
in the East-West Economic Corridor, thus providing a model for replication in other parts of the 
country. It will promote entrepreneurship among migrant returnees and ―left behind‖ families of 
migrants through the effective use of remittances. Strengthening community based enterprises 
and  implementing  life-skills  training  programs  will  provide  young  men  and  women  with 
alternatives to unsafe migration.  
to  assist 
19. 
Sustainability. The proposed outcome of the project will be sustained by strengthening 
project  beneficiaries’  capabilities  to  engage  in  all  stages  of  the  value  chain,  from  identifying 
business  opportunities  to  sourcing  raw  materials  and  the  production  and  sale  of  finished 
products. Training on gender equality and life skills is envisaged to promote gender fair division 
of resources and labor and will create an enabling environment for women to access livelihood 
opportunities.  The  project  will  collaborate  closely  with  existing  government  and  other  local 
institutions  responsible  for  livelihood  development,  including  local  training  entities  and 
vocational  training  centers,  credit  institutions,  and  NGOs.  The  project  will  transfer  knowledge 
and  skills  to  institutionalize  capacity  development  and  support  coordination  mechanisms  that 
can help ensure sustainability and replication of project activities in the future.  
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A.     Project Readiness Activities  
20. 
Table 1 presents the project readiness activities.  
Table 1: Project Readiness Activities  
2015 
2016 
Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
Who 
Responsible* 
Indicative Activities 
Advance contracting actions 
Grant Fact-Finding Mission Aide 
Memoir endorsed  
Clearance of safeguard documents 
Establish project implementation team 
and arrangements 
GOJ endorsement 
ADB Board approval 
Grant signing 
Government legal opinion provided 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
Government budget inclusion 
Grant effectiveness 
(About 1-2 months after grant signing) 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, GOJ = Government of Japan, EA = executing agency.  
Source: ADB estimates. 
X 
X 
ADB & EA 
EA 
ADB & EA 
EA 
GOJ 
ADB 
ADB & EA 
EA 
EA 
ADB & EA 
6 
B.    Overall Project Implementation Plan  
21. 
The project will be implemented over a period of 4 years (Table 2).  
Table 2: Project Implementation Plan 
Activity Milestones (Years)Project Quarters (Implementation Period)Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Output 1. Skills and Management Capacity of Micro and Small Enterprises and their Employees Developed1.1Baseline socio-economic study1.2Training needs assessment, value chain analysis, and mapping of local service providers for techical training & product design1.3Market study of local and tourist consumer demand1.4Selection of target villages determined through multi-stakeholder inception workshops1.5Election and mobilization of village Focal Point Representatives in 12 villages1.6Establish producer and retailer groups1.7Detailed design of multiple product lines for handicraft upgrading program1.8Implementation of training courses/modules for handicraft upgrading program1.9Detailed design of multiple product lines for processed foods upgrading program1.10'Implementation of training courses/modules for processed foods upgrading program1.11Training of master trainers from project producer groups1.12Seminars with producers & suppliers on availability and sustainability of raw materials1.13Seminars to disseminate consumer preferences on market demand for selected products1.14Seminars on gender equality, safer migration and life skillsOutput 2. Access to Business Services, Credit and Commercial Networks Strengthened2.1Mapping of local service providers for BDS and micro-credit and banking services2.2Implementation of business start-up, management and financial literacy and credit training courses2.3Intermediate & advanced business planning, marketing and application of savings & credit2.4Marketing and branding strategy developed2.5Implementation of marketing and branding strategy2.6Workshops to create independent savings & credit groups and mentoring support2.7Exposure visits to facilitate linkages with markets in Yangon & other major cities2.8Promotion of "Made in Mon State" brand image - participation in national & regional trade fairs2.9Product Design competition for innovative handicraft for the souvenir market2.10'Manuals and promotional materials disseminatedOutput 3. Infrastructure to Support Access to Markets and Processing Facilities Improved3.1Identification of market, site survery and initial concept drawings completed & agreed3.2Preparation of EAR and contractor recruitment3.3Bidding, award and construction of market in Mawlamyine3.4Market Management Committee (MMC) established3.5MMC sign and execute management contracts with private/social enterprise3.6Identification of land for processing center, site survey and initial concept drawings completed & agreed3.7Bidding, award and construction of processing center in Kyaikhto3.8Procure equipment and fit out for multi-purpose processing center in Kyaikhto3.9Business plan, EMP and O&M plan 3.10'Training program on facility and O&M3.11Facility management committee established and commencement of operationsOutput 4: Capacity of EA, IA and Key Stakeholders Enhanced4.1Establish , equip and maintain PMU & PIU Offices4.2Purchase of vehicle and motorcycles4.3National Steering Committee Meetings4.4Bi-annual work planning and review meetings facilitated by PIUs (8 events *1day x 2)4.5Project management training & capacity building for PMU & PIU staff4.6Gender trainings fro PMU, PIU, Consultants & Implementation partners4.7Socio - Economic survey (Midterm & Final)4.8Website development and maintenance4.9Documentary Film2016201720182019 
7 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A.  
Project Implementation Organizations – Roles and Responsibilities 
National  Project  Steering  Committee.  A  high  level  National  Project  Steering 
22. 
Committee  (NSC)  will  be  established  before  project  inception.  The  NSC  will  meet  bi-annually 
and as needed, to provide project oversight, in particular, review project progress, provide policy 
guidance, and facilitate interagency coordination and exchange of lessons. It will be chaired by 
the Union Minister, Ministry of Hotels and Tourism (MOHT). The Committee will include Director 
General, MOHT and the Project Director. The NSC will include representation from the Office of 
the  Chief  Minister  of  Mon  State  (Ministry  for  Planning).  It  will  also  include  other  line  Ministries 
such as the Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Cooperatives, Ministry of Social Welfare, Ministry 
of  Labour  and  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  ADB  will  selectively  participate  in  NSC  meetings. 
Development  partners,  CSOs,  relevant  representatives  from  industries,  academia  or  related 
fields will be invited to participate on occasion, based on need. 
Project  Management  Unit  (PMU).  The  PMU  will  be  established  in  the  project’s 
23. 
executing  agency,  the  MOHT.  The  main  functions  of  the  PMU  will  be  to  ensure  timely  and 
effective project planning, management, coordination, recruitment of consultants,  procurement, 
financial controls, monitoring, and reporting to the government and ADB. The PMU will include 
counterpart  staff  of  the  MOHT:  a  National  Project  Director,  Deputy  Project  Director,  Financial 
Specialist and a project assistant. The PMU will be supported by a consultant team of technical 
and  administrative/financial  specialists.  The  consultant  team  will  help  the  PMU  carry  out 
effective  project  supervision,  monitoring  and  reporting,  provide  technical  inputs,  and  support 
semi-annual  planning  and  review  processes.  Office  space  will  be  provided  within  the  MOHT 
building in Nay Pyi Taw. 
24. 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU). The Office of the Chief Minister for Mon State will 
be the Implementing Agency,  where the PIU will be based. The PIU will  be led by the Project 
Manager from the Department of Planning and a Deputy Project Manager from MOHT. The PIU 
will comprise two Project Coordinators supporting implementation in the four townships and one 
accountant. The PIU will include local line agencies directly relevant to the project, such as the 
Trade  Promotion  Department  (Ministry  of  Commerce),  Small  Scale  Industries  Department 
(Ministry  of  Cooperatives),  General  Administration  Department,  Department  of  Social Welfare, 
the  Department  of  Agriculture,  Department  of  Labour,  and  the  Township  Community 
Development Committee. The PIU will be responsible for coordinating and implementing day-to-
day  project  activities  with  government  interagency  partners,  other  development  partners,  and 
civil society organizations (CSOs). The PIU will be supported by a consultant team of technical, 
administration,  and  finance  specialists.  The  PIU  will  report  to  the  PMU  and  the  Office  of  the 
Chief Minister for Mon State. Office space will be provided by the Office of the Chief Minister. 
25. 
Community  Participation.  Each  participating  village  will  appoint  at  least  four  Village 
Focal  Point  Representatives  (VFPRs)  comprising  at  least  two  women.  The  VFPRs  will 
participate in bi-annual planning and review meetings as well as provide support to coordinators 
to facilitate project activities in the villages. VFPRs must be members of the project-supported 
producer  groups.  This  will  promote  mutual  ownership  of  the  project  work  plans.  Two  weeks 
before 
the  PIU  and  VFPRs  will  review 
accomplishments,  challenges,  and  lessons  learned  before  selecting  activities  for  inclusion  in 
subsequent work plans.  
the  completion  of  each  work  plan  period, 
8 
Stakeholder  Participation.  Project  bi-annual  review  and  planning  meetings  will  be 
26. 
attended by VFPRs, PIU staff, PMU staff, CSOs, development partners and other stakeholders 
directly  collaborating  and  implementing  the  project  activities  to  ensure  good  coordination  and 
synergies.  
The  roles  and  responsibilities  of  entities  managing  implementation  of  the  project  are 
27. 
summarized in Table 3. The project organization structure is presented in Figure 1.  
Table 3: Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Management Entity 
National Project Steering 
Committee 
Roles and Responsibilities 
  Provide policy guidance and advice on project-related issues;  
  Oversee implementation in conformity with the project’s 
Executing Agency (MOHT) 
Project Management Unit 
(embedded within MOHT) 
development objectives and scope;  
  Review overall project outputs and achievement towards project 
impact and outcome;  
  Assist in coordination among national local government agencies 
involved in project implementation and related activities;  
  Review progress and monitoring reports and ensure that 
information on project progress is disseminated to relevant 
government agencies and address any planning and coordination 
issues arising;  
  Facilitate the selection of counterpart staff;  
  Ensure the timely approval of work permits and visas for 
international staff working on the project.  
  Approves the project’s annual work plan and budget;  
  Overall responsibility for the execution of the project;  
  Reviews the project implementation progress;  
  Reviews and endorses any proposed change in the project scope 
or implementation arrangements;  
  Supervises  compliance  with  safeguards  and  other  grant 
covenants;  
  Provides oversight for financial management of the project.  
  Administer the project imprest account for the JFPR grant;  
  Project  preparation,  including  the  establishment  of  financial  and 
management systems and procedures, procurement of equipment, 
management of the project’s imprest account;  
  Prepare, authorize and submit of withdrawal applications 
  Consultant recruitment and supervision;  
  Preparation  and  submission  of  rolling  annual  action  plans, 
consolidating  PMU-led  activities  and  work  plans  received  from 
PIUs to the NPSC;  
  Ensuring compliance with grant covenants and assurances   
  Facilitate  updating  and  coordinate  with  relevant  agencies  for 
approval  of  and  ensure  compliance  with  IEEs/EMPs,  GAP  and 
social safeguards criteria and screening procedures;  
  Tendering, bid evaluation, award/signing of the contract 
  Ensure 
that  applicable  environmental  approval/s  have  been 
obtained from relevant agencies prior to any contract award; 
  Review and approval of goods and civil works contracts, including 
bid documents;  
  Approval of payment to contractors and maintaining disbursement 
records;  
  Coordination between the concerned agencies at the national and 
provincial levels;  
  Coordination of activities of the PIUs and the  inputs  of concerned 
9 
stakeholders;  
  Coordination of all reporting aspects of the project;  
  Coordination of institutional strengthening measures;  
  Administrative and technical support to the PIU;  
  Preparation  of  consolidated  project  accounts  to  be  forwarded  to 
ADB;  
  Coordinate/consolidate  bi-annual  project 
reports, 
including 
safeguards monitoring report for submission to ADB; 
  Coordinate  all  specified  monitoring,  evaluation  and  reporting 
activities;  
  Communicate  project  outcomes,  outputs,  and  activities  to  all 
stakeholders.  
Project Implementation Unit 
(embedded within the Office 
of the Chief Minister for Mon 
State   
  Coordinate  and  support  day–to–day  implementation  of  project 
activities  with  the  multi-sector  government  interagency  partners 
and other development partners and civil society organizations;   
  Provide inputs to help the PMU prepare the project’s rolling annual 
work plans;  
  Coordination  and  supervision  of  consultant  inputs  for  detailed 
design of civil works;  
  Procure good and works; PIU will be a member of the procurement 
committee along with PMU. 
  Coordinate with the relevant agencies and consultants on updating 
the safeguard documents;  
  Obtain applicable environmental approval/s from relevant agencies 
prior to any bidding 
  Conduct  due  diligence  and  prepare 
the  social  safeguards 
checklists  for  each  civil  works  or  infrastructure  upgrading,  to  be 
confirmed  by  the  assigned  staff  of  PMU  prior  to  submission  for 
financing  
  Administer project sub-accounts for the JFPR grant; 
  Approve  payments  and  maintaining  disbursement  records  for  PIU 
managed expenditure;  
that 
  Ensure 
institutional-strengthening  and  capacity-building 
initiatives  involving  SMEs  and  CBOs  are  implemented  in  line  with 
agreed project designs, schedules and budgets;  
ADB 
  Establish/enhance  mechanisms  to  sustainably  finance  operation 
and maintenance of project supported infrastructure;  
  Coordination with all concerned stakeholders;  
  Monitoring  and  quarterly  reporting  on  progress  and 
issues 
(including safeguards compliance) to the PMU.  
  Assists  PMU  with  timely  guidance  at  each  stage  of  project 
implementation following agreed implementation arrangements;  
  Timely review of all documents that require ADB approval;  
  Provide oversight for procurement and consultant recruitment;  
  Twice  yearly  project  review  missions,  midterm  review,  and 
evaluation at project completion;  
  Monitoring compliance of all grant covenants;  
  Timely  processing  of  withdrawal  applications  and  release  of 
eligible funds;  
  Monitoring compliance of financial audit recommendations; 
  Regularly  updates  project  information  disclosure  on  the  ADB 
website.  
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  GAP  =  gender  action  plan,  IEE  =  initial  environmental;  examination,  JFPR  =  Japan  Fund  for 
Poverty  Reduction,  MOHT  =  Ministry  of  Hotels  and  Tourism,  NPSC  =  National  Project  Steering  Committee,  PMU  =  project 
management unit, PIU = project implementation unit, SME = small and medium-sized enterprise. 
10 
28. 
An overview of job descriptions for PMU and PIU counterpart staff are in Table 4. 
Position 
Project Director 
Deputy  Project 
Director  
Financial 
Specialist  
Project 
Assistant 
Project 
Manager  
Table 4: PMU and PIU Staff Job Descriptions 
Job Description 
PMU staff 
The  PMU-based  Project  Director  (PMU-PD)  shall  be  tasked  with  authority  to 
manage  the  overall  project.  The  PMU  PD’s  responsibilities  include:  (i)  approve 
and  endorse  all  financial  transactions  as  the  MOHT’s  legal  representative;  (ii) 
supervise contracts with consultant and suppliers; (iii) act as the focal point for all 
formal MOHT- ADB correspondence; (iv) delegation of authority to another person 
within  the  MOHT  to  sign  documents  on  behalf  of  the  project  in  the  PMU-PD’s 
absence;  (v)  represent  the  project  at  all  high-level  meetings  and  act  as  the 
project’s  focal  point  within  the  MOHT  and  coordinate  with  the  project  National 
Steering  Committee;  (vi)  ensure  project  activities  are  compliant  with  ADB  and 
government safeguard policies and complete safeguards screening and checklist 
in  accordance  with  ADB  safeguards  requirements;  (vi)  supervise  all  consultants’ 
inputs  and  civil  works  and  procurement;  and  (vii)  bi-annual  project  reporting  to 
ADB.  All  counterpart  staff,  individual  consultants  and  institutions,  recruited  to 
assist with project implementation shall report directly to the PMU-PD, unless the 
PMU-PD delegates other PMU/PIU counterpart staff to adopt these functions. The 
PMU-PD will report directly to the DG, MOHT.   
The  PMU-based  Deputy  Project  Director  (DPD)  shall  be  tasked  with  the 
responsibility  to  support  the  PMU-PD  with  the  following  tasks:  (i)  assist  in  the 
supervision  of  all  contracts  with  consultant  and  suppliers  and  project 
implementation  partners;  (ii)  support  and  represent  PMU-PD  as  needed  on  all 
project management and supervision tasks; and (iii) any other tasks as assigned 
by the PMU-PD. The DPD will directly supervise the Financial Specialist and the 
Project Assistant. The DPD reports to the PMU-PD.  
The  PMU-based  Financial  Specialist  (FS)  shall  be  responsible  for  the  overall 
financial  management  of  the  Project,  including:  (i)  create  detailed  annual 
expenditure  budgets  based  on  annual  work  plans;  (ii)  maintain  the  project’s 
imprest  account  and  financial  management  system  in  conformity  with  ADB 
procedures;  (iii)  provide  monthly,  quarterly,  bi-annual  and  annual  financial 
statements  pertaining  to  the  management  of  the  imprest  account;  (iv)  with 
approval  of  the  PMU-PD,  countersign  and  process  eligible  payments  originating 
from the operation of the imprest account; (v) create and maintain the PMU assets 
register; (vi) ensure that the PIU’s  civil works or infrastructure upgrading account 
has ample funds to cover PIU operation costs and all other costs associated with 
PIU  implementation  partner  activities;  (vii)  participate  and  provide  input  into  the 
project’s  bi-annual  work  plans;  and  (viii)  liaise,  monitor  and  keep  abreast  of  all 
project procurement. The FS will report to the PMU-PD and DPD.  
The Project Assistant (PA) shall establish and maintain a filing system as follows: 
(i)  all  data  shall  be  stored  in  hard  and  soft  copy  formats;  (ii)  soft  copy  and 
electronic data shall be backed up to an external hard drive on a daily basis; (iii) 
create soft copies of all signed documents using a scanner so that duplicates may 
be printed  or emailed to recipients  with a  high  degree of efficiency; (iv)  maintain 
records  of  all  correspondence  between  the  ADB,  PMU/PIU,  consultants  and 
suppliers;  and  (v)  maintain  all  PMU  office  equipment  in  good  working  order  – 
including  maintenance  of  electronic  and  IT  equipment.  The  PA  will  report  to  the 
DPD.  
PIU staff 
The  PIU  will  be  led  by  the  PIU  Project  Manager  (PIU-PM)  who  shall  assume 
responsibility  for  implementation  of  activities  in  the  project’s  target  areas  in 
Mawlamyine  and  Kyaikhto  in  Mon  State.  The  PIU-PM  shall  represent  and  lead 
11 
Position 
Deputy  Project 
Manager 
Accountant 
Project 
Coordinators  
(2 positions) 
Interagency 
Member: Trade 
Promotions 
Department 
(TPD), 
Department of 
Commerce  
Job Description 
coordination  between  government  interagency  partners,  consultants  and  other 
project  stakeholders.  The  main  duties  of  the  PIU-PM  are  to  represent  the  Chief 
Minister’s Office and direct and coordinate all implementation activities as outlined 
in  bi-annual  work  plans  and  consultant  TORs  and  procurement  of  works  and 
goods. The PIU-PM shall represent the project at all high-level meetings and act 
as  the  project’s  focal  point  in  the  National  Project  Steering  Committee  and  shall 
report  directly  to  the  PMU-PD  and  the  Minister  for  Planning,  Office  of  the  Chief 
Minister.   
The  Deputy  Project  Manager  (PIU-DPM)  will  assist  the  PIU-PM  direct  and 
coordinate all PIU activities as outlined in annual work plans and consultant TORs. 
Tasks  include:  (i)  assist  the  PIU-PM  to  coordinate  with  interagency  partners  and 
other stakeholders to implement project activities as per the annual work plans; (ii) 
assist in approving all financial transactions originating from the PIU’s sub project 
account within the limits of delegated authority defined by the PMU’s disbursement 
policies;  (iii)  assist  the  PIU-PM  to  act  as  the  focal  point  for  all  correspondence 
between  the  PMU  and  the  PIU;  (iv)  supervise  consultants  and  implementing 
partners and all civil works and procurement of goods; (v) work with the PMU and 
project beneficiaries to undertake annual project activity planning and review; and 
(vi)  complete  social  safeguards  screening  and  checklist  in  accordance  with  the 
ADB SPS requirements. PIU-DPM will report to PIU-PM.  
The PIU Accounting Officer (PIUA) will be responsible for the day-to-day operation 
of the PIU financial management system. Working in collaboration with the PMU’s 
Financial Specialist (PMU-FS), the PIUA will: (i) assist the PMU-FS create detailed 
annual  expenditure  budgets  based  on  annual  work  plans;  (ii)  maintain  the  sub 
project account in Mon State and financial management system in conformity with 
ADB requirements ; (iii) provide monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual financial 
statements  pertaining  to  the  management  of  the  sub  project  account;  (iv)  with 
approval  of  the  PIU-PM/PIU-DM  countersign  and  process  eligible  payments 
originating  from  the  operation  of  the  sub  project  account;  (v)  create  and  maintain 
the  PIU  assets  register;  (vi)  calculate  and  verify  per-diems  and  eligible 
expenditures associated with the delivery of training courses, programs and events 
approved  under  contract  agreements  and  bi-annual  work  plans;  (vii)  ensure  that 
the sub project account has ample funds to cover PIU operation costs and all other 
costs  associated  with  PIU  implementation  partner  activities;  (viii)  participate  and 
provide  input  into  the  project’s  bi-annual  work  plans.  The  PIUA  will  report  to  the 
PIU-DM.  
The  Project  Coordinators  will  assume  responsibility  for  activities  in  the  four 
townships. Tasks include: (i) coordination of project activities in target areas; (ii) act 
as  the  focal  point  within  the  PIU  for  all  matters  related  to  implementation  partner 
support,  including  logistics,  transportation  and  venues  where  training  workshops 
and  events  are  delivered;  (iii)  act  as  a 
its 
consultants/trainers)  and  target  beneficiaries,  community  organizations,  local 
authorities  and  development  partners  to  ensure  clear  communications  between 
various  stakeholders;  and  (iv)  monitor  and  respond  to  communications  between 
the  PIU  and  all  other  project  stakeholders  on  implementation  of  activities  at  the 
township levels. Document, record and file all PIU related documents/ matters. The 
Project Coordinators will report to PIU-DPM.  
Ministry of Commerce is the Chair of the Rural  Small Industry  Development  Sub-
Committee.  Through  the  Sub-Committee  and  in  collaboration  with  the  Rural 
Development Bank, the TPD supports credit provision to small food processing and 
handicrafts  producers.  The  TPD  includes  a  commodity  testing  and  quality  control 
center which provides technical assistance and training related to quality control of 
agricultural  products  and  food  processing.  TPD  also  supports  market  access  for 
SME’s  through  facilitating  participation  at  national  and  international  trade  fairs.  In 
addition, TPD through its 16 offices in regions and states undertakes surveys and 
link  between  the  PIU  (and 
12 
Position 
Interagency 
Member: 
Department of 
Cooperatives 
Interagency 
Member: 
General 
Administration 
Department  
(GAD) 
Interagency 
Member: 
Department of 
Agriculture 
Interagency 
Member: 
Department of 
Social Welfare 
(DSW) 
Interagency 
Member: 
Ministry of 
Labor 
Job Description 
collects  data  on  SMEs.  The  Trade  Promotions  Department  will  support:  (i) 
facilitation of credit access for project producers/ beneficiaries; (ii) the provision of 
technical  advice  and training to  project beneficiaries  on quality standards  on food 
processing;  and  (iii)  market  access  for  producers  through  facilitating  their 
participation  in  trade  fairs.  In  addition,  TPD  will  also  support  collaboration  with 
Ministry of Cooperatives and the Department  of Social Welfare to provide training 
on handicrafts, food processing and business development/management to project 
producers. Detailed collaboration and implementation support arrangements will be 
finalized during the project inception period.  
Department of Cooperatives, through its SME department will collaborate with the 
project to provide training on handicrafts and food processing to project supported 
producers. In addition, the SME department will also support the: (i) registration of 
producers,  and  (ii)  raising  awareness  about  good  business  management.  The 
department  will  also  collaborate  with  local  credit  providers  to  support  affordable 
microfinance.  In  addition,  through  its  Cooperative  Department,  producers  will  be 
provided  business  development/management  and  basic  finance  training.  Detailed 
collaboration and implementation support arrangements will be finalized during the 
project inception period.  
Support  PIU  to  coordinate  with  all  government  interagency  partners,  CSOs,  and 
other  stakeholders  for  the  smooth  implementation  of  the  project.  Detailed 
collaboration and implementation support arrangements will be finalized during the 
project inception period.  
Provide advice and extension services to producers to improve the quality of input 
materials  through  pre-  and  post-harvest  training,  including  raw  materials  for 
handicrafts  and  processed  foods.  In  addition,  the  department  will  support 
dissemination  of  best  practice  on  national  food  safety  procedures.  Detailed 
collaboration and implementation support arrangements will be finalized during the 
project inception period.  
Support  the  PIU  to  provide  basic  business  development  training  to  producers.  In 
addition, DSW foster collaboration with development partners to provide training on 
life  skills,  safe  migration  and  prevention  of  trafficking.  Detailed  collaboration  and 
implementation support arrangements will be finalized during  the project inception 
period. 
Collaborate with PIU, through its Migrant Resource Centre to provide information  
and training on safe migration and life skills that would cover the risk of HIV/AIDS 
and trafficking.  
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DSW = Department of Social Welfare,  MOHT = Ministry of Hotels and Tourism, PMU = project 
management unit, PIU = project implementation unit, SME = small and medium-sized enterprise ToR = Terms of Reference. 
B.  
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Executing Agency  
MOHT 
U Than Win 
Director, Directorate of Hotels and Tourism 
Telephone number:   +95 67406081 
Email address:  mhts.dgmpln@gmail.com 
Office Address: Office No (33), Ministry of Hotels and  Tourism  
Nay Pyi Taw  
ADB 
Country Director  
Mission Leader 
13 
Winfried Wicklein  
Country Director, Myanmar Resident Mission 
Telephone number: 85570123 
Email address: wwicklein@adb.org 
Office address:  Ward Number S-253, Tha Pyay Gone 
Township, Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar 
Uzma S. Hoque 
Senior Social Development Specialist (Gender and 
Development) 
Office of the Director General  
Telephone number: 63 2 632 4040 
Email address: uhoque@adb.org 
Office address: 6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City 1550 
Metro Manila, Philippines 
C.  
Project Organization Structure 
Figure 1: Project Organization Structure 
14 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
29. 
The total project cost is estimated at $3,452,000 equivalent, of which $3,000,000 will be 
financed on a grant basis from the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. The remaining $452,000 
equivalent  will  be  provided  by  the  Government  and  project  recipients  as  in  kind  contributions 
(e.g,  land,  office  space,  counterpart  salaries,  and  time  inputs  of  project  recipients).  Table  5 
presents the tentative financing plan. Detailed cost estimates are in Appendix 11. 
Table 5: Tentative Financing Plan ($ Million) 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.  
Table 5-A:  Project Investment Plan ($ Million) 
Item 
A.  Base Costb 
1. Skills and management capacity of micro and small 
enterprises and their employees developed 
Amounta  Percent 
     0.389  
 11.3  
2. Access to business services, credit and commercial networks 
     0.269  
   7.8  
strengthened 
3. Infrastructure to support access to markets and processing 
     1.084  
 31.4  
facilities improved 
4. Capacity of EA, IA and key stakeholders enhanced 
Subtotal (A) 
B.  Contingenciesc 
Total (A+B) 
 34.9  
     1.202  
 85.4  
     2.948  
 14.6  
     0.504  
     3.452   100.0  
a  In April 2015 prices  
b  Base costs include taxes and duties of $0.302 million to be financed by the JFPR Grant and the Government 
for their specific expenditures. The taxes and duties (i) are within the reasonable threshold identified during 
interim country partnership strategy preparation, (ii) do not represent an excessive share of the project cost, 
(iii) apply only to ADB-financed expenditures, and (iv) are relevant to the success of the project. 
c   Physical contingencies computed at 6% for civil works; and 6% for field research and development, training, 
surveys, and studies. Price contingencies computed at average about 1.2% on foreign exchange costs and 6% 
on local currency costs; includes provision for potential exchange rate fluctuation under the assumption of a 
purchasing power parity exchange rate. 
Source: ADB and the government estimates. 
FinanciersTotalPercentAsian Development Bank (JFPR)3.000      86.9The Government0.440      12.7Communities0.012      0.4Total3.452      100.0 
A.
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Table 6:  Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
15 
 Notes: Other inputs include: PMU/PIU office and utilities, websites development, and language translation 
Source: Government and ADB Staff Estimates.  
B.  
Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds ($ Million) 
Table 7: Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds 
No. 
Item 
Civil Works 
1 
Equipment 
2 
Training, Workshop and Seminars 
3 
4 
Consulting Services 
5  Grant Management 
6  Other Inputs  
7.  Unallocated  
Total 
Source: ADB estimates.  
Total Amount Allocated 
($) 
        0.648  
        0.233  
        0.253  
        1.280  
        0.036  
        0.100  
        0.450 
        3.000  
ADB (JFPR) Financing 
Percentage and Basis for 
Withdrawal from the Grant 
Account 
   100 % of total expenditure claimed 
   100 %  of total expenditure claimed 
   100 %  of total expenditure claimed 
   100 % of total expenditure claimed 
   100 % of total expenditure claimed 
   100 % of total expenditure claimed 
16 
C.  
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier14 ($ Million) 
Table 8: Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier ($ Million) 
Source: Government and ADB Staff Estimates.  
D.  
Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs 
Table 9: Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs 
Source: Government and ADB Staff Estimates.  
14 including in-kind land contribution by the Government as the Detailed Cost Estimates – PAM – Appendix 9  
Items 1. Skills and management capacity of MSEs and their employees developed %2. Access to business services, credit and commercial networks strengthened%3. Infrastructure to support access to markets and processing facilities improved%4. Capacity of EA, IA and key stakeholders enhanced%Total%1Civil Works-                            -  -                           -  0.9181000.00000.91827     - ADB (JFPR)-                            -  -                           -  0.6481000.00000.64819     - The Government-                            -  -                           -  0.27000.00000.2708       2Equipment and Supplies0.018                         8     0.025                       11   0.09830.09350.2337       3Consulting Services0.226                         18   0.112                       9     0.05820.884511.28037     4Trainings, Workshops and Seminars 0.124                         49   0.092                       36   0.00000.03720.2537       5Grant Management -                            -  -                           -  0.00000.1261000.1264       - ADB (JFPR)-                            -  -                           -  0.00000.0361000.0361       - The Government-                            -  -                           -  0.00000.0861000.0862       -Communities-                            -  -                           -  0.00000.0041000.0040       6Other inputs0.021                         16   0.040                       29   0.01100.065470.1384       - ADB (JFPR)0.015                         15   0.040                       40   0.01100.034340.1003       - The Government-                            -  -                           -  0.00000.0311000.0311       -Communities0.006                         100 -                           -  0.00000.00000.0060       Total Base Costs0.389                         13   0.269                       9     1.084371.205412.948      85     Contingencies 0.07                           13   0.05                         9     0.185370.206410.504      15     a. Physical0.02                           0.01                         0.0590.0660.161      b. Price0.05                           0.03                         0.1260.1400.343      Total Project Cost0.456                         26   0.315                       18   1.270                    371.412                  823.452      100    
E.  
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Table 10: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year ($ million) 
17 
Source: Government and ADB Staff Estimates.  
F.
Contract and Disbursement S-curve  
Figure 2: Contract and Disbursement S-curve ($ million) 
Items 2016201720182019Total1Civil Works0.0000.0000.4590.4590.918            - ADB (JFPR)0.0000.0000.3240.3240.648            - The Government0.0000.0000.1350.1350.270            2Equipment and Supplies0.0000.0000.0060.2270.233            3Consulting Services0.3200.3200.6060.0351.281            4Trainings, Workshops and Seminars 0.0560.0590.0380.1010.253            5Grant Management 0.0320.0320.0320.0320.126            - ADB (JFPR)0.0090.0090.0090.0090.036            - The Government0.0220.0220.0220.0220.086            -Communities0.0010.0010.0010.0010.004            6Other inputs0.0340.0340.0340.0340.138            - ADB (JFPR)0.0250.0250.0250.0250.100            - The Government0.0080.0080.0080.0080.031            -Communities0.0020.0020.0020.0020.006            Total Base Costs0.4420.4451.1740.8872.948            Contingencies 0.0750.0760.2010.1520.504            a. Physical0.0240.0240.0640.0480.161b. Price0.0510.0520.1370.1030.343Total Project Cost0.5170.5211.3751.0393.4522016201720182019Contract Awards 0.6721.1413.4523.452Disbursement 0.5171.0382.4133.4520.0000.5001.0001.5002.0002.5003.0003.5004.0002016201720182019DisbursementContract Awards 
18 
G.
Fund Flow Diagram 
Figure 3. Project Fund Flow Arrangements 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A.
Financial Management Assessment 
30. 
This Financial  Management Assessment (FMA)  has been prepared in accordance with 
ADB’s Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects15 (the Guidelines) and 
the  publication  Financial  Due  Diligence:  A  Methodology  Note.16  This  FMA  incorporates  the 
Financial  Management  Internal  Control  and  Risk  Management  Assessment  (―FMICRA‖) 
required  by  the  Guidelines.  The  Financial  Management  Assessment  was  informed  by  the 
Governance  and  Anti-Corruption  Action  Plan  II  PFM  Assessments  at  the  country  and  sector 
level. A FMA Questionnaire was prepared prior to completing the FMA.  
31. 
The  purpose  of  the  assessment  was  to  determine  the  robustness  of  the  accounting, 
financial  controls  and internal  audit  arrangements,  and the  capability  of  the  Executing  Agency 
(EA)  and  the  Implementing  Agency  (IA)  to  meet  fiduciary  requirements  .The  FMA  considers 
MOHT appropriate in its role as the EA; and the Office of the Chief Minister for Mon State will be 
appropriate as the IA for the Project.  
15 Financial Management and Analysis of Projects. ADB. 2005. Refer page 14 of Knowledge Management Addendum 
for more information on the Financial Management Assessment. 
16 Financial Due Diligence A Methodology Note. ADB. 2009. 
19 
32. 
The  assessment  revels  that  both  the  EA  and  IA  have  some  experience  to  deal  with 
donor  funded  projects,  however,  these  were  experiences  are  limited  to  technical  assistance 
projects.  Although  they  have  adequate  internal  control  systems  and  financial  reporting 
arrangements  for  their  regular  budget  and  expenditure  management,  they  will  need  additional 
capacity  development  support  particularly  on  financial  management,  and  procurement  to 
properly  implement  the  Project  to  comply  with  ADB  procedures.  The  summary  FMICRA  is 
reproduced  below.  (For  further  details  please  also  refer  to  detailed  FMA-  risk  and  internal 
control section). 
Risk 
Risk 
Assessment 
Comments 
Inherent Risk 
Country Specific 
High 
Entity Specific 
Substantial 
Project Specific 
Moderate 
PFM system is under-regulated and largely practice-
based, weak management skills and capacity 
budgetary and fiscal information is highly limited and 
Internal control environment is relatively weak 
Lack of institutional and staff capacity to implement and 
monitor donor-funded projects 
Fiduciary risks, particularly for contracting for national 
competitive bidding on equipment and civil works 
related investments. Potential delays in implementation 
since staff of PMU and PIU have no experience with 
ADB financial management and reporting 
requirements. Sustainability and O&M of infrastructure 
assets. 
Overall Inherent Risk 
Control Risk 
Implementing Entity 
     Moderate    
 Substantial  Capacity  on  procurement,  financial  management  and 
reporting need to be strengthened 
Funds Flow 
Staffing 
Substantial 
Substantial 
Policies 
Accounting 
and Procedures 
Internal Audit 
External Audit 
Moderate 
High 
Moderate 
Reporting 
Monitoring 
and 
Substantial 
Overall Control Risk 
Substantial 
Training is required to deal with ADB standardized 
financial management  
The Government Accounting System being used needs 
upgrading to reflect international best practice 
Weak internal audit practices 
OAG  as  the  external  audit  has  no  experience  in 
auditing ADB funded projects   
Potential poor quality of the project financial reports  
33. 
The FMA concludes that staff of MOHT, as the EA, and the Office of the Chief Minister 
of  Mon State as the IA of the Project have adequate education background and experience in 
managing fund flow and other aspects of the financial management of the government regular 
budget. However, significant improvement is required to improve the skills and capacity for the 
EA  and  IA  to  deal  with  fund  flow  management,  financial  analysis,  accounting,  reporting  and 
auditing of the Project since they have no experience with ADB financial management policies 
20 
and  implementation  procedures.  Risk  management  actions  include  measures  to  support 
procurement oversight and strengthen financial management skills have been prepared to avoid 
potential  problems.  These  include:  (i)  the  application  of  standard  ADB  bidding  procedures;  (ii) 
capacity  building  and  training  assistance  for  financial  management  and  procurement  under 
output  4;  (iii)  establishment  of  suitable  accounting  systems;  and  (iv)  embedding  of  long-term 
consultants in the PMU and PIU to provide on the job training for project staff and counterparts 
(v)  The  infrastructure  assets  will  be  managed  through  a  Public,  Private  and  Community 
Partnership  model  (PPCP).  Management,  operation  and  maintenance  plans  with  sustainable 
finance mechanisms will be prepared for both the facilities. Entities and staff tasked with O&M 
will  be  provided  with  capacity  building  and  training  Further,  compliance  with  ADB’s  financial 
management and external audit requirements will be monitored by review missions and regular 
project support. ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and 
discussed  with  the  government  and  MOHT.  The  project  will  also  monitor  prompt  reporting  to 
stakeholders  including  the  quarterly  and  annual  (including  physical  and  financial)  progress 
reports;  compliance  with  grant  covenants;  and  backups  of  all  accounting  systems  and 
appropriate  security  measures  over  backed-up  data  to  be  put  in  place.The  implementation  of 
the  risk  management  measures  identified  above  will  ensure  that  financial  management 
arrangements  are  adequate.  An  assessment  of  the  executing  and  implementing  agencies’ 
capacity  to  undertake  procurement  and  financial  management  envisaged  under  the  project  – 
including  imprest  fund  procedure  has  been  undertaken  and  concluded  that  the  proposed 
implementing arrangement is appropriate 
34. 
The conclusion is based on the additional assessment prepared during the project’s fact 
finding  mission,  conducted  in  April  2015.  Preparation  activities  included  reviewing  documents, 
interviewing  counterparts  and  consultants,  and  discussing  issues  with  stakeholders.  Mitigating 
actions were identified together with counterparts.  
B.
Disbursement 
The  grant  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement 
35. 
Handbook  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),  and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between the Government and ADB.17 
36.  MOHT will establish and administer a separate imprest account in its name. The Office 
of the Chief Minister of Mon State as the Implementing Agency will open a sub-account in Mon 
State to facilitate funds transfer/payments. The total outstanding advance to the imprest account 
should  not  exceed  the  forthcoming  6  months’  planned  expenditure,  and  the  currency  of  the 
account  will  be  in  US  dollars.  The  MOHT  requests  to  ADB,  for  the  initial  and  additional 
advance(s) should be based on planned expenditures for the forthcoming 6 months of  project 
implementation.  Reimbursements  and  liquidation  of  advances  to  the  imprest  account  will  be 
based on full documentation for eligible expenditures. The project sub-account at the state level 
shall  be  operated  by  the  PIU  with  an  amount  equal  to  6  months’  planned  expenditures.  The 
account  will  require  two  signatories,  one  of  whom  shall  be  the  authorized  representative  of 
MOHT. All payments of $50,000 and above will be paid directly from ADB.  
37. 
Both EA and the IAs will be supported by consultants to ensure that they will sufficiently 
manage  the  imprest  and  sub-accounts  for  proper  disbursement  arrangements  of  fund  flow 
through  the  accounts.  The  imprest  account  and  sub-account  are  to  be  used  exclusively  for 
17  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Handbooks/Loan_Disbursement/loan-disbursement-final.pdf 
21 
ADB’s share of eligible expenditures.  The PMU is accountable and responsible for proper use 
of advances to the imprest account, including advances to the sub-account. 
38. 
Assisted by consultants, PMU will also be responsible for preparing the annual contract 
awards  and  disbursement  projections.  It  will  also  be  responsible  in  (i)  requesting  budgetary 
allocations for counterpart funds, (ii) preparation of withdrawal applications, and (iii) sending the 
withdrawal applications to ADB.  
Before the submission of the first withdrawal application, the EA should submit to ADB 
39. 
sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal applications on 
behalf  of  the  Government,  together  with  the  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of  each 
authorized  person.  The  minimum  value  per  withdrawal  application  is  $50,000  equivalent.  
Individual  payments  below  this  amount  should  be  paid  (i)  by  the  EA/IA  and  subsequently 
claimed  to  ADB  through  reimbursement;  and/or  (ii)  from  the  imprest/sub-account,  unless 
otherwise accepted by ADB. 
41.   PMU will provide guidance, especially financial management and accounting skills to the 
staff to ensure their skills are sufficient for the project needs. The effectiveness and efficiency of 
the  disbursement  procedures  will  be  reassessed  during  ADB’s  project  review  missions  and 
actions will be taken to simplify or streamline the processes if deemed appropriate. 
C.
Accounting  
42.  
The  MOHT  will  maintain,  or  cause  to  be  maintained,  separate  books  and  records  by 
funding source for all expenditures incurred on the project. The [executing agency] will prepare 
consolidated project financial statements in accordance with the government's accounting laws 
and regulations which are consistent with international accounting principles and practices.  
The PMU and PIU staff should have the necessary skills to prepare financial reports and 
43.  
claims for reimbursement. As necessary, PMU will provide further guidance on project financial 
and  administrative  procedures  to  refresh  staff  skills  and  knowledge  in  these  areas.  For 
administering the project, the following responsibilities have been performed by different units or 
persons:  (i)  authorization  to  execute  a  transaction;  (ii)  recording  the  transaction;  and  (iii) 
responsibility  for  custody  of  the  asset  involved  in  the  transaction.  Bank  reconciliations  have 
been prepared by a different person from that who approved the payment. The PMU and PIU 
will  develop  an  accounting  system  that  allows  the  proper  recording  of  project  financial 
transactions  including  the  allocation  and  approval  of  expenditures  in  accordance  with  the 
respective components, expenditures/disbursement categories and source of funds.  
44.   Accounting Systems. The PMU and PIU will develop a sound and reliable accounting 
system  to  record  all  financial  transactions  of  the  funding  sources  for  the  expenditures  of  the 
project. The recording and reporting of project expenditures should be consistent with the chart 
of accounts and budget classification of the Government.  
D. Auditing and Public Disclosure 
45.    The MOHT will cause the detailed consolidated project financial statements to be audited 
in  accordance  with  International  Standards  on  Auditing  and  with  the  Government's  audit 
regulations,  by  an  independent  auditor  acceptable  to  ADB.  The  audited  project  financial 
statements will be submitted in the English language to ADB within six months of the end of the 
fiscal year by the MoHT.  
22 
46.  
The annual audit report will include an audit management letter and audit opinions which 
cover (i) whether the project financial statements present a true and fair view or are presented 
fairly,  in all  material  respects,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable financial  reporting framework; 
(ii) whether loan and grant proceeds were used only for the purposes of the project or not; (iii) 
the  level  of  compliance  for  each  financial  covenant  contained  in  the  legal  agreements  for  the 
project;  (iv)  compliance  with  the  imprest  fund  procedure,  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan 
Disbursement Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time) and the project documents. 
47.   Compliance  with  financial  reporting  and  auditing  requirements  will  be  monitored  by 
review  missions  and  during  normal  program  supervision,  and  followed  up  regularly  with  all 
concerned, including the external auditor.  
48.  
The  Government  of  Myanmar,  the  EA  and  the  IA  have  been  made  aware  of  ADB’s 
ADB’s  policy  on  delayed  submission,  and  the  requirements  for  satisfactory  and  acceptable 
quality of the audited project financial statements.18 ADB reserves the right to require a change 
in the auditor (in a manner consistent with the constitution of the Government), or for additional 
support  to  be  provided  to  the  auditor,  if  the  audits  required  are  not  conducted  in  a  manner 
satisfactory  to ADB,  or  if  the  audits  are  substantially  delayed.  ADB  reserves  the  right to verify 
the  project's  financial  accounts  to  confirm  that  the  share  of  ADB’s  financing  is  used  in 
accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures.  
49.   Public  disclosure  of  the  project  financial  statements,  including  the  audit  report  on  the 
project  financial  statements,  will  be  guided  by  ADB’s  Public  Communications  Policy  (2011).19 
After review, ADB will disclose the project financial statements for the project and the opinion of 
the  auditors  on  the  financial  statements  within  30  days  of  the  date  of  their  receipt  by  posting 
them  on  ADB’s  website.  The  Audit  Management  Letter  and  the  Audited  Financial  Statements 
will not be disclosed.  
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A.
Advance Actions  
50.  
The  project  will  conduct  advance  actions  for  recruitment  of  individual  consultants, 
including  the  international  project  start-up  specialist.  The  international  start-up  specialist  will 
assist  the  PMU  to  finalize  the  detailed  ToRs  for  recruiting  the  firm  (Technical  and  Project 
Management Consulting Support Package, TPMCS), including issuing invitation for Expressions 
of Interests, short-listing, issuance of the request for proposals and evaluation of proposals as 
well as hire the other individual consultants. ADB support for advance actions does not commit 
18 ADB Policy on delayed submission of audited project financial statements:  
  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  by  the  due  date,  ADB  will  write  to  the  executing 
agency  advising  that  (i)  the  audit  documents  are  overdue;  and  (ii)  if  they  are  not  received  within  the  next  six 
months,  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  imprest  accounts, 
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will 
withhold  processing  of  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of 
imprest  accounts,  processing  of  new  reimbursement,  and  issuance  of  new  commitment  letters.  ADB  will  (i) 
inform  the  executing  agency  of  ADB’s  actions;  and  (ii)  advise  that  the  loan  may  be  suspended  if  the  audit 
documents are not received within the next six months. 
  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may 
suspend the loan. 
19   Available from http://www.adb.org/documents/pcp-2011?ref=site/disclosure/publications 
23 
ADB to approve the grant project or to finance and costs of  recruitment. Retroactive financing 
will not be used.  
B.
Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
51. 
The  procurement  of  goods  and  works,  and  recruitment  of  consulting  services  will  be 
carried out in accordance with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines ( 2015, as amended from time to 
time)20  and  ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Consultants  (March  2013,  and  as  amended from 
time  to  time).21  ADB  conducted  a  Procurement  Capacity  Assessment  of  the  MOHT,  as  is 
mandated  by  ADB  rules  and  procedures.  Based  on  the  assessment,  the  thresholds  for 
procurement of works and goods as well as consulting services have been agreed upon with the 
Government. Likewise, ADB’s prior review is set forth in the procurement plan. 
C.
Procurement Plan  
Table 11:  Basic Data 
Project Name: Economic Empowerment of the Poor and Women in the East-West Economic Corridor 
Project Number: 48322-001 
Country:  Myanmar 
Project Procurement Classification: B 
Procurement Risk: Moderate  
Project Financing Amount: $ 3,452.000 
Cofinancing (ADB Administered):$ 3,000,000 
Non-ADB Financing: $,452,000 
Date of First Procurement Plan: 7 April 2015 
Approval Number: JFPR xxx-MYA 
Executing  Agency:  Ministry  of  Hotels  and 
Tourism 
Implementing  Agency:  The  Office  of  the 
Chief Minister for Mon State 
Project Closing Date: 31 December 2019 
Date of this Procurement Plan: 7 April 2015 
Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan 
52. 
Procurement  and  Consulting  Methods  and  Thresholds.  Except  as  ADB  may 
otherwise  agree,  the  following  process  thresholds  shall  apply  to  procurement  of  goods  and 
works:  
Table 12: Procurement of Goods and Works - Thresholds 
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Method 
Threshold 
Comments 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) for Works  $3,000,000 
$1,000,000 
International Competitive Bidding for Goods 
Beneath that stated for ICB, Works  Applicable 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) for Works 
Beneath that stated for ICB, Goods  NA 
National Competitive Bidding for Goods 
Below $100,000 
Shopping for Works 
Below $100,000 
Shopping for Goods 
Below 10,000 
Shopping for Goods & Services SOE 
Applicable 
Applicable 
Applicable 
NA 
NA 
Table 13: Consulting Services 
Consulting Services 
Method 
Comments 
20  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Procurement/Guidelines-Procurement.pdf 
21  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Consulting/Guidelines-Consultants.pdf 
24 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS/ QBS)22  
Quality Based Selection 
Consultants’ Qualifications Selection 
Least-Cost Selection 
Fixed Budget Selection 
Single Source Selection (SSS) 
Individual Consultant Selection (ICS) 
Resource Persons (10 days or under) 
Indefinite Delivery 
Applicable 
If NGO is shortlisted  
Applicable 
NA 
NA 
Applicable 
Applicable 
Applicable 
Applicable 
53. 
Goods  and  Works  Contracts  Estimated  to  Cost  $1  Million  or  More.  There  are  no 
goods and works  contracts for  which the  procurement  activities  under  this  category  are  either 
ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
54. 
Consulting  Services  Contracts  Estimated  to Cost  $100,000 or  More.  The following 
table  lists  consulting  services  contracts  for  which  the  recruitment  activity  is  either  ongoing  or 
expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Table 14: Consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Recruitment 
Method 
$320,000 
ICS 
$112,000 
ICS 
Review 
(Prior / 
Post) 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Prior 
Prior 
Q4/2015 
Q4/2015 
Type of 
Proposal8 
Comments 
Bio-data 
Individual 
Bio-data 
Individual 
IC - 01 
IC - 02 
F - 01 
International 
Team Leader  
International 
Business 
Development 
Specialist  
Technical and 
Project 
Management 
Support 
Package  
$516,250 
QCBS/QBS
23 
Prior 
Q1/2016 
STP 
Firm and/or 
NGO 
consortium  
90:10  
55. 
Goods  and  Works  Contracts  Estimated  to  Cost  Less  than  $1  Million  and 
Consulting  Services  Contracts  Less  than  $100,000  (Smaller  Value  Contracts).  The 
following  table groups smaller-value  goods,  works  and consulting  services  contracts for  which 
the activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Goods and Works 
Package 
Number5 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
CW – 01  Market 
437,500 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
1 
CW – 02 
construction 
Processing 
center 
Consulting Services 
210,000 
1 
Table 15  
Procurement 
Method 
NCB 
NCB 
Review 
[Prior/Post 
(Sample)] 
Prior 
Bidding 
Procedure6 
1S/1E 
Advertisement 
Date (quarter/ 
year) 
Q4/2016 
Post 
1S/1E 
Q4/2016 
Comments
7 
Small 
works 
Small 
works 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Recruitment 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Advertisement 
Date (quarter/ 
year) 
Type of 
Proposal8 
Comments9 
22 QBS selection in case NGOs are invited to submit a proposal.  
23 QBS will used in case NGOs are invited to submit a proposal.  
25 
IC – 03 
IC – 04 
IC – 05 
International 
Start-up 
Specialist   
PMU 
Accountant  
PIU 
Accountant  
External 
Auditor  
28,875 
126,000 
80,000 
40,000 
1 
1 
1 
1 
ICS 
Prior 
Q4/2015 
Bio-data 
Individual 
ICS 
ICS 
SSS 
Prior  
Prior  
Q4/2015 
Bio-data 
Individual 
Q4/2015 
Bio-data 
Individual 
Prior 
Q2/2016 
Office of 
Auditor 
General 
For out of 
pocket 
expenses  
only 
Indicative List of Packages Required Under the Project 
56. 
The  following  table  provides  an  indicative  list  of  goods,  works  and  consulting  services 
contracts over the life of the project, other than those mentioned in previous sections (i.e., those 
expected beyond the current period). 
Table 16: Indicative List of Goods, Works and Consulting Services Contracts 
Goods and Works 
Package 
Number5 
General Description 
G – 01 
G – 02 
G – 03 
G – 04 
G – 05 
G – 06 
G – 07 
Motor vehicle and 
motorcycle  
Equipment and fit out 
for market at 
Mawlamyine. 
Equipment and fit out 
for 1 multi-product 
processing center  
Processing and 
production equipment 
for home based 
producers & retailers 
Website development 
and maintenance  
Packaging, labeling & 
branding materials for 
producer/retailer 
products 
Promotional brochures, 
posters and other 
printed and visual 
media 
OC - 02  Graphic Design Agency 
for Brand Guidelines & 
Usage 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
(cumulative) 
Estimated 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
[Prior / 
Post/Post 
(Sample)] 
Bidding 
Procedure6 
Comments7 
39,000 
25,000 
45,000 
28,000 
9,900 
5,000 
20,000 
20,000 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Shopping 
Prior 
Quotation 
PMU 
Shopping 
Post 
Quotation 
PMU 
Shopping 
Post 
Quotation 
PMU 
Shopping 
Post 
Quotation 
PMU 
Shopping 
Post 
Quotation 
PMU 
Shopping 
Post 
Quotation 
PMU 
Shopping 
Post  
Quotation 
PMU 
Shopping 
Post 
Quotation  
List of Awarded, On-going, and Completed Contracts  
57. 
There are no awarded and on-going contracts, and completed contracts. 
26 
Non-ADB Financing 
There  will  be  no  goods,  works  and  consulting  services  contracts  over  the  life  of  the 
58. 
project, financed by non-ADB (JFPR) sources.  
National Competitive Bidding 
59. 
General. The procedures to be followed for national competitive bidding shall be those 
set  forth  in  ADB’s  standard  bidding  documents,  with  the  clarifications  and  modifications 
described  in  the  following  paragraphs  required  for  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  ADB’s 
Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time).  
Application. Contract packages subject to national competitive bidding procedures will 
60. 
be  those  identified  as  such  in  the  project  procurement  plan.  Any  changes  to  the  mode  of 
procurement  from  those  provided  in  the  procurement  plan  shall  be  made  through  updating  of 
the procurement plan, and only with prior approval of ADB.  
61. 
Eligibility.  Bidders  shall  not  be  declared  ineligible  or  prohibited  from  bidding  on  the 
basis  of  barring  procedures or  sanction  lists,  except  individuals  and  firms  sanctioned  by  ADB, 
without prior approval of ADB.  
62. 
 Advertising. Bidding of national competitive bidding contracts estimated at $500,000 or 
more for goods and related services or $1,000,000 or more for civil works shall be advertised on 
ADB’s website via the posting of the procurement plan.  
63. 
Anticorruption. Definitions of corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, and coercive practices shall 
reflect  the  latest  ADB  Board-approved  Anticorruption  Policy  definitions  of  these  terms  and 
related  additional  provisions.    ADB  reserves  the  right  to  investigate,  directly  or  through  its 
agents, any violations of the Anticorruption Policy relating to the Project.   All  contracts  financed 
by  ADB  shall  include  provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records 
and  accounts  of  the  executing  agency  and  all  Project  contractors,  suppliers,  consultants  and 
other service providers. Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible 
to participate in ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project.    
The Borrower shall reject a proposal for award if it determines that the bidder recommended for 
award  has,  directly  or  through  an  agent,  engaged  in  corrupt,  fraudulent,  collusive,  or  coercive 
practices  in  competing  for  the  contract  in  question.  ADB  will  declare  a  firm  or  individual 
ineligible, either indefinitely or for a stated period, to be awarded a contract financed by ADB, if 
it at any time determines that the firm or individual has, directly or through an agent, engaged in 
corrupt,  fraudulent,  collusive,  or  coercive  practices  in  competing  for,  or  in  executing,  ADB-
financed contract.  
Rejection of all Bids and Rebidding. Bids shall not be rejected and new bids solicited 
64. 
without ADB’s prior concurrence.  
65. 
Bidding Documents. ADB’s standard bidding documents will be used. 
66.   Member  Country  Restrictions.    Bidders  must  be  nationals  of  member  countries  of 
ADB; and offered goods, works, and services must be produced in and supplied from member. 
Terms of Reference of Consultants  
The  total  consulting  service  requirements  are  an  estimated  217  person-months  (37 
67. 
person-months  international  and  180  person-months  national  consultants  and  include  (i) 
Individual  Consultants;  and  (ii)  Technical  and  Project  Management  Support  (through  a  firm). 
External audit will be conducted by the Office of Auditor General (OAG) on lumpsum basis (on 
annual basis for 4 years).  
27 
68. 
Table 17 shows the summary of consultants’ inputs. 
No 
Expertise 
Table 17: Summary of Consultant Inputs 
1 
2 
3 
International Consultants 
Individuals  
International Start-up Specialist  
International Team Leader 
International Business Development Specialist 
Firm 
International Environment Specialist  
International Social Development Specialist 
4 
5 
National Consultants 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Individuals 
National PMU Accountant 
National PIU Accountant 
Firm 
National Deputy Team Leader  
National Handicrafts Training Specialist  
National Food Processing Training Specialist 
National Civil Engineer (design and construction supervision) 
External Auditor  
 12 
Office of the Auditor General (lumpsum) 
(A)  International Individual Consultants  
International Start-Up Specialist (3 person-months intermittent) 
Person-Months 
37 
 3 
20 
7 
2 
5 
180 
42 
40 
42 
22 
22 
12 
69. 
The International Start-up Specialist (ISS) will be recruited by the ADB through Individual 
Consultant Selection (ICS) to assist  MOHT recruit the other individual consultants and the Firm. 
The  ISS  will  produce  the  detailed  advertisement  for  consulting  services,  EOI,  RFP  templates, 
evaluation and selection matrices and any other task related to the recruitment of the firm for this 
project. The ISS will also assist the MOHT prepare and evaluate first year bidding documents for 
the project vehicle and project office equipment, and provide training to the EA/IA and PMU and 
PIU  accountant/  consultant  on  setting  up  financial  management  systems  and  on  ADB 
procurement and financial management procedures.  
Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  A  post-graduate  degree 
70. 
in  project 
management, international development, finance or other such disciplines is required. At least 7 
years’ of experience assisting EA-ADB finance and procurement for ADB and/or ODA projects.  
International Team Leader (20 person-months intermittent) 
71.  
The  International  Team  Leader  (ITL)  will  assume  primary  responsibility  for  overseeing 
implementation  of  the  entire  project  including  management  and  coordination  of  overall 
28 
assessments, strategy development, input into output design, supervision of consultants’ delivery 
of activities and outputs and monitoring. In undertaking the assigned project management tasks, 
the ITL will coordinate with appropriate PMU/PIU staff and work closely with and be supported 
by the National Deputy Team Leader (NTL). Specific tasks include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Provide  on  the  job  management  training  for  counterpart  staff  and  assist  them 
monitor the  project’s financial  accounts,  procurement  activities,  and  reporting  to 
ADB and the Government;  
In  coordination  with  the  NTL  and  in  close  coordination  with  the  PMU  and  PIU, 
develop  and  monitor  rolling  annual  work  plans,  budgets,  and  monitor  activity 
implementation;  
Draft detailed terms of reference for consulting services and supply of goods;  
Supervise and coordinate the work of the international and national consultants, 
and ensure that the consultants’ outputs are in accordance with agreed Terms of 
Reference and project requirements; 
Prepare  and  regularly  review  the  consultants’  personnel  schedule  to coordinate 
PMU,  PIU  and  international  and  national  consultants’  inputs  and  respond  to 
changing project circumstances if and when these occur; 
Supervise  the  development  and  implementation  of  project  financial  monitoring 
and reporting activities; 
Supervise  and  contribute  to  the  design  of  training  programs  for  sustainable 
operations and maintenance of facilities constructed by the project; 
(ix) 
(x) 
(viii)  Oversee  and  provide  inputs  into  all  assessments  and  studies,  including  value 
chain analysis, training needs assessment, market study and baseline, mid-term 
and end project reviews;  
Prepare civil works bidding documents and bid evaluation reports;  
Set up a project monitoring framework based on the project design and monitoring 
framework and guide and coordinate with PMU, PIU, and consultants in monitoring 
project  performance,  including  implementation  of  the  gender  action  plan  on  a  bi-
annual basis;  
In  cooperation  with  the  NTL  take  the  lead  in  reviewing,  and  consolidating  all 
consultant’s  reporting  submissions  and  preparation  and  consolidation 
into 
integrative  high  quality  reports  in  accordance  with  agreed  reporting  schedules, 
including  quarterly  and  bi-annual  progress  reports,  to  be  submitted  to  ADB  on 
behalf of the EA; 
(xi) 
(xii)  Coordinate  with  development  partners  including  international  and  local  NGOs, 
social enterprises and community based organizations;  
(xiii)  Share  lessons  learned  from  similar  MSE  and  rural  development  projects  in  the 
handicrafts, food processing and small scale agricultural sectors; 
(xiv)  Participate in semi-annual planning and review meetings;  
(xv)  Support  the  PMU  and  PIUs  with  compliance  with  ADB  Grant  covenants, 
assurances, as well as with national and provincial policies and regulations; 
(xvi)  Ensure  project  activities  are  compliant  with  ADB  and  government  safeguard 
policies and complete safeguards screening and checklist in accordance with the 
ADB SPS requirements;  
(xvii)  Draft  the  management,  operation  and  maintenance  plans  for  the  craft  and 
souvenir market and processing facility; 
(xviii)  Participate  in  and  assist  with  the  implementation  of  project  activities  including 
reasonably 
training,  meetings  and  exposure 
trips  as 
community-based 
requested; and 
(xix)  Undertake  other  specific  technical  management  inputs  where  these  may  be 
required. 
29 
and 
Experience:  Master’s 
Preferred  Qualifications 
72. 
business 
development/management  or  related  field.  At  least  10  years’  experience  in  managing  MSE 
development  projects,  in  particular,  experience  in  managing  community  based  and  women 
that  address  value  chain 
focused  enterprise  development/  poverty  reduction  projects 
enhancements, MSME development and market access. An understanding of the political, social 
and  cultural  environment  in  Myanmar  would  be  an  advantage.  Knowledge  of  ADB  and/or  ODA 
project administration procedures and experience of implementing projects financed by the Japan 
Fund  for  Poverty  Reduction  would  be  an  asset.  The  ITL  should  have  understanding  and  skills 
related to gender and development issues.  
degree 
The  ITL  will  report  to  the  EA’s  Project  Director  and  will  be  based  in  Mawlamyine,  with 
73. 
frequent travel to Nay Pyi Taw (NPT).  
International Business Development Specialist (7 person-months intermittent) 
The  International  Business  Development  Specialist  (IBDS)  will  design,  undertake  and 
74.  
support the (i) value chain assessment, (ii) market research and prepare marketing strategy, (iii) 
business  development  services  program;  (iv)  credit  and  micro-finance  program  and  (v)  brand 
development and implementation. The key tasks for these deliverables are detailed below:   
75. 
Key  tasks  for  the  VCA  with  support  from  VCA/  survey  team:  The  focus  of  the 
analysis should be to assess how to maximize employment and income gains for women. The 
consultant  will  map  the  craft  and  local  food  supply  chain  from  target  villages,  including  actors 
involved disaggregated by gender. The study will (a) evaluate the market potential of craft and 
other local product supply chains; (b) estimate spending patterns of international and Myanmar 
tourists;  (c)  assess  opportunities  to  increase  benefits  to  project  beneficiaries  by  developing 
products  and  services  that  respond  to  market  demand;  (d)  identify  the  constraints  project 
beneficiaries  face  in  access  to  opportunities  and  adding  value  to  their  products;  (e)  identify 
training  needs  of  project  benefits  to  help  them  overcome  these  constraints  and  provide 
recommendations  to  the  project’s  MSE  training  programs;  and  (f)  provide  advice  on  the 
development of market linkages. 
76. 
Key  tasks  for  the  market  research  and  strategy:  The  market  research  and  strategy 
will  involve  a  detailed  assessment  of  consumer  preferences  and  demand  for  locally  produced 
handicrafts  and  processed  foods  -  specifically  targeting  national  and  international  tourist 
markets. From the market assessment, a five-year marketing strategy will be drafted to ensure 
producers  and  retailers  adequately  respond  to  both  consumer  preferences  and  demand.  The 
marketing  strategy  will  provide  the  necessary  guidance  for  technical  training  and  business 
development specialist to ensure that specific sub-project designs are driven by proven market 
demand. The market survey and strategy will include the following tasks:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Conduct  desktop  research  and  interviews  to  determine  exactly  where  authentic 
Myanmar  souvenirs,  including  handicrafts  and  processed  foods,  fit  within  the 
context of souvenirs produced and sold in neighboring GMS countries;  
Through  retailer  and  wholesaler  interviews  in  Yangon,  determine  the  top  10 
selling  souvenirs  purchased  by  international  and  national  tourists  over  the  last 
two years in Yangon and Mon State;  
Design  and  conduct  tourist  surveys  to  determine  consumer  preferences  and 
demand in respect to Myanmar souvenirs. Survey will be conducted with tourists 
visiting  Yangon,  MLM  and  Kyaikhto  and  record  the  age,  gender,  nationality, 
30 
77. 
(iv) 
(v) 
occupation and other relevant bio-data to determine preferences and demand for 
specific segments of the tourist market;  
Create  an  inventory  of  locally  produced  souvenirs,  concentrating  on  handicrafts 
and processed foods that meet the purchasing criteria specified by tourists;  
Using  the  inventory  of  locally  produced  souvenirs,  provide  an  assessment  of 
opportunities  for  redesigning  and  creating  new  designs/  product  lines  which  fit 
with demand from the tourist market;  
(vi)  Where there are constraints to tailoring products to tourist demand, indicate the 
(vii) 
nature of these constraints and strategies to meet market demand;  
Identify  the  top  10  souvenir  outlets  in  Yangon,  the  top  selling  outlets  in 
Mawlamyine and the top selling outlets in Kyaikhto and describe the competitive 
advantage  and  particular  characteristics  that  these  outlets  have  developed  to 
maintain their position as market leaders for the sale of tourist souvenirs; and  
(viii)  Ensure that the five-year marketing plan for locally produced souvenirs provides 
a step-by-step action plan complete with cost estimates for proposed marketing 
and promotion activities that will feed into the projects branding strategy for Mon 
State. 
Key tasks for the business development services program:  
(i) 
Develop  or  adapt  appropriate    modules that  include:  (a)  basic  financial  literacy; 
(b)  basic  accounting;  (c)  basic  debt  management;  (d)  basic,  intermediate  and 
advanced  business  plans  which  will  include  financial  projections  (expense-
revenue  and  net  profits,  marketing  plans  specific  to  the  target  markets  and 
operations and resourcing plans that demonstrate the viability of the enterprise;  
Deliver  individual  courses  and  workshops. These  courses will  also  be  delivered 
through engaging local trainers and resource persons; depending on location and 
course complexity.   
Implement  systematic  methods  to  assist  producers  and  traders  to  develop  and 
complete business plans and;  
Provide specific advice  and diagnostics to individual enterprises to increase the 
businesses performance.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Key tasks for the credit and micro-finance component: The micro-credit component 
78. 
has two main focus areas, which will be tailored for various supply chain actors that include raw 
materials suppliers, producers, retailers, traders and distributors. Key activities include:  
(ii) 
(i)  Conducting  workshops  to  explain  the  general  procedures  and  criteria  for 
accessing  affordable  credit  through  independent  savings  and  credit  groups  and 
micro-credit providers;  
Provide  a  list  of  local-state-national  micro  credit  providers  and  pro-poor  banks 
and MFIs and the terms offered by these providers;  
Train  and  assist  beneficiaries  in  preparing  business  plans  to  be  submitted  to 
appropriate credit providers (noting that larger SMEs will have different needs to 
MSEs);  
(iii) 
(iv)  Once  applications  are  lodged  with  micro-credit  providers  support  the  NTL 
complete  the  process,  acquire  funds  and  apply  funds  as  stipulated  under 
individual grant agreements.  
The second micro-credit component aims to assist producer-retailer groups and 
other supply chain actor groups establish independent savings and credit groups. 
The  IBDS  will  assist  the  NTL  to  establish the  and  launch  the  system  which  will 
include  establishing  groups  and  group-rules,  application,  processing, 
(v) 
31 
disbursement  and  collection  procedures  complete  with  instruction  guides  and 
manuals.  
79. 
Key  tasks  for  the  brand  development  and  implementation:  For  the  brand 
development and brand implementation component of the project, the IBDS will be responsible 
for  facilitating  the  development  and  implementation  of  a  ―Made  in  Mon,  Myanmar‖  tourist 
souvenirs brand through drafting a comprehensive five-year branding strategy. The Mon State 
brand  strategy  will  be  developed  in  the  context  of  a  future  national  brand  for  Myanmar  and 
adopt the branding architectural hierarchy used international in the tourism sector. The IBDS will 
support a multi-sector stakeholder-working group, representing the brand owners, to determine 
an  appropriate  brand  image  for  Mon  State.  The  multi-sector  stakeholder-working  group  will 
comprise of  representatives  from  Mon  State government  departments (including  those directly 
involved  with  trade  promotion  and  SME  development)  development  agencies,  tourism  sector 
representatives, manufacturers, producers, retailers, wholesalers and distributors. The IBDS will 
work  in  collaboration  with  the  brand  owners  to  define  the  scope,  use  and  sustainability  of  the 
branding initiative.  
80.   Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  Post  graduate  degree 
in  business 
development/  management  and  marketing.  The  consultant  will  have  at  least  seven  years  of 
practical experience training and implementing savings and micro-credit schemes for the urban 
and rural poor and especially women, and demonstrated ability and experience in implementing 
a marketing and branding program. 
(B)  National Individual Consultants  
National Accountant - PMU (42 months intermittent) 
81. 
The  National  Accountant  (PMU)  will  assume  responsibility  to  establish  and  maintain 
appropriate  financial  management,  and  administration  systems  for  the  EA  and  IA  and  in 
conformance with ADB and government financial  accounting  standards. The  NFAP  will  be  the 
primary  focal  point  for  control  and  maintenance  of  financial  management  and  administration 
systems;  and  where  determined  by  ADB  and  the  EA,  execute  and  supervise  procurement  of 
goods, services and civil works packages and recruitment of individual consultants and resource 
persons. The PMU accountant will be based in the MOHT project office in Nay Pyi Taw. Specific 
tasks include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Develop  and  maintain  project  accounting  systems  consistent  with  government 
and ADB accounting standards and procedures;  
Provide  quarterly,  bi-annual  and  annual  financial  reports  to  the  EA  and  ADB 
consistent with both government and ADB reporting processes and procedures in 
Burmese and English;  
Specific  reporting  will  include  financial  statements  for  the  project’s  chart  of 
accounts, imprest account disbursements, grant funds received and imprest fund 
replenishments,  Withdrawal  applications  submitted,  processing  of  direct 
payments to suppliers as well as other project transactions; 
Using the ADB’s Statement of Expenditure (SOE) procedures, assist the PMUT 
prepare  SOEs  and  supporting  documentation  for  submission  to  ADB  through 
withdrawal applications;  
Prepare withdrawal applications on a regular basis to ensure the imprest account 
is sufficiently replenished and adequate cash flows are maintained at all times;  
Train  counterpart  project  staff  on  the  use  and  operation  of  the  project  financial 
management , accounting, reporting and administration systems;  
32 
Preparation of periodic reports as required;  
(vii) 
(viii)  Supervise and support the PIU’s accountant  for operation of the PIU’s financial, 
  minor 
accounting  and  administration  systems;  and  where  necessary 
procurement activities;  
Facilitate the efficient transfer of funds from the project’s imprest fund to the PIU’s 
subnational  bank  account  for  efficient  payment  of  local  suppliers,  PIU  operating 
costs and other eligible expenditures;  
Monitor  and  update  disbursements  projections  based  on  the  project’s  rolling  bi-
annual work plans and procurement plans;  
Review  bi-annual  activity  plans  and  ensure  budget  allocations  and  planned 
disbursements are adequately harmonized and;  
Assist the EA prepare external annual audits and submit to ADB with 6 months of 
the end the project’s financial year.  
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  Degree 
82. 
financial 
management, business administration or similar and at least 7 years of experience in managing 
project/business  financial  management  systems.  Experience  with  ADB  and/or  ODA  financial 
management,  administration  and  procurement  systems  and  procedures  will  be  a  distinct 
advantage.  
in  accounting, 
National Accountant - PIU (40 months intermittent) 
83. 
The National Accountant (PIU) will assume responsibility for operating and maintaining 
the subnational financial management, administration and procurement systems for the IA. S/he 
will  assist  the  PMU  accountant  to establish,  harmonize and manage the  required  systems,  as 
well as provide on the job training to the PIU’s financial management counterpart staff. The PIU 
accountant will work under supervision and report directly to the PMU accountant. S/he will copy 
all  relevant  communications  with  the  PMUs  Financial  Specialist  and  the  PMU  Accountant  to 
ensure  clear  communications  from  the  IA  to  the  EA  and  Firm  at  all  times.  S/he  will  assist  the 
PMU accountant initiate and complete all of the tasks described in the PMU accountant’s TOR. 
84.   Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  Degree 
financial 
management, business administration or similar and at least 7 years of experience in managing 
project/business  financial  management  systems.  Experience  with  ADB  and/or  ODA  financial 
management,  administration  and  procurement  systems  and  procedures  will  be  a  distinct 
advantage. S/he will be based in the project office in Mawlamyine, in Mon state.  
in  accounting, 
(C)  Firm - Technical and Project Management Support Package (TPMS) 
85. 
The  TPMS  package  will  be  recruited  through  a  firm  using  the  quality-and  cost-based 
selection  (QCBS/QBS)  method  with  standard  quality  ratio  of  90:10  and  shall  conform  to  ADB 
procedures. The firm will possess adequate qualifications, expertise and experience to perform 
the services. 
86. 
General Requirements for the Consulting Firm 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Eligible to provide consulting services to ADB and/or ODA funded Projects;  
Have legal status (public or private), operating under Enterprise Law;  
Have  business  registration  or  decision  to  specify  appropriate  business  fields 
according to the required contents of the consultancy package;  
At least five (5) years working experience in related areas; 
33 
(v) 
(vi) 
Have  performed  at  least  three  (3)  similar  Contracts  during  the  last  three  (3) 
years;  of  which  at  least  one  similar  contract  relating  to  the  supporting  MSME 
development; 
Priority for experience in performing consulting services on safeguard policies for 
grant project funded by 5 banks including: ADB, WB, AFD, JBIC and KFW; and 
(vii)  Have essential financial capacity.  
International Consultants to be engaged through the Firm  
International Environment Specialist (2 person-months intermittent) 
87. 
The international environmental consultant will:  
(i) 
Be  familiar  with  application  of  ADB  safeguard  policies  as  elaborated  in  ADB’s 
Safeguard Policy Statement;  
Prepare  the  needed  environmental  assessment  reports  as  may  be  required 
under  ADB’s  SPS  (2009)  and/or  government  requirements.  The  report/s  will  be 
submitted to government for approval and subsequent endorsement to ADB. The 
report/s  will 
(IEE)  and 
Environmental  Management  Plans  (EMPs),  as  may  be  required,  for  use  during 
construction  of  the  facilities  and  environmental  management  thereafter.  The 
environmental assessment process is described in detail in the EARF;  
Assist 
in  obtaining 
permits/clearances/approval prior to contract award; 
the  applicable  government  environmental  
Initial  Environmental;  Examination 
include  an 
the  PMU 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv)  Work closely with the civil engineer to review the contractor’s EMP which will be 
(v) 
included in the NCB bidding and shopping for works documents;  
Prepare a checklist and reporting system to be used by the project team and civil 
engineer  to  monitor  the  contractor’s  implementation  and  compliance  with  the 
EMP and mitigation measures during project implementation.  
88. 
Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  Degree  in  environmental  management, 
science  or  engineering  or  equivalent  environmental  discipline  and  have  at  least  five  years  of 
experience in conducting IEE and preparation of IEE reports/EMP for ADB  and/or ODA projects 
as  well  as  knowledge  of  the  EIA  system  in  Myanmar.  The  ability  to  write  clearly  in  English 
language is required.   
International Social Development Specialist (5 person-months intermittent)  
89. 
The  Social  Development  Specialist  will  establish  baseline  conditions  at  inception, 
undertake a mid-term evaluation at 18 months after project inception, and prepare the final impact 
assessment  two  months  prior  to  completion  of  the  project.  She/he  will  provide  training  for  PMU 
and  PIU  staff  on  monitoring  the  projects  gender  action  plan  and  assist  to  prepare  social 
safeguards screening for infrastructure subprojects. She/he will be assisted by national research 
assistants. The key tasks include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Select poverty, social and gender indicators that will be used to measure poverty 
reduction impacts and social benefits over the life of the project;  
Provide on the job training for gender monitoring for PMU / PIU staff;  
Conduct three separate household surveys of 250 households (direct beneficiaries 
=  200  Control  =  50)  at  baseline,  midterm  and  project  completion  to  evaluate  the 
impact of project assisted beneficiaries; 
34 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Provide  detailed  longitudinal  economic  analysis  of  12  individual  MSEs  (direct 
beneficiaries)  in  the  project  area  measured  at  inception,  midterm  and  project 
completion;  
For the 12 MSEs selected, provide individual case studies for each to quantify the 
impact of project support services;  
Assist  the  PMU  and  PIU  conduct  safeguards  screening  for  civil  works  and 
infrastructure upgrading;  
(vii)  Develop guidelines for ensuring participation of the poor during implementation, 
and its monitoring.  
in 
(ix) 
(viii)  During the mid-term evaluation and at project completion, highlight the challenges 
and  successes  experienced  by  the  project  team and  beneficiaries,  At  the  time of 
the midterm evaluation, suggest improvements to expedite the outcome and output 
levels of the project for the remaining period of implementation;  
At  the  time  of  the  mid-term  evaluation  and  project  closure  assess  the  project’s 
effectiveness 
interaction,  mobilization, 
participation,  and  changes  in  social  capital  and  the  degree  of  beneficiary 
ownership of interventions provided by the project;  
Assess  the  extent  to  which  knowledge  and  skills  acquired  by  direct  beneficiaries 
through the project has been shared with others in their communities;  
Assess  the  impact  of  the  project  on  gender  attitudes  and  gender  relations  in  the 
project’s target areas;  
Assess the effectiveness of the project’s community-led approach to MSE support 
and development;  
facilitating  community 
terms  of 
(xii) 
(xi) 
(x) 
(xiii)  Provide  an  assessment  and  execution  of  the  project’s  sustainability  and  exit 
strategy; and 
(xiv)  Assist the ITL to monitor and guide implementation of the gender action plan. 
90. 
Preferred Qualifications and Experience: University degree in applied social sciences 
including survey design, poverty and social impact analysis and evaluations and at least 5 years’ 
experience in designing socio-economic surveys, selecting appropriate poverty and social impact 
indicators, preparing baseline surveys, midterm review, and final project evaluations.  
National Consultants to be engaged through the Firm 
National Deputy Team Leader (42 person-months intermittent)  
The National Team Leader (NTL) will be based in Mawlamyine in Mon state and stationed 
91. 
at the Project Implementing Unit office. The NTL will assist the ITL to manage and implement the 
project,  including  overall  supervision  of  the  international  and  national  consultants.  The  NTL  will 
support  the  PIU  and  Project  Coordinators  implement,  coordinate  and  provide  day-to-day 
substantive inputs and logistical support for all workshops, seminars trainings and events. Specific 
tasks include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Support  the  PIU  and  Village  Focal  Point  Representatives  (VFPRs)  conduct  bi-
annual planning and review meetings; 
Support ITL to supervise all international and national consultants and oversee all 
studies and assessments 
Conduct  village-based  awareness  seminars  on  consumer  preferences, 
establishment of producer groups and other MSE support activities;  
Coordinate and ensure the successful implementation of all training activities 
35 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
fairs, 
trade 
in  organizing 
local  product  exhibitions,  and 
learning 
Assist 
programs/exchange  visits  for  raw  materials  suppliers,  producers,  traders  and 
retailers;  
Advise  on  the  creation  and  distribution  of  promotional  media  and  supervise  the 
maintenance of the projects website;  
Advise  the  project  implementation  team  in  Mawlamyine  on  sound  project 
management procedures. 
(ix) 
(viii)  Assist  the  ITL  in  monitoring  project  implementation  and  prepare  draft  quarterly 
project  progress  reports  for  submission  to  the  project  Director  for  review  and 
finalization before onward submission to ADB and the Government;  
 Assist  in  overseeing  social  and  environmental  safeguards  compliance    and 
preparing checklist in accordance with the ADB SPS requirements; and 
Support  the  business  development  specialist  in all  activities  related  to  business 
development,  micro-credit,  marketing,  and  brand  development  and 
implementation. 
(x) 
Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  Degree  in  enterprise  development  and 
92. 
marketing.  Experience  in  managing  or  assisting  community-based  women  led  micro-enterprise 
development  projects.  At  least  5  years  of  in-country  experience  in  Myanmar.  Excellent  English 
and  Burmese  language  skills  with  Mon  language  skills  would  be  a  distinct  advantage.  The  NTL 
will have at least basic gender training or experience with MSE and women led enterprises.  
National Handicrafts Training Specialist (22 person-months intermittent) 
The National Handicrafts Training Specialist will assume overall responsibility and vision 
93. 
for  designing  new  products  and  enhancing  existing  products  that  meet  current  and  emerging 
consumer  preferences  and  demand.  S/he  will  design,  develop  and  oversee  the  24-month 
handicraft  upgrading  subcomponent.  Implementation  of  the  handicraft  subcomponent  will 
include the following activities: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Using the recommendations from the preliminary TNA, complete a detailed TNA 
commencing with existing products. For new product designs, specific technical 
training courses will be  developed by existing local trainers in collaboration with 
master trainers supported by the project;  
In collaboration with the local master trainers, design and oversee the delivery of 
all training courses with specific attention to developing best production methods 
and  practices.  Training  courses  will  also  include  quality  control  mechanisms  to 
consistently achieve and sustain best quality;  
Throughout  the  assignment  continually  support  and  improve  the  skills  of  the 
project’s master trainers and in collaboration with local training providers, create 
opportunities  for  master  trainers  to  secure  employment  in  the  vocational  and 
cottage training industries;  
In  collaboration  with  local  master  trainers,  provide  training  manuals  for  each 
product which has been upgraded or newly created;  
Design, 
implement  and  assist  with  coordinating  annual  product  design 
competitions  and  where  possible,  create  opportunities  and  linkages  to  existing 
institutions to continue these completions each year;  
(vi)  Where  necessary,  advise  EA/IA  to  engage  local  resource  persons    to  deliver 
(vii) 
specific training inputs for selected products;  
Provide  specifications  and  advice  for  procurement  of  handicrafts  processing 
equipment 
the  handicrafts 
processing facility;  
individual  home-based  producers  and 
for 
for 
36 
(viii)  Provide  input  into  the  design  of  the  proposed  craft  and  souvenir  market  in 
(ix) 
Mawlamyine; and  
Provide specific inputs into annual work plans and progress reports and provide 
relevant information for posting to the project’s website.  
94. 
Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  At  least  5  years’  experience  in  the 
handicrafts  production  sector.  Having  worked  or  currently  working  for  a  social  or  private 
enterprise  in  the  handicrafts  sector  would  be  a  major  advantage.  The  consultant  should  have 
understanding  and  skills  related  to  gender.  The  consultant  will  be  based  in  Mawlamyine  with 
frequent trips to Kyaikhto. 
National Food Processing Training Specialist (22 person-months intermittent) 
95. 
The  National  Food  Processing  Training  Specialist  will  assume  overall  responsibility  for 
new product development and upgrading existing products aligned with the needs of emerging 
market demand and using  information from VCA, TNA, and market studies. Implementation of 
the food processing subcomponent will include the following activities: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Conduct a detailed TNA for exiting products and design training modules for the 
development of new products. New methods of production will be introduced that 
improve the level of food hygiene and where possible. Assist producers acquire 
national  certification  of  national  food  safety  standards.  The  consultant  will  have 
access  to  laboratories  to  test  food  quality  and engineer  prototypes  for  new  and 
improved processed foods;  
The consultant will also address issues associated with hygienic packaging and 
improving the shelf life of processed foods;  
Adopting a similar approach to the National Handicraft Training Specialist, select, 
train  and  improve  the  skills  of  master  trainers  and  design  and  supervise  the 
delivery of all training courses;  
Provide  specifications  and  advice  on  the  procurement  of  food  processing 
equipment for individual  home-based producers and the food processing facility 
and provide inputs into the design of the crafts and food market in Mawlamyine 
(specifically restaurants and eating spaces); 
Provide specific inputs into annual work plans, progress reports and post relevant 
information for posting to the project’s website 
Preferred  Qualifications  and  Experience:  At  least  5  years’  experience  in  the  food 
96. 
production sector and experience working with the rural poor especially women. The consultant 
should  have  understanding  and  skills  related  to  gender.  The  consultant  will  be  based  in 
Mawlamyine with frequent trips to Kyaikhto.  
National Civil Engineer Consultant (12 person-months intermittent) 
97. 
The national civil engineer will assume responsibility for facility design and construction 
supervision  for  the  craft  and  souvenir  market  and  the  multi-purpose  food  processing  and 
handicrafts production center. The civil engineer will: 
(i) 
Create preliminary concept designs for the craft and souvenir market and multi-
function processing center ;  
37 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Complete  preliminary  site  surveys  to  estimate  the  cost  of  developing  the  land 
parcels for construction of the market and processing center that fits with in the 
overall civil works budget;  
Once land has been selected and agreed, conduct land contour surveys, create 
detailed works designs and specifications, with  drawings, and provide the project 
with cost estimates based on  a Bill of Quantities ;  
Collaborate with the project’s international team leader and national deputy team 
leader  and  environmental  specialist 
for 
construction of both facilities;  
Integrate 
Initial 
Environmental  Examination  into  the  civil  works  contract  for  construction  of  the 
market complex;  
Assist  the  PMU  with  the  technical  evaluation  of  bids  and  preparation  of  Bid 
Evaluation Reports following National Competitive Bidding procedures;  
Supervise the  construction  of the market  and  processing  center to  ensuring  the 
contractor complies with all civil works contract provisions;  
recommendations  and  mitigation  measures 
to  prepare  bidding  documents 
from 
the 
(viii)  Certify progress payments to the contractor based on physical completion of the 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
works;  
Assist the PIU in all phases of contract management and supervision, including 
the issuance of the Certificate of Completion;  
Provide regular progress reports that contain a photographic record of all stages 
of construction activates and;  
At  the  end  of  the  construction  phase,  provide  ―as  built  drawings‖  to  the  EA,  IA 
and operators of the market and processing center.  
98. 
Preferred  Qualifications and Experience:  Degree  in  civil  engineering and  at  least  10 
years  work  experience  in  Myanmar.  The  civil  engineer  will  have  proven  experience  in  design, 
contract management  and  construction  supervision.  A  university  degree in civil  engineering  or 
other relevant field and the ability to read and write clearly in English and Burmese is required.   
99. 
The Terms of Reference for the external auditor is provided in Appendix 2. 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
100.   No adverse environmental or social impacts are expected to arise from the project. The 
Project is categorized as C for involuntary resettlement and environment and B for Indigenous 
People.  It  is  focused  primarily  on  training  and  capacity  building  for  the  rural  poor  who  are 
overwhelming majority ethnic minority people. Project preparation and implementation will follow 
ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS 2009). It will not support any activities that require land 
acquisition  and  resettlement  or  have  any  adverse  impacts  on  Indigenous  People  and  the 
environment.  The  land  for  the  market  will  be  vacant,  unused  and  unoccupied  land,  to  be 
identified  and  provided  by  the  government  and  project  beneficiaries.  A  due  diligence  during 
project implementation shall confirm that (i) the project will not entail   land acquisition; (ii) that 
where land is available, such lands are free from encumbrances; and (iii) there are no past or 
existing land and resettlement issues in regard to existing facilities. This will be ensured through 
completion  of  the  social  safeguards  screening  checklist  by  the  PIU  for  each  civil  works  or 
infrastructure  upgrading.  The  checklists  will  be  confirmed  by  the  assigned  staff  of  PMU  and 
consultant support prior to submission for financing. 
101.  Environment  safeguards.  As  Category  C,  potential  impacts  (if  any)  will  be  localized 
and site-specific. Any identified impacts are low and temporary, and can easily be mitigated. As 
38 
may be appropriate, an Environmental Assessment Report, and if required, IEE/EMPs shall be 
prepared to manage any environmental impacts during constructions and/or operation phase for 
civil works. Also, the applicable government environmental permits, clearances and/or approval 
will be obtained before award of any contract. 
102. 
Indigenous  Peoples.  The  presence  of  large  number  of  ethnic  minorities  in  both  the 
project’s target areas who are the primary project beneficiaries meets the criteria of integration 
of IPP elements into project design in accordance with the  SPS. There are no specific targets 
for  the  IP  group  participation.  Interviews  and  consultations  with  affected  IP  communities  - 
producers, retailers and owners of MSEs, were conducted and their support for improvement of 
the value chain gained. Consultation and participation will be continued  throughout the project 
cycle to ensure their involvement in access to finance, training and other project activities. There 
is neither commercial development of resources nor any emergence of tourism activities due to 
this  intervention.  The  IP  groups  are  already  producing  the  handicrafts  and  the  project  will 
support  improvements  in  the  value  chain.  A  consultation  and  participation  summary  will  be 
included as part of project documentation. 
103.  Consultations  were  held  with  Mon  and  Karen  people  in  Mawlamyine  and  Kyaikhto 
Townships,  Consultations included:  (i)  workshops  in both  Mawlamyine  and  Kyaikhto  with  Mon 
and  Karen  based  CSO,  NGOs,  locally  based  development  partners  and  local  Mon  tourism 
interviews  with  CSO,  NGO  and  development  partner 
operators 
representatives;  (iii)  Individual  face  to  face  interviews  with  producers,  retailers  and  owners  of 
MSEs  who  were  of  Mon,  Karen  and  Burmese  ethnicity  with  the  overwhelming  majority  being 
Mon people and (iv) meetings with State government agencies and departments.  
informant 
(ii)  key 
104.  The social safeguards due diligence checklists are in Appendix 3. 
  Project Outputs 
  1. Skills and 
management 
capacity of micro 
and small 
enterprises and 
their employees 
developed 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
Table 18: Gender Action Plan 
Gender Design features/Activities 
-  Ensure  that  gender  issues  and  analysis  informs  all  the  foundation  studies:  socio-
economic baseline survey, value chain assessment and market study. 
-  Women  will  comprise  50%  of  participants  in  all  village  consultations  and  awareness 
raising seminars 
60% of the members of producer groups are women  
- 
-  All  training  materials  will  be  prepared  in  consultation  with  community  women  and 
other  stakeholders,  to  ensure  that  these  are  easily  understood  and  sensitive  to 
gender and ethnicity 
-  Ensure that training materials on safe migration and life skills include gender issues in 
migration, including gender dimensions of risk, vulnerability and protection.  
-  At least 60% of participants in all trainings will be women  
-  At least 60% of trained master trainers will be women 
-  All trainings are conducted in locations and at times convenient for women 
-  At least 60% of newly developed enterprises will be owned by women 
  Project Outputs 
  2. Access to 
business services, 
credit, and 
commercial 
networks 
strengthened 
39 
Gender Design features/Activities 
-  All  training  materials  will  be  prepared  in  consultation  with  community  women  and 
other  stakeholders,  to  ensure  that  these  are  easily  understood  and  sensitive  to 
gender and ethnicity 
-  At least 60% of trainees in training on business development/ accounting and savings 
and credit groups, will be women.  
60% of producers/ retailers who have accessed credit are women.  
- 
-  At least 60% of participants in national and regional trade fairs are women. 
- 
50%  of  the  participants  in  product  design  competition  for  innovative  handicrafts  are 
female.  
  3. Infrastructure to 
support access to 
markets and 
processing 
facilities improved 
-  Women  will  comprise  70%  of  producer/retailers  participants 
in  all  village 
- 
consultations/planning meetings on the development of project infrastructure  
60%  of  the  vendors  provided  space  in  the  local  craft  and  product  market  will  be 
women. 
-  Ensure  that  the  market  and  processing  facility  includes  separate  latrines  for  women 
and men and adequate lighting for security of women.  
-  At least 40% of members in market management committee and vendor associations 
are women 
-  At least 60% of community members employed in project supported infrastructure are 
women.  
-  Management,  operation  and  maintenance  plans  will  include  strategies  to  ensure 
women’s involvement in the management, operation and maintenance of the market 
and processing facilities, including quotas for membership in relevant committees  
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A.
Project Design and Monitoring Framework  
Table 19: Design and Monitoring Framework 
Impact the Project is aligned with: 
The  project  is  aligned  with  the  government’s  priority  to  create  jobs  and  generate  income  to  reduce 
povertya 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Micro and small 
enterprises (MSEs) 
enabled to increase 
business activities 
and employment in 
project areas 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
By 2020: 
a. At least 300 new MSEs 
established, of which at least 60% are 
led by women, and have a majority of 
women employees  
(2015 baseline: 1,500) 
b. 500 people (of which 60% are 
women) employed through project 
interventions (2015 baseline: 0) 
c. Real income increased by 25% in 
project-supported areas  
(2015 baseline: N/A) * 
Data Sources or 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
a & b. Project 
monitoring reports 
Risks 
Adverse economic 
conditions, political 
unrest, or natural 
disasters occur 
c. Household 
surveys 
Outputs 
1. Skills and 
By 2019: 
1a. At least 1,700 people trained, of 
1a & 1c. Quarterly 
Inadequate 
40 
Results Chain 
management 
capacity of MSEs 
and their 
employees 
developed 
2. Access to 
business services, 
credit, and 
commercial 
networks 
strengthened 
3. Infrastructure to 
support access to 
markets and 
processing facilities 
improved 
4. Capacity of 
executing and 
implementing 
agencies, and key 
stakeholders 
enhanced 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
which at least 60% are women (2015 
baseline: 0) 
1b. Value chain analysis conducted 
for 12 products with potential for 
commercialization (2015 baseline: 0) 
1c. 3,100 master trainers trained from 
government, civil society 
organizations, and producer groups 
(60% women) (2015 baseline: 0) 
2a. At least 900 MSEs have 
increased knowledge of good 
business development and 
management practice (60% women-
owned MSEs) (2015 baseline: N/A)* 
2b. 90% of MSEs have access to 
affordable credit (60% women-owned 
MSEs)  
(2015 baseline: N/A)* 
2c. At least seven new products 
marketed and sold through retail 
outlets in Yangon and other major 
cities (2015 baseline: 0) 
3a. Dedicated craft and local product 
market with at least 25 vendors 
developed, operating, well 
maintained, and financially 
sustainable (60% of vendors are 
women)  
(2015 baseline: 0) 
3b. A market management committee 
and one vendor association 
established (60% of members are 
women) (2015 baseline: 0) 
3c. One multiproduct processing 
center established for production of 
handicrafts and processed foods 
(2015 baseline: 0) 
3d. Two management, operation, and 
maintenance plans developed and 
implemented for the market and 
processing facilities  
(2015 baseline: 0) 
4a. Project management, 
implementation, and consulting teams 
fully staffed (35% women)  
(2015 baseline: 0) 
4b. Sex-disaggregated data project 
performance and management 
systems established  
(2105 baseline: 0) 
Data Sources or 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
project progress 
reports 
1b. Interviews with 
producers and 
entrepreneurs, 
trainers, and 
consumers 
2a. Interviews with 
women producers 
and intended 
project recipients  
2b & 2c. Quarterly 
and annual project 
progress reports 
3a. Interviews with 
site managers, 
entrepreneurs, 
and consumers 
3b, 3c, & 3d. 
Quarterly and 
annual project 
progress reports 
Risks 
coordination with key 
government 
and 
stakeholders 
ministries 
the 
delivery  of  project 
activities and outputs 
for 
Potential 
coordination issues 
with local civil 
society 
organizations, 
women’s groups,  
business 
development 
services service 
providers, and other 
stakeholders 
Sustainability, 
operation and 
maintenance of 
infrastructure assets 
are not implemented 
effectively 
4a. Annual project 
reports 
Required 
counterpart  staff  are 
not appointed 
4b. Performance 
monitoring and 
evaluation reports 
* These will be updated based on socioeconomic study and value chain analysis. 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets 
and Baselines 
4c. All counterpart staff, consultants, 
and implementing partners trained on 
gender issues in enterprise 
development 
Data Sources or 
Reporting 
Mechanisms 
4c. Project 
completion report 
41 
Risks 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1. Skills and management capacity of MSEs and their employees developed 
1.1  Baseline socioeconomic study by second quarter (Q2) 2016 
1.2  Training needs assessment and value chain analysis by Q2 2016 
1.3  Selection of target villages determined by baseline studies and multistakeholder inception workshops 
by Q2 2016 
Implementation of training courses and modules for handicraft upgrading program by Q4 2016 
1.4  Election and mobilization of village focal point representatives in 12 villages by Q2 2016 
1.5  Producer and retailer groups established by Q3 2016 
1.6  Detailed design of multiple product lines for handicraft upgrading program by Q3 2016 
1.7 
1.8  Detailed design of multiple product lines for processed foods upgrading program by Q3 2016 
1.9 
1.10 Training of master trainers by Q4 2016 
1.11 Seminars on gender equality, safer migration, and life skills by Q3 2016 
1.12 Seminars with producers and suppliers on availability and sustainability of raw materials by Q1 2017 
1.13 Seminars to disseminate consumer preferences on market demand for selected products by Q1 
Implementation of training courses and modules for processed foods upgrading program by Q4 2016 
2017 
2. Access to business services, credit, and commercial networks strengthened 
2.1  Mapping of local service providers for business development services, and microcredit and banking 
2.2 
2.3 
services by Q2 2016 
Implementation of business start-up, management, and financial literacy and credit-training courses 
by Q3 2016 
Intermediate and advanced business planning, marketing, and application of savings and credit by 
Q1 2017 
2.4  Marketing and branding strategy developed by Q2 2017 
2.5  Marketing and branding strategy implemented by Q4 2017 
2.6  Workshop to create independent savings and credit groups and mentoring support by Q2 2017 
2.7  Exposure visits to facilitate linkages with markets in Yangon and other major cities by Q4 2017 
2.8  Promotion of "Made in Mon State" brand in national regional trained fairs by Q3 2017 
2.9  Product design competition for innovative handicrafts for the souvenir market by Q1 2017 
2.10 Manuals and promotional materials disseminated by Q2 2018 
3. Infrastructure to support access to markets and processing facilities improved 
3.1 
Identification of market, site survey (with no land acquisition and resettlement), and initial concept 
drawings completed and agreed by Q4 2016 
3.2  Completion of initial environmental examination reports as may be required; applicable government 
environmental clearances, permits, and approvals obtained by Q4 2016 
3.3  Bidding, award, and construction of market in Mawlamyine by Q1 2017 
3.4  Equipment procured and fit out for the market at Mawlamyine by Q4 2018 
3.5  Market management committee established by Q4 2018 
3.6  Management contracts prepared for private and/or social enterprise by Q4 2018 
3.7 
Identification of land for processing center, site survey, and initial concept drawings completed and 
agreed by Q4 2016 
3.8  Bidding, award, and construction of market in Kyaikhto by Q1 2018 
3.9  Equipment procured and fit out for multipurpose processing center in Kyaikhto by Q4 2018 
3.10 Facility management committee established and operations commenced by Q1 2019 
4. Capacity of executing and implementing agencies, and key stakeholders enhanced 
4.1  Recruit and train project management unit and project implementation unit staff by Q1 2016 
4.2  Establish project performance management system by Q1 2016 
42 
Key Activities with Milestones 
4.3  Recruit consulting services and specialists with expertise in MSEs development, marketing, civil 
engineering, value chain analysis, training, and project management by Q1 2016 
4.4  Gender training for project management unit, project implementation unit, consultants, and 
implementation team by Q2 2016 
4.5  Biannual planning and review steering committee meetings by Q2 2016 
4.6  Exit strategy developed and implemented by Q3 2019 
4.7  Midterm evaluation and completion report by Q3 2017 
Inputs 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction: $3.0 million grant 
Government: $0.44 million 
Community contributions: $0.01 million 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Not Applicable 
a  Government  of  Myanmar.2012.  Framework  for  Economic  and  Social  Reforms,  2012–2015.  Yangon;  and  
Government of Myanmar. 2014. National Comprehensive Development Plan – A Prosperous Nation Integrated Into 
the Global Community 2030. Yangon. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B.
Monitoring  
105.  Project  performance  monitoring.  The  project  design  and  monitoring  framework 
includes  indicators  and  targets  to  measure  project  benefits.  To  facilitate  project  benefit 
monitoring, a baseline report detailing socioeconomic conditions in target communities and data 
on MSE-related production, income, and employment will be commissioned within 7 months of 
project effectiveness. Within 9 months of project effectiveness, the PMU, with support from the 
International  Team  Leader  consultant  will  develop  the  project  performance  monitoring 
framework (PPMF). The PPMF will record project’s technical and financial performance, timely 
delivery  of  project’s  activities/  milestones,  and  assess  achievement  of  project  objectives  and 
social, economic and institutional impacts. The PPMF will include the key project indicators and 
targets  with  agreed  socio-economic  baselines  to  be  used  to  measure  the  project  impact, 
outcome  and  evaluate  its  outputs.  During  the  establishment  of  the  PPMF,  the  PMU  will:  (i) 
confirm baseline figures and targets; (ii) determine monitoring and reporting arrangements; (iii) 
confirm  data  sources;  (iv)  check  assumptions  and  risks;  and  (v)  establish  systems  and 
procedures  for  systematic  data  collection.  The  PMU  will  submit  the  final  PPMF  to  ADB  for 
approval. 
106.  Work-planning  process:  Bi-annual  planning  and  review  meetings  will  be  undertaken 
comprising  PMU,  PIU,  village  focal  point  representatives,  CSOs,    development  partners,  and 
other  stakeholders  directly  collaborating  with  the  project  to  develop  initial  annual  work  plan, 
review  accomplishments,  challenges,  and  lessons  learned  before  selecting  activities  for 
inclusion in subsequent work plans.  
107.  Monitoring disbursements: Annual contract awards and disbursement projections will 
be  prepared  and  submitted  by  the  PMU  to  ADB  within  2  months  of  project  inception. 
43 
Subsequent projections will be submitted by 10 December each year, to facilitate the monitoring 
of project implementation and help identify impediments to implementation progress.24  
108.  The  PMU  will  monitor  the  progress  of  activities  in  each  project  location  as  well  as 
withdrawals, disbursements and reimbursements of project accounts based on monthly reports 
by the PIU and the consultant team. The PMU will consolidate the monthly progress reports into 
quarterly  and  bi-annual  progress  reports  for  onward  submission  to  the  National  Steering 
Committee  and ADB.  Data  collection methods for  the  baseline, midterm,  and final  evaluations 
will  be  highly  participatory.  Sex  and  ethnic-group  disaggregated  data  will  be  collected  for  all 
indicators and activities, including household surveys and interviews with producers and retailer 
groups.  
109.  Compliance  monitoring:  The  status  of  compliance  with  project  covenants  will  be 
reviewed during each ADB review mission, to be conducted at 6-month intervals. The PMU will 
monitor compliance against the covenants and report updates in bi-annual and annual progress 
reports submitted to ADB and the Government. Any non-compliance issues will be specified in 
these reports, with proposed remedial actions for consideration at ADB review missions.  
110.  Safeguards  monitoring:  Regular  progress  reports  to  include  summary  of  social  and 
environmental  safeguards  screening  activities  based  on  the  checklist  and  findings  during  the 
monitoring period. An integrated safeguards monitoring report shall be prepared and submitted 
to ADB on an annual basis. Said report shall be based on EMPs (if any). 
111.  Gender and social dimensions monitoring: The implementation of the gender action 
plan  (GAP)  is  the  primary  responsibility  of  the  Project  Director.  The  Project  Director  will  be 
supported  in  his/her  oversight  function  by  the  by  International  Team  Leader.  At  the  PIU  level, 
the responsibility for GAP implementation will rest with the two Coordinators coordinating project 
implementation  at  the  township  levels.  The  project  coordinators  will  be  supported  by  the 
National  Deputy  Team  Leader.  All  Consultant  TORs  will  include  responsibility  for  gender 
analysis, integration and implementation of GAP activities relevant to their assignments/ area of 
expertise  and  focus.  Gender  sensitive  indicators  will  be  integrated  in  the  PPMS.  Project  will 
include sex disaggregated data and ethnic group-disaggregated data on all project activities and 
outputs  in  regular  reporting.  Progress  update  on  GAP  implementation  will  be  included  in  all 
reports to ADB. The GAP Monitoring Template is in Appendix 4. 
C.
Evaluation 
112.  The ADB and government will jointly review the project at least twice a year (at 6-month 
intervals).  Joint  review  missions  will  assess  (i)  achievement  of  contract  awards  and 
disbursements;  (ii)  physical  progress  of  each  project  output;  (iii)  effectiveness  of  capacity 
development programs; (iv) compliance with social and environmental safeguards; (v) progress 
on  gender  dimensions;  (vi)  compliance  with  project  covenants;  and  (vii)  performance  of 
government  agencies,  implementation  units  and  consultant  and  contractor  performance. 
Findings of project review missions will be agreed by ADB and the EA and recorded in an Aide 
Memoire. 
24 The Disbursement Procedures for withdrawals of loan or grant proceeds and the required documents are detailed 
in 
at 
http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/33606/files/loan-disbursement-handbook.pdf. The sample 
forms for withdrawal applications can be downloaded from the LFIS/ GFIS website (http://lfis.adb.org).  
Loan  Disbursement  Handbook 
amended)  which 
(2015, 
found 
can 
the 
be 
as 
44 
113.   A midterm evaluation performed by the project’s counterpart staff together with ADB will 
(i) review the project scope, design, and implementation arrangements; (ii) identify changes in 
scope or implementing arrangements since project appraisal; (iii) assess the project’s progress 
toward meeting its stated objectives; (iv) identify problems and suggest ways to overcome them 
during  the  final  18  months  of  the  project;  and  determine  compliance  with  the  JFPR  Letter  of 
Agreement.  The  government  project  completion  report  (PCR)  will  be  prepared  by  the  project 
implementation team following the standard ADB format, within 6 months of physical completion 
of the Project. Following submission of the government PCR and handover of all project assets, 
an ADB  Completion Report and independent impact assessment comparing baseline and end 
of project conditions will be prepared by an independent individual consultant recruited by ADB. 
D.
Reporting  
114.  Quarterly  Report:  The  EA  will  provide  ADB  with  (i)  quarterly  progress  reports  in  a 
format  consistent  with  ADB's  project  performance  reporting  system.  The  PMU  will  consolidate 
all  project  activity  reports  prepared  by  the  PIU,  consultants,  and  contractors  into  quarterly 
reports  containing  sex-disaggregated  data  and  ethnic  group-disaggregated  data,  and  should 
include a summary of social safeguards screening activities and findings during the monitoring 
period. Quarterly reports will be endorsed by the national project director and submitted to ADB 
no more than 30 days after the end of each project quarter. Quarterly reports will be in English 
following  the  guidelines  and  template  shown  in  Appendix  5.  The  guidelines  for  computing 
percentage of grant implementation progress is in Appendix 6.  
115.  Grant  Status  Report  for  ADB  Office  of  Co-financing  Operations.  As part  of regular 
reporting the executing agency will prepare a bi-annual grant status report and submit the report 
to  ADB  within  one  month  of  the  end  of  each  reporting  period.  The  report  will  include:  (a) 
progress achieved by output as measured through the indicator's performance targets, (b) key 
implementation  issues  and  solutions/  actions  taken;  (c)  grant  utilization  status;  (d)  updated 
procurement  plan  and  (d)  updated  implementation  plan  for  next  6  months.  The  grant  status 
report template is in Appendix 7. 
116.  Audited  Grant  Accounts.  The  PMU  and  PIU  will  maintain  project  accounts  in 
accordance with sound accounting principles. All project accounts will be audited annually by an 
independent  external  auditor  acceptable  to  the  ADB;  and  using  international  accounting  and 
auditing  standards.  A  separate  audit  opinion  will  be  issued  on  the  use  of  the  JFPR  imprest 
account,  project  sub-account  and  statement  of  expenditure  procedures.  The  audit  opinion  will 
include (i) an assessment of the adequacy of accounting and internal control systems regarding 
project  expenditures  and  transactions;  (ii)  a  determination  as  to  whether  the  government,  the 
PMU  and  PIU  have  maintained  adequate  documentation  for  all  financial  transactions, 
specifically on statement of expenditure and imprest account procedures; and (iii) confirmation 
of  compliance  with  the  project’s  financial  management  system  and  ADB  and  government 
requirements for project management. Audit reports will be submitted to ADB within 6 months of 
the end of each fiscal year. Audit requirements and guidelines are in Appendix 8. 
117.  The government project completion report will be prepared by the project implementation 
team following the standard ADB format, within 6 months of physical completion of the project. 
The report will document actual cumulative inputs, outputs and outcomes, and lessons learned 
through the grant implementation period.  
45 
E.
Stakeholder Communication Strategy  
118.  The  project  will  implement  a  stakeholder  communications  strategy  that  will  ensure 
stakeholders and participants at all levels are adequately informed of the project activities. The 
PMU  will establish  webpages on the MOHT website  as the primary portal for dissemination of 
project related information. The website will include the JPFR Grant Assistance Report, project 
administration  manual,  progress  reports,  annual  work  plans  and  procurement  plans,  among 
other project-related documents and links. Efforts will be made to publish documents in both the 
English and Myanmar languages. The PMU will facilitate information exchange at all levels and 
sharing  of  lessons  among  the  multi-sector  project  steering  committee.  Project  beneficiaries, 
selected from communities participating in the project and broader community of stakeholders in 
Mawlamyine  and Kyaikhto  townships will  be  included  in the  project’s  planning,  monitoring  and 
evaluation  activities.  Twice  yearly  project  planning  and  review  meetings  will  be  conducted  to 
review and agree on annual work plans among the various project stakeholders. 
119.  The  project  will  also  promote  JFPR  visibility  through  the  use  of  standardized  logos  in 
publications,  workshops  and  seminars,  and  periodic  press  releases.  The  JFPR  logo  will  be 
prominently displayed during the ceremony to sign the JFPR Grant Agreement. Advertisements 
for procurement of goods and consultant recruitment will carry the JFPR logo. Project visibility 
and stakeholder communications will be further enhanced through the branding and marketing 
strategies and activities; design competition for innovative handicrafts and the establishment of 
the market and processing facilities. These activities are expected to generate substantial public 
interest and national media attention.  
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY  
120.  ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) was explained to and discussed 
with the  government.  ADB  reserves the  right  to  investigate,  directly  or  through its  agents,  any 
violations  of  the  Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  Project.25  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB 
shall  include  provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and 
accounts of the  executing  agency  and all  Project  contractors,  suppliers,  consultants  and other 
service  providers.  Individuals/entities  on  ADB’s  anticorruption  debarment  list  are  ineligible  to 
participate in ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project.26  
121.   To support these efforts, relevant provisions are included in the grant agreement and /or 
regulations  and  the  bidding  documents  for  the  Project.  The  project  incorporates  several  other 
measures  in  addition  to  the  standard  ADB  requirements  to  deter  corruption  and  increase 
transparency. The  project  will  (i)  build capacity  in the  EA  to  understand and comply  with ADB 
and government procedures as outlined in the PAM and (ii) widely publicize in communities in 
the project area the existence of ADB’s Office of Anticorruption and Integrity as the initial point 
of  contact  for  allegations  of  fraud,  corruption,  and  abuse  in  ADB-financed  projects.  A  project 
website will be developed to disclose information about project matters, including procurement. 
To encourage more stakeholder vigilance as well as ensure greater accountability, a task force 
will be set up in the EA to receive and resolve grievances or act upon stakeholders’ reports of 
irregularities.  The  task  force  will  (i)  review  and  address  stakeholders’  grievances  against  the 
project  in  relation  to  the  project  itself,  any  service  provider,  or  any  person  responsible  for 
carrying  out  the  project  and  (ii)  set  the  threshold  criteria  and  procedures  for  handling  such 
25  Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf 
26  ADB's Integrity Office web site is available at: http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp 
46 
grievances,  proactively  responding  to  them,  and  providing  the  stakeholders  with  notice  of  the 
mechanism. 
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
122.  People  who are, or may in the future be, adversely affected by the project may submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent  forum  and  process  whereby  people  adversely  affected  by  ADB-assisted  projects 
can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make a good faith effort to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.  Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.27 
XII. 
RECORD OF PAM CHANGES  
123.  The first draft of the PAM has been prepared and discussed during the grant fact-finding 
mission in April 2015.  
124.  After  ADB  Board  approval  of  the  project  changes  in  implementation  arrangements  are 
subject  to  agreement  and  approval  pursuant  to  relevant  Government  and  ADB  administrative 
procedures  and  upon  such  approval  they  will  be  subsequently  incorporated  into  the  PAM.  All 
revisions/updates to the PAM should be recorded chronologically in this section.  
27  For further information see: http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp.  
Appendix 1  47 
Mawlamyine Market General Specifications 
Land  
Minimum  land  area:  40m  x  40  m  =  1200  m2  (includes  parking  lot)  Government  owned  vacant 
plot with no assets. 
Land  geography:  Ideally  (i)  well  drained  and  not  prone  to  flooding  (ii)  does  not  require  large 
volumes of backfill to achieve desired site land profile; (iii) aim to leave as many existing large 
trees  and  native  vegetation  as  possibly  (if  any);  (iv)  access  to  mains  power;  (v)  access  to 
mainline  sewerage and storm  water  discharge  systems  and;  (vi)  not  in conflict  with other  land 
adjacent uses (light industry or industrial sites). 
Access: Paved road strong enough to carry tourist buses. 
Location:  Ideally  located  close  to  an  existing  popular  tourist  site.  Accessibility  to  women 
producers, MSEs and retailers will be a key criterion in selecting the market location.   
Market Design Concept 
There  are  a  few  simple  design  features  that  contribute  to  a  well-functioning  craft  and  local 
products market. Firstly, the market should provide tourists and local residents with comfortable 
spaces  to  shop  and  interact  with  retailers.  The  actual  shopping  experience  by  tourists  and 
residents  need  to  be  carefully  considered  during  the  design  phase.  Many  market  spaces  in 
Southeast Asia are cramped and uncomfortable for both buyers and sellers. Narrow walk ways 
and  products  stacked  from  floor  to  ceiling  make  physical  movement  difficult.  The  walkways 
between vendor stalls should be at least 1.5 meters wide. Secondly most markets are designed 
with  little  or  no  input  from  sellers  –  who  are  overwhelmingly  women.  Market  designers  build 
small  narrow  stalls,  which  retailers  then  have  to  somehow  convert  into  retail  spaces.  Enough 
physical space for products on display – storage space for the inventory is required. A minimum 
space  of  9m2  for  each  stall  would  provide  enough  space  for  retail  floor  space  and  storage. 
Spaces in front of vendor retail outlets for working displays such as cotton and basket weaving 
and wood carving would also add authenticity for tourists to appreciate the work that is invested 
into  handmade  local  products.  Thirdly,  well-designed  craft  and  souvenir  markets  provide 
outdoor  food  service  areas  where  tourists  and  locals  can  congregate  eat,  drink  and  relax.  A 
number of food outlets can be integrated into the design to provide clean, good quality local and 
international food. The restaurants would be built opposite the craft outlets and outdoor eating 
spaces would occupy the central courtyard and follow good practice service standards including 
waste disposal. The outdoor restaurants would include retractable awnings to keep visitors cool 
during the day and provide shelter during periods of rain. Palms and vegetation in the courtyard 
would add to the overall beauty of the eating areas and create a pleasant atmosphere enjoyed 
by  locals  and  tourists  alike.  Fourthly,  clean  toilets  and  restroom  facilities  need  to  be  located 
away from eating areas and restaurants at the minimum distance specified by the state health 
department  following  good  practice  operating  standards  especially  related  to  water  supply, 
waste  water  and  solid  waste  disposal.  Infant  changing  facilities  and  disabled  people  access 
must also be considered in the design of public restrooms (see also first point above on width of 
walkways). Lastly the market would be an ideal location for performance and events and where 
tourists could be entertained and experience Mon traditional dance and live music. A stage and 
performance  area  could  be  easily  integrated  into  the  market  space.  The  market  would  also 
support a market manager’s office and ideally a trade facilitation space to enable national and 
international  buyers  a  central  venue  to  place  orders  for  products  produced  from  all  ten 
Townships in Mon State.  
48 
Appendix 1 
Opening Hours and Employment 
The survey team’s research for the ideal opening hours of craft and souvenir markets would be 
from 10.00 am to 10.00 pm daily. These hours will allow the market to operate as day and night 
market  with  the  majority  of  tourists  expected  to  arrive  from  4pm  onwards.  The  initial  design 
could cater for 25 retail outlets 20 handicrafts and five for food. Total employment for the whole 
of  the  market  is  conservatively  estimated  at  approximately  80  people;  represented  by  50 
retailers (2 per outlet) 20 outside restaurants staff, 6 maintenance staff including security and a 
market management team of two people to manage the day to day operations of the market and 
the manage the trade center.  
Market Management Committee  
It  is  proposed  that  the  management  of  the  market  follows  a  similar  model  developed  in  other 
JFPR projects in recent years. Given that the market will be funded by the JFPR and transferred 
to  the  EA  or  IA  at  the  end  of  the  project,  with  the  government  being  the  legal  owner  of  the 
market.  It  is  likely  the  market  will  be  handed  over  to  a  Ministry  or  Department  within  the  Mon 
State  Government.  The  mandate  of  the  Market  Management  Committee  (MMC)  is  to  ensure 
that the market is professionally operated, continues to benefit its direct stakeholders and act as 
a  focal  point  for  issues  external  to  the  markets  operation.  The  basic  concept  is  that  a  MMC 
representing all concerned stakeholders is formed to oversee management and maintenance of 
services of the market. The MMC will comprise of up to 12 members including representatives 
from  State  government  departments  (MOC  and  MOHT  for  example),  CSOs  and  NGOs, 
individual  vendors/retailers  based  at the market and members  of  the tourist  industry  (hoteliers 
for example). The MMC  then could offer the actual market management to a private sector or 
social enterprise with experience in facility management to manage the day-to-day operations of 
the  market.  The  market  management  operator  (MMO)  would  also  operate  a  trade  facilitation 
center.  The  MMO  could  comprise  two  managers  and  employ  up  to  6  staff  to  maintain  and 
provide  security  for  the  market.  The  MMO  would  have  the  right  to  create  subcontracts  with 
vendors/retailers and other users of the market to  pay for market management, operation and 
maintenance costs.  
Market Sustainability 
The operations and maintenance sustainability of the market will be assured through contracting 
arrangements along with market by-laws, which will ensure the operation of the market to a high 
standard. Funds to support operations and maintenance will be drawn from income generated 
from monthly market rents by vendors. Other sources of income will include commissions from 
operating the business facilitation center and renting venue for cultural performances and open 
restaurant spaces, for example. Table 1 provides the estimates of revenue and expenditure for 
the market for the period 2017-2027. The project will prepare a business and marketing plan for 
the  market  in  parallel  with  preparation  of  detailed  design  of  the  facility.  The  project  will  also 
assist the MMC prepare bidding documents, expressions of interest, and request for proposals 
to identify, evaluate, select and engage a competent  operator. The project can also assist the 
operator draft leases and subcontractors for retailers intending to occupy the market.  
49 
Table 1: Mawlamyine Market Income and Expenditure Estimates ($) 2017 – 2027 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Revenues 
Permanent kiosks  
45,000 
47,250  49,613  52,093  54,698  57,433  60,304  63,320  66,485  69,810  73,300 
Events   
Temporary kiosks 
2,000 
2,000 
2,100 
2,205 
2,315 
2,431 
2,553 
2,680 
2,814 
2,955 
3,103 
3,258 
2,100 
2,205 
2,315 
2,431 
2,553 
2,680 
2,814 
2,955 
3,103 
3,258 
Total Revenue  
49,000 
51,450  54,023  56,724  59,560  62,538  65,665  68,948  72,395  76,015  79,816 
Expenditures 
Salaries 
10,560 
11,088  11,642  12,225  12,836  13,478  14,151  14,859  15,602  16,382  17,201 
Repairs & Maintenance   15,000 
15,750  16,538  17,364  18,233  19,144  20,101  21,107  22,162  23,270  24,433 
Utilities 
12,000 
12,600  13,230  13,892  14,586  15,315  16,081  16,885  17,729  18,616  19,547 
Miscellaneous 
2,500 
2,625 
2,756 
2,894 
3,039 
3,191 
3,350 
3,518 
3,694 
3,878 
4,072 
Total Expenditures 
40,060 
42,063  44,166  46,374  48,693  51,128  53,684  56,368  59,187  62,146  65,254 
Net Income before Tax 
Source: ADB estimates. 
8,940 
9,387 
9,856  10,349  10,867  11,410  11,980  12,579  13,208  13,869  14,562 
Appendix 2 
50 
Terms of Reference for Financial Audit Consulting Services (Auditor) 
Audit of Annual Project Financial Statements (APFS) 
I. 
BACKGROUND OF THE PROJECT:  
1. 
Annex  1  presents  the  guidance  including  terms  and  definitions  used  in  this  terms  of 
reference  (TOR),  and  Annex  2  presents  the  background,  the  executing  agency  (EA)  and 
implementing agencies (IAs) of the project.   
II. 
OBJECTIVE 
The objective of the audit of the APFS is to enable the auditor to express a professional 
2. 
opinion on:  
(a)  the  APFS  for  the  year(s)/period(s)  then  ended,  and  assess  the  progress  with  the 
overall budget, in accordance with the acceptable accounting standards;  
(b)  the  compliance  with  laws,  regulations  and  funding  agreements  that  have  a  direct 
(c) 
and material financial effect on the entity’s financial report;  
the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  compliance  with  requirements  that  could 
have a direct  and material  financial  effect  on the financial  statements  (FS)  as well 
as internal control over financial reporting; and 
(d)  the eligibility of claims made in Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) and the Imprest 
Account Statement. 
3. 
Record  keeping:  The  Project’s  accounting  system  (books  and  records)  provides  the 
basis  for  preparing  the  audited  APFS.  The  system  was  established  to  record  the  Project’s 
financial transactions and is maintained by related Project’s EA/IAs.  
III. 
SCOPE OF WORK 
The  APFS  to  be  audited  will  focus  on  Financial  Statements  (FSs),  prepared  by  the 
4. 
EA/IAs that should include: 
(a)  A Summary of Sources and Uses of Funds received showing the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) funds, any co-financing and counterpart funds separately;  
(b)  A  summary  of  expenditures  shown  under  the  category  of  the  main  project 
components,  the  expenditures,  the  allocation  of  grant  proceeds,  the  procurement 
plan (as referenced in grant and appraisal documentation) for both current fiscal year 
and cumulative to date, based on the categories given in Annex 3; 
(c)  Supporting  schedules  to  the  FSs  which  at  least  include:  (i)  A  reconciliation  of  the 
amounts  shown  as  ―received  by  the  project  from  ADB  and  other  financiers‖  with 
those shown as being disbursed by ADB and other financiers (for direct payment); (ii) 
SOE:  listing  individual  SOE  withdrawal  applications  by  specific  reference  number 
and amount in each financing agreements; and (iii) designated Account(s) statement 
showing movement and reconciliation with the bank statements;  
(d)  A  Summary  of  the  principal  accounting  policies  that  have  been  adopted,  and  other 
explanatory notes; 
(e)  A  Management  Assertion  that  the  funds  of  ADB  and  other  financiers  have  been 
expended in accordance with the intended purposes.  
5. 
Audit Phasing28:  
Period 
1 
2 
3 
4 
FY start  
 1 April 2016 
 1 April 2017 
 1 April 2018 
 1 April 2019 
Month of fiscal year (FY) and report submission 
Report Submission 
 Soon after FY ended 
 Soon after FY ended 
 Soon after FY ended 
 Soon after FY ended 
FY End 
 31 March 2017 
 31 March 2018 
 31 March 2019 
 31 March 2020 
Appendix 2 
51 
Remarks 
Shall be received 
by ADB before the 
6 months of fiscal 
year ended 
Contract:  The  auditor  will  be  contracted  for  the  audits  for  four  (4)  phases  mentioned 
6. 
above. However, the auditor should submit the financial proposal in US$ in a format indicating 
the amount for each financial year independently. If performance is not satisfactory in one year 
then the client will not be bound for subsequent year’s audits.  
Applicable  auditing  standards:  The  audit  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with 
7. 
International Standards of Auditing (ISA) including:  
(a)  planning and conducting the audit in accordance with a risk based framework with a 
detailed  audit  work  program  which  is  sufficiently  extensive  in  its  coverage  of  the 
project’s accounts to support the opinion given; 
(b)  the  auditor  will  gather  evidence  and  prepare  working  papers  to  properly  document 
the  evidence  seen  in  support  of  the  opinion  given;  sufficient  audit  evidence  will  be 
gathered  to  substantiate  in  all  material  respects  the  accuracy  of  the  information 
contained in supporting schedules attached to the financial statements; 
(c)  the auditor will review and evaluate the system of internal controls in effect, including 
internal  audit  procedures,  to  determine  the  degree  of  reliance  that  may  be  placed 
upon  them  and  to  determine  the  extent  of  testing  of  actual  transactions  needed  to 
assure the auditor of the accuracy of the accounting records; and 
(d)  the  audit  coverage  will  consider  the  risk  of  material  misstatement(s)  as  a  result  of 
fraud  or  error.  The  audit  program  should  include  procedures  that  are  designed  to 
provide reasonable assurance that material misstatements (if any) are detected.  
8. 
The  auditor  should  obtain  an  understanding  of  the  design  and  operation  of  internal 
control over compliance with requirements that could have a direct and material financial effect 
on the funding agreements. The auditor’s work in this area is in addition to the consideration of 
internal control over financial reporting that is part of the financial statement audit. Specifically, 
the auditor must obtain an understanding of the internal control over compliance that is sufficient 
to plan the audit to support a low assessment level of control risk for donor program. The auditor 
needs  to  test  the  internal  control  unless  the  internal  control  is  likely  to  be  ineffective  in 
preventing or detecting noncompliance. Please review and confirm whether:   
(a) 
Funds of ADB and other financing (and all external financing where ADB is not the 
only financier) have been used in accordance  with the conditions of the relevant 
financing  agreement,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  only  for 
the purposes for which the financing was provided, as detailed in the supporting 
documents (Annex 3); 
 (b)  Counterpart funds (Annex 3) have been provided and used in accordance with the 
relevant financing agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and 
only for the purposes for which they were provided;  
28 Note that audit periods for one auditor are allowed for all fiscal years of the Project:   
52 
Appendix 2 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(c)  Goods, works and services financed have been procured in accordance with the 
the  ADB 
including  specific  provisions  of 
financing  agreements 
relevant 
Procurement Policies and Procedures. 
The  expenditures  submitted  to  ADB  are  eligible  for  financing  and  all  necessary 
supporting  documents,  records,  and  accounts  in  support  of  Credit  withdrawals 
have  been  adequately  maintained  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of 
account and reports presented to ADB; 
Funds  disbursed  through  SOEs  were  utilized  for  the  purposed  defined  in  the 
funding agreements. Where ineligible expenditures are identified as having been 
included  in  withdrawal  applications  and  reimbursed  against,  these  should  be 
separately noted by the auditor; and 
Designated  Accounts  (imprest  account  and  sub-accounts,  if  used)  have  been 
maintained in accordance with the provisions of the relevant financing agreements 
and funds disbursed out of the Accounts were used only for the purpose intended 
in the financing agreement. 
Accounting  Policies  and  Changes:  The  auditor  should  comment  on  the  project’s 
9. 
accounting policies, and confirm the extent to which the agreed project accounting policies (see 
Terms and Definitions in Annex 1) have been applied. In particular, the auditor should note the 
impact on the APFS arising from any material deviations from the agreed accounting standards. 
The  auditor  should  also  comment  on  any  accounting  policy  changes,  either  during  a  financial 
year, or from one year to another. 
10. 
Compliance with laws, regulations and funding agreements: The auditor should be 
aware of the unique characteristics of the compliance auditing environment. Governments and 
not-for-profit  organizations  differ  from  commercial  enterprises  in  that  they  may  be  subject  to 
diverse compliance requirements including its compliance with financial covenants and financial 
assurances. Management is responsible for ensuring compliance with relevant laws, regulation 
and funding agreements. That responsibility encompasses the identification of applicable laws, 
regulations  and  funding  agreements  and  the  establishment  of  internal  control  designed  to 
provide  reasonable  assurance  that  the  auditee  complies  with  those  laws,  regulations  and 
funding agreements. 
11. 
In addition to the opinion on the FSs, the auditor should provide an opinion on whether 
the  auditee  complied  with  laws,  regulations  and  provision  of  contracts  or  funding  agreements 
that  have  a  direct  and  material  financial  effect  on  the  entity’s  financial  statements.  Where 
applicable,  the  auditor  should  prepare  a  report  with  separate  schedule  of  findings  and 
questioned costs. The scope of the audit should also refer to compliance with the Procurement 
procedures as set out in the funding agreements.  
Responsibility  to  Consider  Fraud  in  an  Audit:  The  primary  responsibility  for  the 
12. 
prevention  and  detection  of  fraud rests  with  both  those  charged  with  governance  of  the  entity 
and  with  management.  It  is  important  that  management,  with  the  oversight  of  those  charged 
with governance, place a strong emphasis on fraud prevention, which may reduce opportunities 
for  fraud to  take  place,  and fraud deterrence,  which  could  persuade  individuals  not  to commit 
fraud  because  of  the  likelihood  of  detection  and  punishment.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  those 
charged  with  governance  of  the  entity  to  ensure,  through  oversight  of  management,  that  the 
entity establishes and maintains internal control to provide reasonable assurance with regard to 
reliability  of financial  reporting,  effectiveness and  efficiency  of  operations  and  compliance  with 
applicable laws, regulations and funding agreements.  
Appendix 2 
53 
In  addition  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  a  control  environment  and 
13. 
maintains policies and  procedures  to  assist  in achieving  the  objectives of  ensuring  the  orderly 
and efficient conduct of the entity’s business. Therefore, in order to ensure that those assertions 
are addressed in the audit of the entity, it is important that ISA 240 ―The Auditor’s Responsibility 
to consider Fraud in an Audit of Financial Statements‖ be followed.  
14. 
In  addition  to  the  opinion  on  the  financial  statements  and  opinion  on  compliance,  the 
auditor  should  provide  an  additional  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over 
compliance requirements  that  could have a direct  and material financial  effect  on  the financial 
statements as well as financial reporting. 
IV. 
AUDIT REPORT 
Audit Report: The auditor will issue the Auditor reports on the APFS29 and the auditors’ 
15. 
reports on the APFS should include at least the following:  
(a)  the audit report will state the purpose of the report and its intended use, 
(b)  the  audit  report  will  state  which/whose  generally  accepted  accounting  standards 
have been applied and indicate the effect of any deviations from those standards, 
(c) 
the audit report will state that the audit was conducted in accordance with ISAs,  
(d)  the  audit  opinion  will  cover  the  current  period  and  compare  the  achievement  with 
the overall periods, 
(e)  the audit opinion will state whether or not the financial statements presents fairly in 
accordance with the adopted accounting policies for the specified program /project 
and that the funds were utilized for the purposes defined by the funding agreements 
(and  the  separate  grant  agreement  if  cofinancing  is  included;  preferably  a  joint 
funding agency agreement on common accounting and reporting requirements will 
have been signed), 
the  audit  opinion  will  cover  in  all  material  respects  the  supporting  schedules, 
including those noted above, 
(f) 
(g)  the  auditor  should  provide  an  opinion  on  whether  the  auditee  complied  with 
applicable laws, regulations and the Procurement procedures and other provisions 
of  the  funding  agreements  that  have  a  direct  and  material  financial  effect  on  the 
entity’s financial report (audit report on the project financial statements only), and 
(h)  the  auditor  should  provide  an  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over 
compliance with requirements that could have a direct and material financial effect 
on the financial statements as well as internal control over financial reporting. 
V. 
MANAGEMENT LETTER 
In addition to the audit report, the auditor will prepare a management letter, in which the 
16. 
auditor will:  
(a)  Give comments and observations on the accounting records, systems and controls 
(b) 
that were examined during the course of the audit;  
Identify  specific  deficiencies  or  areas  of  weakness  in  the  accounting  and  internal 
control systems that were identified during the audit, and make recommendations 
for their improvement;  
(c)  Also  include  responses  from  the  EA  and  IAs  to  the  issues  highlighted  by  the 
auditor  Report  on  the  degree  of  compliance of  each  of the financial  covenants  in 
29 This is only for APFS. The auditor reports on the entity Financial statements is prepared separately 
54 
Appendix 2 
the  financing  agreement  and  give  comments,  if  any,  on  internal  and  external 
matters  affecting  such  compliance;  and  provide 
for 
improvement; 
recommendations 
(d)  Communicate  matters  that  have  come  to  the  auditor’s  attention  during  the  audit 
which might have a significant impact on the implementation of the project;  
(e)  Give  comments  on  the  extent  to  which  outstanding  issues/qualifications  issues 
have been addressed; 
(f)  Give comments on the status of significant matters raised in previous management 
letters; and on previous audits’ recommendations that have not been satisfactorily 
implemented;   
(g)  Give comments on significant matters that the auditor considers should be brought 
to  ADB’s  attention  and  any  other  matters  that  the  auditor  considers  pertinent, 
including ineligible expenditures 
(h) 
Include responses from the EA and IAs to the issues highlighted by the auditor. 
(i)  Provide  practical  recommendations  on  the  steps  that  could  be  taken  to  become 
materially  compliant  with  the  agreed  project  accounting  policies  (see  Terms  and 
Definitions in Annex 1), together with a time frame for making these changes; 
(j)  Any other matters that the auditor considers should be brought to the attention of 
the project’s management. 
VI. 
AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
17.  
The auditor should have access to all legal documents, correspondences, and any other 
information associated with the project and deemed necessary by the auditor. The auditor will 
also  obtain  confirmation  of  amounts  disbursed  and  outstanding  at  ADB.  Available  information 
should  include  copies  of  the  relevant:  project  appraisal  document;  financing  agreement; 
financial  management  assessment  reports;  supervision  mission  reports  and  implementation 
status reports.  
VII. 
AUDITOR QUALIFICATIONS: 
18.   Requirement  on  the  Qualification  of  Auditing  Company  and  Auditors  are  as 
follows: 
(a)  For  Auditing  Company:  Be  a  legal  entity  with  business  license  granted  by  the 
competent authority. 
(b)  For  Auditor:  (i)  Auditors  shall  hold  relevant  professional  qualifications30  with  in-
depth experience in conducting audits of project financial statements. They should 
be properly granted with relevant professional license by the Ministry of Finance; (ii) 
Audit managers shall have at least 8 years’ experience while audit seniors who are 
the  team  leader  shall  have  at  least  5  years’  experience  and  audit  assistant  shall 
have  at  least  2  years’  experience  in  their  profession;  and  (iii)  All  established 
procedures  and  methodology  are  reliable  and  in  conformity  with  International 
Standards on Auditing.  
Reporting Requirements: The audited financial statements including the report should 
19. 
be received by ADB not later than six months after the end of the fiscal year/period to which the 
audit  refers  and  should  be  prepared  in  English  and  Myammar  languages  in  5  hard  copies 
separately  for  each.  The  financial  statements  in  English  version  should  be  prepared  in  US$, 
30 International auditing qualifications (ACCA, CPA Australia, etc.) should also be considered in evaluating technical 
audit proposal 
Appendix 2 
55 
while  for  the  Myammar  version  should  be  prepared  in  Chat  (state  exchange  rate  used 
accordingly).  
20.   Reporting relationships: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
The  audit  services  will  be  contracted  by  the  Ministry  of  Hotels  and  Tourism, 
Myammar. 
The estimated time for providing the relevant documents to the auditor should be 
by  30  April  (one  month  after  financial  year-end)  to  ensure  that  the  Auditor  can 
accomplish  the  audit  report  can  be  submitted  to  ADB  by  30  September  (the 
latest, 6 months after the financial year-end).  
The Auditor shall report to the National Project Management Unit, the Ministry of 
Hotels and Tourism, Myammar 
The  Auditor  should  maintain  and  file  the  work  papers  and  provide  them  to  the 
Government and/or ADB when requested. 
Annex 1 
The Guidance including Terms and Definitions used in this TOR  
TOR template: The template of this TOR is appropriate for an APFS audit. It should be 
1. 
completed—by  the  borrower,  Executing  Agency  (EA)  or  Project  Preparatory  Technical 
Assistance  (PPTA)  consultants—and  provided  to  ADB  for  comments  before  fact  finding.  This 
template can be applied to the audit of either a revenue-earning or nonrevenue-earning project. 
2. 
Record  Keeping.  The  auditor  shall  pay  particular  attention  to  whether  all  necessary 
supporting documents, records, and accounts have been kept in respect of all project activities, 
with clear linkages between the accounting records and the APFS. This shall include:  
a)  computation  and  recalculation,  including  checking  the  mathematical  accuracy  of 
estimates, accounts or records;  
b)  reconciliation, including reconciling related accounts to each other, subsidiary records 
to primary records and internal records to external documents;  
c)  physical  observation,  including  inspecting  or  counting  tangible  assets,  such  as 
materials, inventory, land buildings, property or equipment; 
d)  confirmation, including directly confirming balances or transactions with external third 
parties, such as cash balances, accounts receivable or accounts payable;  
e)  sampling, including vouching or examining supporting documentation to determine if 
f) 
balances are properly stated; and  
tracing,  including  tracing  journal  postings,  subsidiary  ledger  balances,  and  other 
details to corresponding general ledger accounts or trial balances. 
3. 
The Scope: The auditor should be sufficiently clear with the scope of the audit to properly 
define  what  is  expected  of,  but  should  not  restrict  the  audit  procedures  or  the  techniques  the 
auditor may wish to use to form an opinion. The TOR will not generally have to be customized to 
a particular audit situation. The list of issues outlined in the TOR is not exhaustive, nor should all 
matters be addressed in every project. The scope and detail of an audit are likely to be unique 
for each project. 
The form of the APFS and supporting documentation that will be supplied to the auditor, 
4. 
and on which they are to give an opinion and a report, should be specified. In practice, the form 
and  content  of  APFS  will  vary  among  countries  and  projects.  For  instance,  the  APFS  may 
56 
Appendix 2 
comprise a Statement of Receipts and Payments only on project transactions. Other schedules 
may  include  cumulative  work-in-progress,  assets  and  inventories,  and  summarized  bank 
reconciliation. The estimated time for providing these documents to the auditor should be stated 
(e.g., one month after financial year-end). This schedule helps the auditee and the auditor plan 
for the accounts-preparation and the audit process. 
Internal Control Systems. The auditor shall assess the adequacy of the project financial 
5. 
management systems, including internal controls. The assessment includes whether:  
a)  proper  authorizations are  obtained and  documented  before transactions  are  entered 
into;  
b)  accuracy  and  consistency  are  achieved  in  recording,  classifying,  summarizing  and 
reporting transactions;  
c)  reconciliations with internal and external evidence are performed on a timely basis by 
the appropriate level of management;  
transactions are allowable under the agreements governing the project; 
d)  balances can be confirmed with external parties;  
e)  adequate documentation and an audit trail is retained to support transactions;  
f) 
g)  errors  and omissions  are  detected  and  corrected by  project  personnel  in the  normal 
course  of  their  duties,  and  management  is  informed  of  recurring  problems  or 
weaknesses; 
h)  management  does  not  override  the  normal  procedures  and  the  internal  control 
structure; and  
i)  assets are property accounted for, safeguarded and can be physically inspected. 
Statements  of  Expenditures  (SOEs).  The  auditor  shall  audit  all  SOEs  used  as  the 
6. 
basis for the submission of credit withdrawal applications to ADB. These expenditures should be 
compared for project eligibility with the relevant financing agreements (and with reference to the 
Report and Recommendation to the President, RRP, and other project documents for guidance 
when  considered  necessary).  Where  ineligible  expenditures  are  identified  as  having  been 
included  in  withdrawal  applications and  reimbursed  against,  these should be  separately  noted 
by the auditor. The annual audit report should include a separate paragraph commenting on the 
accuracy  and  propriety  of  expenditures  withdrawn  under  SOE  procedures,  and  the  extent  to 
which ADB can rely on those SOEs as a basis for credit disbursement. Annexed to the APFS 
should  be  a  schedule  listing  individual  SOE  withdrawal  applications  by  specific  reference 
number and amount. 
Designated  Accounts:  The  Imprest  Account  reflects:  (i)  deposits  and  replenishment 
7.  
received  from  financiers;  (ii)  payments  substantiated  by  withdrawal  applications;  and  (iii)  the 
remaining  balance  at  financial  year-end.  The  auditor  must  form  an  opinion  on  whether  the 
Imprest  Account(s)  and  the  sub-accounts  were  used  in  compliance  with  required  procedures 
(e.g.,  those  of  ADB  and  other  co-financiers),  and  the  fairness  of  the  presentation  of  each 
account  activity  and  the  year-end  balance.  The  auditor  should  examine  the  eligibility  and 
correctness  of  financial  transactions  during  the  period  under  review,  account  balances  at  the 
end  of  the  period,  the  operation  and  use  of  each  account  in  accordance  with  the  financing 
agreement,  and the  adequacy  of  internal  controls  for  this  particular  disbursement  mechanism. 
The  auditor  will  examine  whether  each  Account  has  been  maintained  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of the relevant financing agreements.  
Financial  Covenants:  The  financial  covenants  that  are  applicable  to  projects  are 
8. 
included in grant agreements. The Auditor should list, describe and fully reference all applicable 
financial covenants, review and comment on the compliance. 
Appendix 2 
57 
9. 
Compliance with Financial Covenants. The auditor will confirm compliance with each 
financial covenant contained in the project legal documents. Where present, the auditor should 
indicate  the  extent  of  any  noncompliance  by  comparing  required  and  actual  performance 
measurements for each financial covenant for the financial year concerned. 
10. 
Financial  Assurances  Applicable  to  Projects:  The  financial  assurances  that  are 
applicable  to  the  EA—such  as  a  commitment  to  employ  suitably-qualified  accounting 
personnel—will  be  included  in  project  legal  documents.  The  auditor  should  list,  describe  and 
fully reference all applicable financial assurances, review and comment on the compliance. 
11. 
Compliance  with  Financial  Assurances.  The  auditor  will  confirm  compliance  with  all 
financial  assurances  contained  in  the  project  legal  documents  Where  present,  the  auditor 
should indicate the extent of any noncompliance by comparing required and actual performance 
of  the  Government’s  executing  and  implementing  agencies  in  respect  of  these  ADB 
requirements for the financial year concerned. 
Procurement  Policies  and  Procedures:  Review  ADB  Procurement  Guidelines  and 
12. 
comment on the compliance of the procurement practices of the project.  
Technical Experts: Depending on the complexity of procurement activities, the auditor 
13. 
may  consider  involving  technical  experts  during  the  audit  engagement.  In  cases  where  such 
experts are involved, the auditor is expected to comply with provisions of International Standard 
on  Auditing  620:  Using  the  Work  of  an  Expert.  Consideration  to  use  of  the  work  of  experts 
should be brought to the early attention of the borrower and the ADB for mutual agreement and 
appropriate guidance. 
14. 
Auditor requirements: The details of the proposed contractor of the auditor’s services 
should  be  provided.  If  the  contractor  is  acting  on  behalf  of,  or  is  part  of,  a  larger  authority  or 
entity, this should be disclosed, to assist prospective auditors to determine their independence. 
15. 
Annual  Project  Financial  Statements  (APFS):  APFS  may  comprise  a  Statement  of 
Receipts and Payments (Cash flow statement). This template is specifically intended for audits 
of  these types  of  APFS.  Other  schedules of  value  or  cumulative work-in-progress,  assets  and 
inventories and a summarized reconciled bank statement are to be attached. Project reporting 
requirements  will  usually  be  specified  in  the  RRP  or  project  documents  including  in  the  grant 
agreement.  The  component  parts  of  the  APFS  should  be  specified  in  this  TOR.  The  APFS 
comprises:  
 [Option A: Generally IAS-compliant Accrual-based Financial Statements]: 
-  Statement of Accounting Policies 
-  Statement of Financial Performance (or income statement) 
-  Statement of Financial Position (or balance sheet) 
-  Statement of Movements in Equity 
-  Statement of Cash Flows 
-  Notes to the Financial Statements 
-  Statement of Uses of Funds by Project Activity 
-  Other Information (Specify) 
[Option B: Other Financial Reports]: 
-  Statement of Accounting/Financial Policies 
-  Statement of Income/Cash Receipts 
58 
Appendix 2 
-  Statement of Expenses/Cash Payments 
-  Statement of Cash Flows/Cash Receipts and Payments 
-  Statement of Uses of Funds by Project Activity 
-  Notes to the Financial Statements ,and Other Information (Specify) 
16. 
APFS  should  include:  (a)  a  summary  of  funds  received  showing  ADB  funds,  any  co-
financing  and  counterpart  funds  separately;  (b)  a  summary  of  expenditures  shown  under  the 
main  project  components,  allocation  of  grant  proceeds,  procurement  plan,  and  by  main 
categories  of  expenditures  (as  referenced  in  grant  and  appraisal  documentation)  for  the  year 
ending 31 March 201_ and cumulative expenditures on the project to date; and (c) statement of 
fund balance as of 31 March 201_, and the following fiscal years (use the actual fiscal year of 
each country for each annual audit report).  
Note: The Project will use Option B 
17. 
Agreed  Project  Accounting  Policies:  The  project  accounting  policies  that  govern 
APFS preparation will normally be agreed and documented in the RRP and/or grant agreement. 
Choose the appropriate option. ―Agreed project accounting policies‖ with regard to preparation 
of Annual Project Accounts, means:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
[Option A: Cash-based International Public Sector Accounting Standards] the 
cash-based  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standard  (IPSAS)  promulgated 
by the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). 
[Option  B:  Accrual-based  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards] 
the  accrual-based  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS) 
promulgated by the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). 
[Option  C:  International  Accounting  Standards]  the  International  Financial 
Reporting  Standards  (IFRS)  issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards 
Board (IASB) (also known as international accounting standards). 
[Option  D:  National  Accounting  Standards]  the  accounting  standards  issued  by 
[national authority]. 
[Option  E:  Modified  National  Accounting  Standards]  the  accounting  standards 
issued  by  [national  authority],  with  the  following  modifications  and/or  additional 
disclosures: 
[Option  F:  Specific  Government  Accounting  Standards]  describe 
standards. 
these 
Note:  The  Project  accounting  policies  will  use  the  specific  government  standards 
(derived from the British’s accounting standards 
18. 
Applicable agreed auditing standards: The agreed auditing standards will normally be 
documented  in  the  RRP,  grant  agreement,  and/or  other  project  documents.  Choose  the 
appropriate option. ―Agreed auditing standards‖ means:  
a) [Option  A:  International  Standards  on  Auditing]  the  International  Standards  on 
Auditing  (ISA)  promulgated  by  the  International  Auditing  and  Assurance  Standards 
Board (IAASB). The auditor shall review the following ISAs:  
- 
ISA 240: Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud in an Audit of Financial 
statements; ISA 200: Overall Objectives of Independent Auditors, and the Conduct 
of an Audit the Entity in Accordance with ISA:  
ISA 210: Agreeing the terms of audit engagements  
ISA 220: Quality control for an Audit of FSs.  
- 
- 
Appendix 2 
59 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
ISA 315: Identifying and Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatements through 
Understanding the Entity and its Environment  
ISA 250: Consideration of Laws and Regulations in an Audit of Financial 
Statements:  
ISA 260: Communication of Audit Matters with Those Charged with Governance - 
ISA 330: The Auditor’s Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks  
ISA 402: Audit Considerations Relating to an Entity Using a Service Organization 
ISA 580: Written Representations  
ISA 620: Using the Work of an Expert. 
b)  Option  B:  INTOSAI  Auditing  Standards]  the  auditing  standards  promulgated  by 
c) 
the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI). 
[Option  C:  National  Auditing  Standards]  the  auditing  standards  promulgated  by 
[national authority]. 
19.   Different  standards:  if  the  auditing  standards  which  auditors  shall  comply  with  to 
conduct  audit  procedures  and express  their  opinions  on  the  FS,  the  statement  on  compliance 
and the statement on effectiveness of the internal control system are different, the auditor shall 
disclose the differences including the implications in its reports. 
Note: In principle, the auditor will apply the international standard of auditing (ISA). The auditor 
shall disclose the differences including the implications in its reports. 
Annex 2 
Project Background, Executing and Implementing Agencies 
A.  The Project to be Audited: 
1. 
2. 
3.  Project Name: 
Project No:  
Grant No.   
48322-001 
__________________________________ 
Economic Empowerment of the Poor and Women in the East - West 
Economic Corridor  
4. 
5. 
6. 
Executing Agency: The Ministry of Hotels and Tourism 
Implementing Agencies: The Office of the Chief Minister for Mon State  
Total Project Costs:  
$ 3.452 million (from all financiers, excluding in kind contribution) 
B.  Project  Description:  Describe  the  project  here  in  the  context  of  its  contribution  to 
achievement  of  the  EA’s  economic  goals.  The  auditor  must  understand  the  "purpose  for 
which  the  funds  are  intended"  in  the  context  of  the  broad  project  objectives  as  well  as  in 
terms of the specific project budget.  
C.  The Executing- and the Implementing Agencies (EA/IAs): A detailed description—both 
legal  and  generally  informative—should  be  provided  here  to  enable  the  auditor  to 
understand  fully  the  nature,  location  and  objective  of  the  executing-  and  implementing 
agencies  (EA/IAs),  the  entities  under  audit.  Geographic  characteristics  should  be 
described, together with:  
(a)  organization charts;  
(b)  names of senior managers;  
(c)  name and qualification of the person(s) responsible for financial management, 
accounting and internal audit;  
(d)  name and address of any existing external auditor;  
60 
Appendix 2 
(e)  computing or other data processing facilities in use;  
(f)  a copy of the latest published financial statements; if applicable; and 
(g)  internal facilities (if any) available to an external auditor (e.g., office accommodation, 
calculators, computer facilities). A general summary of the financial management 
assessment of the EA/IAs should be included, together with a reference that the full 
financial management assessment will be made available to the auditor; 
D.  Accounting  and  Financial  Management  Practices:  Briefly  summarize 
relevant 
accounting  and  financial  management  practices.  Various  diagnostic  reports  are  available 
that  describe  accounting  and  financial  management  practices  (e.g.,  ADB  Diagnostic 
Studies  of  Accounting  and  Auditing,  World  Bank  Country  Financial  Accountability 
Assessments).  Emphasis  should  be  placed  on  issues  raised  and  risks  identified  in  these 
reports.  
Annex 3 
Funds provided by ADB and its co-financiers 
Please complete the following tables: 
2.1. Funds Allocation by Components 
No 
Item 
A. Base Cost 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Subtotal (A) 
Amount ($) 
% 
B. Contingencies 
C. Financing Charges During Implementation 
 0 
Total (A+B+C) 
2.2. Funds Allocation by Financing Plan 
Source 
Amount     
($ ) 
Share of Total 
(%) 
 Asian Development Bank 
 10,000,000 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Total 
2.3. Allocation of ADB Grant Proceeds 
No 
Items 
Category 
Sub-
category 
Amount Allocated 
ADB Financing 
Percentage and Basis 
for Withdrawal from the 
Grant Account 
Appendix 2 
61 
Total  
2.4. Allocation by Procurement Plan  
(Please attach the Procurement Plan here). 
2.5. Budget Allocation by Executing- and Implementing Agencies: 
Items 
Total Project Costs  
Direct payment from ADB and cofinanciers 
Through Imprest accounts 
Through sub-accounts 
Notes: Please segregate the budget allocation for each imprest- and sub-account 
Amount  
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Remarks 
for xx accounts 
for xx sub-accounts 
2.6. Cofinancier(s) and Counterpart funds: 
Please  also  segregate  the  number  of  accounts  for  the  cofinanciers(s)  and  counterpart  funds, 
and budget allocation for each account 
Notes: See PAM and Grant Agreement for details and consistencies  
Appendix 3 
62 
Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous People Safeguards Guidelines 
The Project is categorized C for involuntary resettlement (IR) and B for Indigenous People (IP) 
impacts as per Operations Manual F1/ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement, 2009 (SPS). Any civil 
works  or  infrastructure  upgrading  that  may  cause  any  involuntary  resettlement  or  land 
acquisition or indigenous people impacts will not be eligible to be financed under the grant. Any 
component  that  may  cause  any  involuntary  resettlement  or  forced  land  acquisition  will  not  be 
eligible to be financed under the grant. For minor land requirements required for the subproject 
under  output  3,  means  to  acquire  the  land  is  using  available  government  land  (with  no  IR 
impacts). Due diligence during the project implementation prior to any civil works shall confirm 
(i) the project will not entail further land acquisition; (ii) that where land is available, such lands 
are free from encumbrances; and (iii) there are no past or existing land and resettlement issues 
in regard to existing facilities. 
The  project  is  primarily  focused  on  training  and  capacity  building  for  the  rural  poor.  Both  the 
project  areas  have  a  high  presence  of  ethnic  minority  groups  who  are  the  primary  project 
beneficiaries and are the overwhelming majority. Hence it meets the criteria of integration of IP 
elements  into  the  project  design.  Pre-identification  of  villages  (to  be  confirmed  during  project 
implementation) with people from Mon and Karen groups who will be the overwhelming majority 
of  the  beneficiaries  with  other  ethnic  groups.  Consultation  and  participation  will  be  continued 
throughout the project cycle to ensure their involvement in linkages to micro finance providers to 
access credit, training and other project activities.  
In order to ensure compliance with ADB’s SPS, the Ministry of Hotels and Tourism as executing 
agency  will  ensure  social  safeguards  compliance  under  the  project  and  provided  with  the 
required  fund  and  resources  (i.e.  staff).  A  set  of  criteria  and  screening  procedures  for  eligible 
civil works or infrastructure upgrading will be established and specific requirements for land will 
be  set  up  and  implemented  by  the  Project  Implementation  Unit  (PIU).  Social  safeguards 
compliance monitoring will  be  included  in  the  regular  project  progress report  and submitted  to 
ADB.  
Criteria and screening procedures for IR and IP safeguards compliance are: 
1.  No    civil  works  or  infrastructure  upgrading  shall  cause  any  IR  and  IP  impacts.  Specific 
screening check list is included in this guideline. The PIU will prepare the check list for each 
civil works or infrastructure upgrading  to be confirmed by the assigned staff of PMU prior to 
submission for financing.  Priority  should be  given  to  civil  works  or  infrastructure  upgrading 
which will not involve additional land requirements.  
2.  Land acquisition will not cause:  
a.  Involuntary resettlement of the formal or informal land users, squatters or encroachers of 
the land 
b.  Dispossession of assets belonging to the ethnic minority and/or vulnerable groups 
c.  Significant  loss  of  assets  or  source  of  income/  livelihood  of  the  owner  of  the  donated 
assets/lands.  
3.  When  government  land  is  being  used,  it  has  to  confirm  with  the  IR  and  IP  screening 
checklist for the  civil works or infrastructure upgrading to be eligible for grant financing 
4.  Under  any  circumstances,  the  grant  fund  must  not  be  used  for  purchasing  of  land  for 
implementation of civil works or infrastructure upgrading.  
Appendix 3 
63 
To  ensure  policy  compliance  of  the  project  the  assigned  staff  in  PIU  for  safeguards  issues 
should: 
1.  Receive  adequate  training  on  ADB  SPS  and  how  to  conduct  the  safeguards  screening 
procedures, 
2.  Conduct the required consultations with the all project beneficiaries on the project activities 
and safeguards requirements, 
3.  Provide  training  to  the  implementing  partners  and  PIU  members  on  the  ADB  safeguards 
principles and  civil works or infrastructure upgrading screening procedures, 
4.  Regularly monitor the project compliance on safeguards policy and prepare a report to PMU 
for submission to ADB, 
5.  Be equipped with the necessary facilities to conduct the training and monitoring activities.  
IR and IP Screening Checklist 
INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT & INDIGENOUS PEOPLE CHECKLIST 
(Due Diligence Activity) 
A.   
Introduction 
1. 
Each  subsection/  section  needs  to  be  screened  for  any  involuntary  resettlement 
(IR)  and/or  indigenous  people  (IP)  impacts  which  will  occur  or  already  occurred.  This 
screening  determines  the  eligibility  of  the  civil  works  or  infrastructure  upgrading  to  be 
financed under the Grant.  
B. 
District/ Administrative Name:____________________________ 
Location (km):_______________________________________ 
Civil work dates (proposed): _____________________________ 
Technical Description: 
Information on subsection/ section: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
________________________________ 
d. 
______________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________ 
C. 
Screening Questions for Involuntary Resettlement & Indigenous People Impact 
2. 
Below  is  the  initial  screening  for  IR  and  IP  impacts  and  due  diligence  exercise. 
Both  permanent  and  temporary  impacts  must  be  considered  and  reported  in  the 
screening process. 
Type of Impacts 
Yes 
No 
Will it require permanent and/or temporary 
involuntary land acquisition? 
Is the ownership status and current usage of 
the land known? 
Are there any non-titled people who live or 
earn their livelihood at the site or within the 
corridor of impact (COI) / Right of Way 
(ROW)? 
yes, 
Remarks 
civil  works  or 
 If 
the 
infrastructure  upgrading 
is  not 
eligible  for  project  financing  and 
must  be  dropped  from  the  list  of 
proposed projects.  
If no, further clarification of the 
owner of the land is required 
civil  works  or 
the 
If 
infrastructure  upgrading 
is  not 
eligible  for  project  financing  and 
must  be  dropped  from  the  list  of 
proposed projects. 
yes, 
64 
Appendix 3 
Type of Impacts 
Yes 
No 
Remarks 
Will there be loss of agricultural plots?  
Will there be losses of crops, trees, fixed 
assets (i.e. fences, pumps, etc.), incomes or 
livelihood?  
Will people lose access to facilities, services, 
or natural resources?  
Will any social or economic activities be 
affected by land use-related changes? 
Will the proposed subproject involve the 
transfer, reallocation or use of assets/ 
resources owned/managed/ used by ethnic 
minority or vulnerable groups in the project 
site? 
D. 
Summary of Impacts 
yes, 
yes, 
civil  works  or 
If 
the 
infrastructure  upgrading 
is  not 
eligible  for  project  financing  and 
must  be  dropped  from  the  list  of 
proposed projects. 
civil  works  or 
If 
the 
infrastructure  upgrading 
is  not 
eligible  for  project  financing  and 
must  be  dropped  from  the  list  of 
proposed projects. 
If yes, the civil works or 
infrastructure upgrading is not 
eligible for project financing and 
must be dropped from the list of 
proposed projects. 
civil  works  or 
If 
the 
infrastructure  upgrading 
is  not 
eligible  for  project  financing  and 
must  be  dropped  from  the  list  of 
proposed projects. 
civil  works  or 
If 
the 
infrastructure  upgrading 
is  not 
eligible  for  project  financing  and 
must  be  dropped  from  the  list  of 
proposed projects.  
yes, 
yes, 
Has  involuntary  resettlement  (IR)  and  Indigenous  People  (IP)  (negative)  impacts,  the 
After reviewing the answers above, PMU/PIU Team confirm that the assigned/ proposed 
3. 
subsection/ section is  
 [  ] 
proposed civil works or infrastructure upgrading is ineligible for project financing  
 [  ] 
for project financing 
Has no IR nor IP impact, the proposed civil works or infrastructure upgrading is eligible 
Prepared By: 
Signature: 
Name: 
Position: 
Date:  
Verified by: 
Signature: 
Name: 
Position: 
Date: 
Appendix 4 
Gender Action Plan Monitoring Report Template 
 Gender Action Plan (GAP Activities, Indicators and Targets, Timeframe and Responsibility) Progress to Date  (This should include information on period of actual implementation, sex-disaggregated qualitative and quantitative updates (e.g. number of participating women, women beneficiaries of services, etc.). However, some would be in process - so explain what has happened towards meeting this target. Issues and Challenges (Please include reasons why an activity was not fully implemented, or if targets fall short, or reasons for delay, etc.) Output 1:              Output 2:                 Output 3:                  Output 4:          
Guidelines and Template for Project Progress Reports 
Appendix 5 
66 
A. 
Introduction and Basic Data 
For quarterly progress reports, provide the following: 
  ADB  grant  number,  project  title,  borrower,  executing  agency(ies),  implementing 
agency(ies); 
total estimated project cost and financing plan; 
 
  status of project financing including availability of counterpart funds and cofinancing; 
  dates of approval, signing, and effectiveness of ADB grant; 
  original and revised (if applicable) ADB grant closing date and elapsed grant period 
based on original and revised (if applicable) grant closing dates; and 
  date of last ADB review mission. 
B.  
Utilization of Funds (ADB Grant, Cofinancing, and Counterpart Funds) 
Provide the following: 
  cumulative contract awards financed by the ADB grant, cofinancing, and counterpart 
funds  (commitment  of  funds  to  date),  and  comparison  with  time-bound  projections 
(targets); 
  cumulative  disbursements  from  the  ADB  grant,  cofinancing,  and  counterpart  funds 
(expenditure to date), and comparison with time-bound projections (targets); and 
re-estimated costs to completion, need for reallocation within ADB grant categories, 
and whether an overall project cost overrun is likely. 
 
C.  
Project Purpose 
Provide the following: 
  status  of  project  scope/implementation  arrangements  compared  with  those  in  the 
report  and  recommendation  of  the  President  (RRP),  and  whether  major  changes 
have occurred or will need to be made; 
  an assessment of the likelihood that the immediate development objectives (project 
purpose) will be met in part or in full, and whether remedial measures are required 
based on the current project scope and implementation arrangements; 
  an assessment of changes to the key assumptions and risks that affect attainment of 
the development objectives; and 
  other project developments, including monitoring and reporting on environmental and 
the  project's  viability  or 
that  might  adversely  affect 
social 
accomplishment of immediate objectives. 
requirements 
D.  
Implementation Progress 
Provide the following: 
  assessment of project implementation arrangements such as establishment, staffing, 
 
and funding of the PMO or PIU; 
information relating to other aspects of the EA’s internal operations that may impact 
on the implementation arrangements or project progress; 
  progress or achievements in implementation since the last progress report; 
  assessment of the progress of each project component, such as,  
Appendix 5 
67 
recruitment of consultants and their performance; 
- 
-  procurement  of  goods  and  works  (from  preparation  of  detailed  designs  and 
- 
bidding documents to contract awards); and 
the  performance  of  suppliers,  manufacturers,  and  contractors  for  goods  and 
works contracts; 
  assessment  of  progress  in  implementing  the  overall  project  to  date  in  comparison 
with  the  original  implementation  schedule—quantifiable  and  monitorable  target, 
(include  simple  charts  such  as  bar  or  milestone  to  illustrate  progress,  a  chart 
showing actual versus planned expenditure, S-curve graph showing the relationship 
between physical and financial performance, and actual progress in comparison with 
the  original  schedules  and  budgets,  the  reference  framework  or  guidelines  in 
calculating the project progress including examples are shown in Appendix 2); and 
  an  assessment  of  the  validity  of  key  assumptions  and  risks  in  achieving  the 
quantifiable implementation targets. 
E.  
Compliance with Covenants 
Provide the following: 
  compliance  with  policy  grant  covenants  such  as  sector  reform  initiatives  and  EA 
 
 
reforms, and the reasons for any noncompliance or delay in compliance; 
the  EA’s  compliance  with  financial  grant  covenants  including  the  EA’s  financial 
management,  and  the  provision  of  audited  project  accounts  or  audited  agency 
financial statements; and 
the  EA’s  compliance  with  project-specific  grant  covenants  associated  with 
implementation, environment, and social dimensions. 
F. 
Major Project Issues and Problems 
Summarize  the  major  problems  and  issues  affecting  or  likely  to  affect  implementation 
progress,  compliance with covenants,  and achievement  of  immediate  development  objectives. 
Recommend actions to overcome these problems and issues (e.g., changes in scope, changes 
in implementation arrangements, and reallocation of grant proceeds). 
This document is available at:  
http://lnadbg1.asiandevbank.org/cos0003p.nsf/f47286b4d1eb6e9b482569e500308fb9/49dbc302076f92b148256b450
01165b8!OpenDocument 
68 
Appendix 5 
For Each Project Activity a Proposal and Report   
Ministry of Hotels and Tourism, Myanmar 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction: Economic Empowerment of the Poor and Women  
in the East-West Economic Corridor 
(add MOHT and JFPR logos) 
Project Activity Proposal 
Title of Activity: 
Date(s): 
Objective/Justification: 
Location: 
Implementing personnel/partner: 
Participants: 
Methodology: 
Budget: 
Subcontract: 
Remarks: 
List of attachments: 
a. detailed budget 
b. schedule/agenda 
c. other attachments as appropriate 
Recommendations/actions: 
Prepared by:  
Approved by: 
Ministry of Hotels and Tourism, Myanmar 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction: Economic Empowerment of the Poor and Women  
in the East-West Economic Corridor 
Appendix 5 
69 
(add MOHT and JFPR logos) 
Project Activity Report 
Title of Activity: 
Date(s): 
Location: 
Implementing personnel/partner: 
Methodology: 
Outcome: 
Lesson learned: 
Actual budget expenditures: 
Subcontract: 
Remarks: 
Attachments: 
a. Detailed list of expenditures 
b. list of participants in workshops 
c. related technical materials/notes 
d. others (list as appropriate) 
Recommendations/follow-up actions: 
Prepared by:  
Approved by: 
Appendix 6 
70 
Framework and Guidelines in Calculating Project Progress 
Introduction 
A. 
1. 
To  ensure  that  all  implementation  activities  are  reflected  in  measuring  implementation 
progress  against  the  project  implementation  schedule,  the  term  "physical  completion‖  in  the 
PPR has been changed to "project progress.‖ 
2.  
Physical  and  precommencement  activities  are  considered  in  calculating  project 
implementation  progress.  These  activities,  which  may  include  recruitment  of  consultants, 
capacity building, detailed design, preparation of bid and prequalification documents, etc., could 
constitute a significant proportion of overall implementation and therefore should be counted.  
3. 
Each  activity  in  the  implementation  schedule  will  be  weighted  according  to  its  overall 
contribution  (using  time  as  a  reference)  to  progress  of  project  implementation.  These  weights 
will then be used to calculate the percentage of project progress along the entire time span of 
the project. This is to provide a holistic view of the pace of implementation. 
B. 
Framework for Compiling Activity List and Assigning Weights 
As  implementation  activities  and  their  corresponding  weights  will  vary  according  to the 
4. 
type  of  project,  sector,  and  country.  .  The  actual  project  implementation  progress  of  these 
activities  should  be  reported  regularly  through  the  EA’s  quarterly  project  progress  report.  To 
ensure ADB-wide consistency, the following framework has been established; its application will 
be monitored through the PPR. 
Compilation of Activity List 
1. 
5. 
 Identify  major  implementation  activities  and  include  them  in  the  implementation 
schedule, which is attached as an appendix in the report and recommendation of the President 
(RRP).  The  implementation  schedule  should  follow  the  critical  path  of  the  project’s  major 
activities  in  project  implementation  taking  account  of  various  country,  sector,  and  project 
constraints. 
Assignment of Weights 
2.  
6.  
Corresponding  weights  for  each  activity  should  be  assigned  to  ensure  that  ―project 
progress" measures the percentage of achievement (nonfinancial except when the project has 
credit components) for all events during the entire duration of the implementation schedule. To 
avoid  disproportionate  assignment  of  weights,  to  the  extent  possible  these  should  be  evenly 
distributed  along  the  implementation  schedule.  When  activities  are  concurrent,  avoid  ―double 
counting.‖ 
Computation of Project Progress 
3.  
Once  all  activities  are  identified  and  corresponding  weights  assigned,  project  progress 
7. 
should be calculated using the following steps: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Determine the actual percentage progress (nonfinancial) of each activity. 
Multiply these percentages by the assigned weight of each activity to arrive at the 
weighted progress. 
Add  up  the  resulting  weighted  progress  of  all  activities  to  determine  the  project 
progress. 
Page  3  of  this  Appendix  provides  an  illustration  of  this  calculation  using  a  generic  sample 
implementation schedule and this Appendix, page 4 a specific example in the education sector. 
Sample Table for Calculating Weighted Project Progress 
Appendix 5 
71 
This document is available at:  
http://lnadbg1.asiandevbank.org/cos0003p.nsf/f47286b4d1eb6e9b482569e500308fb9/49dbc302076f92b148256b450
01165b8!OpenDocument 
72 
Appendix 7 
Grant Status Report Template 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (JFPR) 
1. 
GRANT STATUS REPORT 
(Note: To be received by OCO within one month after the end of the reporting period) 
A. Basic Grant Data 
DMC:    
Grant Number: 
Name of Grant:  
Approved Grant Amount:  
$  
Responsible Project Officer and Division {name, position,  
e-mail, phone}: 
Grant  Commencement  Date 
(Date LoA was signed): 
Original Closing Date / Revised Closing date (after extension): 
Executing Agency {Names, Address, Contact Persons, E-mail, Phone, Fax}: 
Implementing Agency(ies) {Names, Address, Contact Persons, E-mail, Phone, Fax}: 
B. Grant Status 
Period of Reporting {date from/to}: 
Date when this report was prepared: 
General 
(Summary) 
Status 
A 
 
B 
 
C 
 
D 
 
E31 
 Specify:______________________________  
Grant Development Objective: 
Grant Components 
Targeted/Expected Output 
Physical 
Accomplishments  
(%) 
Rating32 
(HS,S,PS,U) 
Notes - Remarks: 
31 A = Financially Closed; B = Implementation already started or is ongoing; C = LOA signed but implementation has not started yet; 
D = ADB Approved but LOA not yet signed; E = Others, (please briefly specify, e.g. extension, or issues that need to be flagged) 
32 HS=Highly Satisfactory, S=Satisfactory, PS=Partly Satisfactory, U=Unsatisfactory 
Appendix 7 
73 
C. Grant Utilization 
Grant Committed: 
$ 
Cumulative 
Disbursements: 
$ 
Balance: 
Notes - Remarks: 
$ 
Annual Disbursements (from ADB to Grant Accounts): 
1st Qtr. 
2nd Qtr. 
3rd Qtr. 
4th Qtr. 
Projected: 
Actual: 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
$ 
Goods 
Services 
Notes - Remarks: 
No. of 
contracts 
Total 
Amount 
No. of 
Contracts 
Total 
Amount 
Procurement of 
Goods and 
Services: 
Contracts 
Awarded: 
Outstanding 
Contracts: 
D. Major Issues / Problems {please add extra sheet if necessary} 
Problems / Issues 
Action Taken / Proposed 
Prepared By: 
Name / Division / Signature 
Comments 
Project Officer: 
74 
Appendix 7 
Cleared By: 
Name/Division/Signature 
Comments 
1. Director General:  
2. Director: 
75 
Financial Reporting and Audit Requirements and Guidelines 
PAI No. 5.07 
Issued on December 2001 
Revised on June 2012 
Appendix 8 
Introduction  
A. 
Article 14(xi) of the  Agreement Establishing the Asian Development Bank  (the Charter) 
1. 
requires  ADB  to  take  necessary  measures  to  ensure  that  the  proceeds  of  any  loan  made, 
guaranteed,  or  participated  in  by  ADB  are  used  only  for  the  purposes for  which  the  loan  was 
granted and with due attention to considerations of economy and efficiency.33 In addition, Article 
14(xiv) of the Charter requires ADB to be guided by sound banking principles in its operations.  
2. 
To fulfill these requirements of the Charter, ADB requires borrowers  to annually submit 
annual  audited  project  financial  statements  and  the  related  audit  reports,  and  management 
letters, and where applicable an independent entity’s audited financial statements, audit report 
and management letter.34  
3. 
ADB  requires  that  borrowers'  financial  management  and  reporting  systems  to  be 
adequate to generate reliable financial data relevant to each ADB financed operation, including 
the review and audit thereof.35 
The  project  administration  instruction  (PAI)  applies  to:  investment  activities  that  have 
4. 
loans; 
been  undertaken  with  support 
nonsovereign  financing;  sector  development  programs  and  policy  based  loans  which  have 
discrete  and  identifiable  investment  components;  financial  intermediary  loans;  and  project 
design advances under the project design facility.36 
from  project,  sector,  and 
technical  assistance 
ADB’s Public Communications Policy (PCP) 2011,37 provides that for sovereign projects 
5. 
for which the invitation to negotiate is issued on or after 2 April 2012, ADB shall publicly disclose 
the  annual  audited  project  financial  statements  and  the  auditor’s  opinions  for  these  financial 
statements. 
1.    Communicating ADB Financial Reporting and Audit Requirements 
6. 
ADB’s financial reporting and auditing requirements, including public  disclosure, should 
be  adequately  communicated  in  national-level  discussions  to the  borrower  and  supreme  audit 
33  The above requirements also apply to ADB grant financing. 
34    See  Operations  Manual  (OM)  Section  J7  (Project  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing)  for  definition  of  terms  and 
policy requirements. 
35  See OM Section G2 (Financial Management Systems, Financial Analysis, and Financial Performance Indicators) 
for  a  definition  of  financial  management.  Where  appropriate,  ADB  should  consider  capacity  development 
assistance to address financial management risks. 
36  This PAI is applicable to all projects that are active, under preparation, and subject to the PCP audit disclosure 
requirements and projects under preparation coincidentally with the effectiveness of the PCP on 2 April 2012. As 
audit  arrangements for active projects  for  the  current  fiscal year  have been  made,  on  a  project-by-project  basis 
agreement  will  be  documented  in  an  aide  memoire  or  memorandum  of  understanding  with  each  EA  on  when 
relevant requirements will be applied. 
37  See OM Section L3 (Public Communications). 
76 
institution (SAI) with agreed arrangements set forth in a memorandum of understanding or aide-
memoire.38 
7. 
Project financial reporting and auditing requirements should be discussed during project 
processing  at  the  project  identification  stage.  By  the  end  of  the  fact-finding  mission,  the 
borrower and the ADB project team leader (PTL) should agree on the form, content, and timing 
of submissions to meet ADB’s financial reporting, including progress reporting,39 requirements. 
These arrangements should be set forth in the memorandum of understanding or aide-memoire 
for  the  mission  and the project  administration manual  (PAM).40  During  implementation,  project 
financial  reporting  and  auditing  requirements  detailed  in  the  PAM  should  be  reviewed  with 
project officials, particularly after a change in personnel.  
2.  PAI Content 
8. 
This project administration instruction (PAI) covers the following: Section B covers ADB’s 
financial  reporting  and  auditing  requirements  including  project  financial  reporting,  auditing  of 
annual  project  and  independent  entity  financial  statements,  selection  of  auditors,  and  a  SAI. 
Section  C  covers  monitoring  compliance  with  ADB  requirements  including  reporting  periods; 
acceptability  of  annual  project  financial  statements,  and  review  of  an  audit  report,  a 
management  letter,  and  an  independent  entity’s  annual  financial  statements;  communicating 
review results; and unaudited interim project financial statements.41  
Sample  project  financial  statements,  management  and  audit  letters,  audit  terms  of 
9. 
reference, review checklists for ADB staff etc., are provided in technical guidance notes.42  
B. 
ADB’s Requirements  
1.  Annual Project Financial Reporting 
a.   Basic Requirements  
10.   ADB  requires  that  ADB  funds  and  ADB-administered  external  funds  from  financing 
partners be used appropriately and only for the intended purposes. To this end, ADB requires 
submission of the annual audited project financial statements, the audit report and management 
letter for each financial reporting period (fiscal year) from the date of loan effectiveness until the 
loan account’s financial closing on ADB’s record of loan account. The audit report includes the 
auditor's  opinion  on  whether  the  financial  statements  show  a  true  and  fair  view.  The  auditor 
should also provide opinion(s) on the use of the loan proceeds and compliance with the financial 
covenants  of  the  legal  agreement  as  well  as  on  the  use  of  the  procedures  for  the  imprest 
account(s) and statement of expenditures (where applicable).  
11.  When an independent entity’s annual financial statements are subject to audit under the 
DMC’s statutory or regulatory requirements, the borrower or EA will submit to ADB the audited 
38 Meetings should be scheduled to reach agreement with borrowers and SAIs on applying ADB’s public disclosure 
and this PAI’s requirements. The agreement should be monitored by the borrower and ADB, and discussed as 
required in, for example, annual country portfolio review missions. 
39 PAI 5.01 (Executing Agencies Project Progress Reporting) details the requirements regarding the provision of 
unaudited financial statements with EA progress reports.  
40 This could be a facility administration manual (FAM) where a FAM is used for one or more periodic financing 
request (―tranche‖) of a multitranche financing facility.  
41 Technical advice on this PAI will be provided by the Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD). 
42 See for example the ADB. 2006. Handbook for Borrowers on the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects. 
RSDD will revise this handbook and prepare a similar handbook for ADB staff guidance after approval of this PAI. 
77 
financial statements within one month of their approval by the relevant authority.43 In this case, 
the audited financial statements should be for each reporting period (fiscal year) from the date 
of loan effectiveness until the loan account’s financial closing on ADB’s record of loan account. 
When such is not required, ADB will not require an audit to be conducted.  
12. 
The  audit  should  be  conducted  in  accordance  with  auditing  standards  acceptable  to 
ADB44  and carried  out  by  independent  auditors  acceptable  to ADB. The  audit  should relate  to 
the whole project, not just to the ADB-financed portion. 
13. 
 A complete set of annual audited project financial statements should be provided by the 
borrower  to  ADB,  together  with  the  audit  report  (which  includes  the  auditor’s  opinion  as 
described in para. 25 below) and management letter.  
b.  Form of Annual Project Financial Statements  
14. 
The  annual  project  financial  statements  should  be  prepared  on  the  cash  basis  of 
accounting  and  include  (at  a  minimum)  cash-based  receipt  and  expenditure  payments 
statements 
15. 
Annual project financial statements should normally be presented in the local currency, 
with  the  basis  for  conversion  of  any  foreign  exchange  transactions  or  commitments  explicitly 
stated.  
16. 
The  annual  project  financial  statements  should  be  presented  in  the  English  language 
and  should  reflect  the  operations  supported  by  ADB  financing,  including  ADB-administered 
funds.  
The  project  cash  payments  should  be  presented  following  the  expenditure  categories 
17. 
contained in the legal agreement and/or the PAM, and revisions thereto.  
18. 
The  annual  project  financial  statements  should  include  comparative  figures  for  the 
preceding reporting year and cumulative figures from the loan effectiveness date to the end of 
the  current  reporting  year.  For  projects  that  receive  funding  from  other  sources,  the  annual 
project  financial  statements  should  include  all  sources  of  funds  (both  ADB-provided  and 
otherwise).  
19. 
The accompanying Notes to Financial Statements should provide sufficient explanation 
and  information  on  the  financials  in  narrative  form  or  appropriate  supporting  schedules, 
including description of key financial reporting policies.  
20. 
For projects where separate and distinct components are being administered by the EA 
and/or  several  implementing  agencies  (IAs)  each  agency  should  prepare  separate  project 
financial statements reporting on the funds they are administering. During project processing the 
PTL  and  the  EA  should  agree  on  appropriate  financial  reporting  arrangements  including  the 
preparation of consolidated project financial reports. 
21. 
Financial  statements  for  independent  entities  should  be  prepared  in  accordance  with 
national accrual based financial reporting standards. Annual financial statements may combine 
43  The timeframe for submission will be agreed in the financial management assessment conducted during project 
processing and set forth in the legal agreement and/or project administration manual as appropriate. 
44  Auditing standards acceptable to ADB are detailed in OM/BP Section J7. 
78 
financial  transactions  of  a  project  with  those  of  the  independent  entity  such  as:  (i)  where  the 
entity  has  been  established  solely  for  purposes  of  developing  the  project;  and  (ii)  the  project 
may  be  of  significance  relative  to  the  independent  entity’s  operations.45  In  these  cases,  the 
annual project audited project financial statements may be incorporated within the independent 
entity’s financial statements, provided the statements explicitly describe the financial status and 
performance of the project for the current reporting year, the previous year, and from the date of 
effectiveness.46  
The  agreed  financial  reporting  and  auditing  arrangements  will  be  set  forth  in  the  legal 
22. 
agreement and detailed in the PAM.47 
c.  Public Disclosure Requirements 
Consistent with ADB’s PCP 2011, ADB will agree with the borrower on a country-specific 
23. 
basis,48 the procedures to disclose the annual audited project financial statements (including the 
audit report on the financial statements) for sovereign projects. The management letter will not 
be disclosed. The agreed arrangements will be incorporated into legal agreements. In general, 
such  audited  project  financial  statements  and  the  audit  report  will  be  disclosed  within  30 
calendar days of receipt by ADB. Country specific circumstances that could affect the timing of 
disclosure will be agreed during either country level discussions with ADB or project processing 
and documented in the PAM as appropriate.  
d.  Audit Report 
24. 
The auditors are engaged to provide an independent and objective opinion on whether 
the  financial  statements  present  a  true  and  fair  view  or  are  presented  fairly,  in  all  material 
respects, in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework. The auditors should 
also form an opinion based on an evaluation of the conclusions drawn from the audit evidence 
obtained, and clearly express that opinion through a written report that also describes the basis 
for that opinion.49 The auditor’s opinion is necessary to establish the credibility, or otherwise, of 
the project financial statements. 
25. 
The auditor should also provide opinion(s) covering: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Use  of  loan  proceeds.  ADB  requires  that  the  auditor  confirms  whether  loan 
proceeds were used only for the purposes of the project or not.  
Compliance with financial covenants. The auditor is required to confirm the level 
of  compliance  for  each  financial  covenant  contained  in  the  legal  agreement  for 
the project. The auditor should also indicate, where applicable, the extent of any 
noncompliance, by reference to the specified (required) and actual performance 
45  This should also apply to interim progress reports (See PAI 5.01). 
46  In cases, where the legal agreement provides for retroactive financing, the reporting period could include the date 
when costs that were approved for retroactive financing were incurred. 
47    Where  a  project  is  cofinanced  with  one  or  more  multilateral  or  bilateral  financier,  the  financial  reporting  and 
auditing requirements should be harmonized such that the borrower, EA and/or IA is required to submit only one 
set of annual audited project financial statements and audit report to all financiers. These requirements should be 
set  forth  in  the  PAM.  Where  there  is  no  agreement  on  the  financial  reporting  auditing  requirements,  the 
requirements for ADB’s financing will follow this OM. 
48    Regional  departments  will  arrange  meetings  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  ministry  responsible  for  foreign 
financed  projects,  and  the  Supreme  Audit  Institution  to  discuss  the  application  of  ADB’s  public  disclosure 
requirements in light of any relevant provisions in the country's constitution, laws and procedures. Country-level 
arrangements  will  be  recorded  in  a  memorandum  of  understanding  or  aide  memoire  and  will  form  the  basis  of 
project level arrangements to be detailed in the PAM. 
49  See for example ISA 700 Forming an Opinion and Reporting on Financial Statements which details the auditor’s 
responsibility to form an opinion on the financial statements, and the form and content of the audit report issued 
as a result of an audit of financial statements 
79 
(iii) 
(iv) 
measurements  for  each  financial  covenant  for  the  fiscal  year  concerned.  This 
requirement  must  be  included  in  the  auditor’s  terms  of  reference  (TOR),  which 
should also specify the financial covenants for which the auditor has to express 
an opinion regarding compliance. 
Use  of  imprest  fund  procedure  which  includes  imprest  account(s)  (and  sub-
account(s),  where  applicable),50  where  such  account(s)  have  been  established 
for  the  project.  Such  an  audit  may  be  separate,  or  included  as  a  part  of  the 
overall audit of the project financial statements. It is limited to the transactions of 
the  imprest  accounts,  as  the  expenditures  reimbursed  or  paid  directly  from  the 
imprest  accounts  are  to  be  audited  as  a  part  of  the  project  financial  statement 
audit, with appropriate review of the in-transit items. Where the audit forms a part 
of  the  overall  audit  of  the  project,  a  separate  reference  to  the  imprest  account 
audit should be included in the auditor’s opinion. Where the audit of the imprest 
accounts is self-standing, a specific audit opinion is required.  
Use  of  the  Statement  of  Expenditure  (SOE)  procedure.  ADB  requires  that 
particular attention be paid to the internal control systems and the verification of 
documents  relating  to  SOE  expenditure,  not  only  to  ascertain  proper  financial 
accountability,  but  also  that  expenditure  is  eligible  for  inclusion  in  the  project. 
Where the audit forms a part of the overall audit that of the project, ADB requires 
a special reference in the auditor’s opinion with respect to the SOE portion of the 
audit.  Where  a  separate  audit  of  the  SOE  is  required,  additional  paragraphs 
should be included in the audit opinion of the project certifying (a) to the eligibility 
of those expenditures claimed under SOE procedures, and (b) proper use of the 
procedure  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  and  the 
project documents.  
The requirements for the auditor’s opinion in paras. 24 and 25 above should be included 
26. 
in the auditor’s TOR. 
An auditor’s opinion can be unmodified or modified, with three types of modified opinion: 
27. 
(i) qualified, (ii) adverse, and (iii) disclaimer of opinion.51 
The  type  of  auditor’s  opinion  is  not  the  basis  for  assessing  the  acceptability  of  the 
28. 
submitted audited project financial statements. Rather, it should prompt the PTL to evaluate the 
appropriate  action  required,  e.g.,  follow-up  request  to  the  EA  for  corrective  action  or  suspend 
the right to withdrawal the proceeds of ADB financing. 
29. 
In certain cases, other specific audit requirements may be agreed upon by ADB and the 
borrower  and  included  in  the  PAM.  These  could  include:  performance  auditing,  audit  of 
resettlement expenditures, audit of a quick-disbursing component, and spot audits/checks. 
e.  Management Letter 
30. 
The audit of financial statements includes consideration of internal control relevant to the 
preparation of the financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate 
in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of 
internal  control.  The  auditor  may,  however,  identify  deficiencies  in  internal  control  during  the 
50  See OM J6 (Disbursements). A sub-account refers to a separate bank account opened in the name of an IA or unit 
for the exclusive use of meeting project expenditures incurred by the IA. A sub-account receives its funds from the 
main imprest fund account. 
51  See  ADB.  2006.  Handbook  for  Borrowers  on  the  Financial  Management  and  Analysis  of  Projects  for  specific 
definitions and examples of how they may be expressed in an audit report. 
80 
assessment  of  risks  of  material  misstatement  and  also  at  any  other  stage  of  the  audit.  
31. 
The  auditor  should  communicate  to  project  management  (at  appropriate  level  of 
responsibility)  on  a  timely  basis  any  material  deficiencies  or  weaknesses  in  the  financial 
reporting  system  or  in  the  overall  system  of  internal  control  and  audit  of  a  project  or  its  EA 
through a management letter.52 
32. 
The management letter is issued as ―confidential‖ to project management and should not 
be  publicly  disclosed.  As  it  provides  the  most  relevant  information  on  current  and  potential 
fiduciary risk, ADB’s requirement for its submission should be agreed with the borrower during 
project processing and set forth in the legal agreement, and PAM.  
2.  Selection of Auditors  
33. 
ADB requires that the borrower and the EA/IA select and appoint an auditor acceptable 
to  ADB  within  a  sufficient  period  to  conduct  the  annual  audit  of  ADB-financed  projects.  The 
borrower or EA should appoint an independent auditor at or before the start of project activities, 
and for each fiscal year until the project is financially closed.  
The PTL should agree with the borrower during project preparation on the procedure to 
34. 
engage an auditor acceptable to ADB by the date of loan effectiveness. 
35. 
Auditors  conducting  audits  of  ADB-financed  and  administered  projects  may  be  drawn 
from private or public sector audit practitioners. The borrower or EA is responsible for selecting 
and appointing auditors except for some developing member countries (DMCs) where statutory 
requirements may require the use of the SAI.  
36. 
following criteria:  
(i) 
ADB  will  require  that  the  auditors  appointed  by  the  borrower  or  EA  must  satisfy  the 
Auditors  must  be  impartial  and  independent  of  the  control  of  the  entity  to  be 
audited and of the person or entity appointing them. In particular, auditors must 
not be otherwise employed by; serve as directors of; or have family, financial, or 
close  business  relationships  with  the  entity  during  the  period  covered  by  the 
audit. 
Auditors  must  be  well-established  and  reputable;  use  procedures  and  methods 
that  conform to agreed  international  auditing  standards,  or  the  national  auditing 
standards of the DMC acceptable to ADB (supplemented where necessary  with 
additional auditing and reporting procedures); and employ adequate numbers of 
staff with the required qualifications, experience, and competence.  
Auditors  must  be  able  to  demonstrate  experience  in  auditing  accounts  and 
financial  statements  for  projects  and  entities  comparable  in  type,  nature,  and 
complexity to the assignment to be undertaken.  
Auditors  must  propose  (and  assign)  the  audit  work  to  personnel  who  have  the 
necessary capabilities to complete it competently and on time. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
If auditors acceptable to ADB are not available in the DMC, the borrower or EA should 
37. 
appoint suitable international auditors, preferably to work in collaboration with a local auditor. 
52  See  ADB.  2006.  Handbook  for  Borrowers  on  the  Financial  Management  and  Analysis  of  Projects  for  detailed 
description of key features of Management Letters. 
81 
38. 
ADB  reserves the right to  review  the  list  of  auditors from  which an  appointment  will be 
made by the borrower or EA, and identify any auditor who may not meet ADB’s criteria.53 The 
sector  or  country  director  should  indicate  the  acceptability  of  an  auditor  in  the  form  of  a  ―no 
objection‖ provided that existing or proposed auditors satisfy the selection criteria. Details on the 
selection of the auditor should be set forth in the PAM. The PAM should also specify that ADB 
reserves  the  right  to  require  a  change  in  the  auditors  (in  a  manner  consistent  with  the 
constitution of the borrower), or an addition to the auditors, if the audits required are not carried 
out in a manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits are substantially delayed.  
39.  Where  an  auditor  is  currently  engaged,  the  director  general  of  the  relevant  regional 
department should ensure the auditor’s past performance with respect to the quality of reports 
and  opinions,  and  management  letters  is  reviewed.54  Where  deficiencies  are  identified,  the 
sector or country director should request the borrower and EA to convey these concerns to the 
auditor.  
40.  While  it  is  common  practice  in  some  DMCs  to  appoint  the  auditor  each  year, 
engagements should normally be long enough to enable an auditor to become familiar with the 
project or EA under audit and to permit efficient operation. However, the term should be short 
enough to facilitate a change of auditor if necessary.55 An auditor’s engagement should be kept 
under review to ensure consistent quality of performance.  
41. 
The borrower or EA should provide the sector or country director with an assurance that 
the auditor has been notified of ADB’s requirements, including the timing of the audit, issuance 
of the audit report and management letter, and public disclosure requirements where applicable. 
While  regulatory  requirements  as  well  as  the  nature/type  of  the  project  and  the  implementing 
organization  (where  applicable)  will  normally  determine  the  scope  and  depth  of  an  audit 
examination,  providing  instructions  to  auditors  in  the  form  of  a  TOR  should  facilitate 
understanding  of  ADB’s  requirements  particularly  those  that  extend  an  audit’s  scope  and 
detail.56 The TOR should be included in the PAM.57 
42. 
Based on  the  TOR,  the auditor  should prepare  an  audit  engagement  letter,  setting  out 
the responsibilities of the auditor and borrower including a provision for termination in the case 
of  unacceptable  performance  for  any  given  year  over  the  engagement  period.58  The  EA  will 
monitor the auditor’s performance against the engagement letter and TOR.  
53  ADB may request the following information to be satisfied regarding independence and experience of the 
proposed auditor: (i) name of the auditor, (ii) names, qualifications, and experience of the principals and 
managers; (iii) approximate number of professional staff employed; (iv) listing of some of the main audits currently 
and previously carried out by the auditor; and (v) a statement of the independence of the firm of auditors vis-à-vis 
the entity it is proposed to audit. 
54  Technical reviews required under this PAI should be conducted by a financial management specialist (referred to 
as the ―reviewer‖) based in the regional department. 
55  Engagements of 3 to 5 years are typical. 
56  Care should be taken when framing a request for additional work from an auditor as such instructions restrict an 
auditor’s activities rendering them unacceptable. 
57  Where appropriate, a country-level auditor TOR may be agreed by regional departments’ and the borrower as the 
basis for project level TORs. 
58  For example this would include: (i) Confirmation of acceptance of the appointment including reference to the TOR; 
(ii) Borrowers’ responsibilities, particularly the preparation of financial information (the financial statements); (iii) 
Provision of access to whatever premises, records, documentation (including staff, RRP, PAM, the EA’s project 
approval documentation, legal agreements, etc.) and any other information the auditor may request in connection 
with the audit; (iv) Form of audit reports; (v) Arrangements regarding the involvement of internal auditors and of 
82 
3.  Supreme Audit Institutions  
43. 
In some DMCs the auditor appointment process is statutory with the SAI conducting the 
audit of ADB-financed projects or assigning the audit to its subsidiaries, or commercial auditor 
firms. ADB requires SAIs to meet the auditor selection criteria.59 In the event the SAI, in ADB’s 
opinion, does not meet the criteria, ADB should agree with the borrower and SAI on measures 
to remedy identified deficiencies.60  
C. 
Monitoring Compliance with ADB Requirements 
Reporting Period 
1.  
The  borrower  or  EA  should  submit  annually  the  audited  project  financial  statements 
44. 
(which includes the audit report) and the management letter for each financial reporting period 
(fiscal year) from the date of loan/grant effectiveness 61 until the loan account’s financial closing 
on ADB’s record of loan account.  
45. 
The annual audited project financial statements, etc. will be submitted 6 months after the 
end  of  the  EA’s  fiscal  year.  Only  in  projects  where  implementing  agencies  are  decentralized 
local  governments  and  where  logistical  considerations  are  such  that  they  would  impact  the 
physical  flow  of  information,  could  this  deadline  be  extended  to  9  months.  When  seeking  a 
reporting  deadline  up  to  9  months,  the  justification  should  be  provided  in  the  report  and 
recommendation of the President and should be approved in the relevant management or staff 
review meeting.  
46. 
For  projects  with  external  financing,  the  sector  or  country  director  should  ensure  the 
EA’s submission of the audited project financial statements for the external funds adheres to the 
schedule stipulated in the relevant cofinancing agreement.62  
47. 
ADB  encourages  the  audit  of  project  financial  statements  irrespective  of  the  size  or 
number  of  project  financial  transactions.  The  first  reporting  year  may  include  a  part-year  from 
the  loan  effectiveness  date  to  the  end  of  that  fiscal  year  while  the  last  reporting  year  may 
include a part-year from the start of the fiscal year in which a project loan account is closed, to 
the loan closing date. The first project financial reporting year may be extended to a maximum 
of  18  months  where  the  first  financial  reporting  period  from  the  loan  effectiveness  date  to  the 
relevant fiscal year end, would otherwise be less than 6 months.  
48. 
Similarly, the last reporting year for the project may also be extended to a maximum of 
18 months.63 For such audit, the sector or country director should remind the EA to schedule the 
any other external auditors (such as the government auditor); (vi) Expected date of issuance of the audited 
financial statements, etc.; and (vi) Basis on which fees are computed and any billing arrangements. 
59  RSDD will provide advice on the assessment of SAIs. 
60  This could include provision of technical assistance to develop SAI capacity, and/or agreeing with the borrower to 
have the government auditor subcontract the audit to an acceptable private auditor to carry out the audit on their 
behalf. 
61  In cases, where the legal agreement provides for retroactive financing, the reporting period could include the date 
when costs that were approved for retroactive financing were incurred. 
62  The  PTL  will  consult  as  required  with  the  Office  of  Cofinancing  Operations  (OCO)  and  copy  OCO  on  related 
correspondence. 
63  For example, if the fiscal year ends on 31 December and a project closes on 30 June 2012, the  EA may request 
that the last reporting year for the project cover the last whole reporting year (1 January 2011–31 December 2011) 
and the partial year until project closure (6 months 1 January 2012–30 June 2012), an 18-month period. However, 
83 
audit  to  avoid  problems  of  information  availability  when  a  project’s  management  unit  is 
disbanded upon project completion.  
49. 
On an exceptional basis, the EA may indicate that the project’s financial activity during 
the first financial reporting period (up to a maximum of 18 months) has been limited. The value 
of conducting an audit of project financial statements may therefore not be commensurate with 
the cost of audit. In such cases, the EA may request ADB for a waiver of the covenant requiring 
the  submission  of  audited  project  financial  statements.  If  warranted,  the  sector  or  country 
director may agree on the condition that the first audited project financial statements include the 
full period since the loan effectiveness date.64 A request for waiver of this loan covenant should 
be discussed with the RSDD and the Office of General Counsel (OGC). 
2.  
Monitoring  Submission  of  Annual  Audited  Project  Financial 
Statement, Audit Report, and Management Letter 
The PTL should proactively monitor the timely receipt and review of the audited financial 
50. 
statements, etc. as discussed in the following paragraphs. 
51. 
Three  months before  the  Due  Date. The  sector  or country  director  sends a reminder 
letter to the borrower to submit audited financial statements, etc. within the due date (as agreed 
in the legal agreement and the PAM).65  
52. 
On the Due Date. If the audited financial statements,  etc. are not received by the due 
date,  the  sector  or  country  director  sends  a  letter  informing  the  EA/IA  that  (i)  the  audit 
documents are overdue; and (ii) if they are not received within the next six months, requests for 
new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  imprest  accounts, 
processing  of  new  reimbursement,  and  issuance  of  new  commitment  letters  will  not  be 
processed. 
53. 
Six  Months  after  the  Due  Date. When the  audited financial  statements,  etc.  have not 
been received within six months after the due date, the sector or country director will  withhold 
processing of requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment 
of  imprest  accounts,  processing  of  new  reimbursement,  and  issuance  of  new  commitment 
letters. The sector or country director will (i) inform the EA/IA of ADB’s actions; and (ii) advise 
that  the  loan  may  be  suspended  if  the  audit  documents  are  not  received  within  the  next  six 
months. 
54. 
Twelve Months after the Due Date. When the audited financial statements, etc. have 
not been received within 12 months after the due date, the sector or country director determines 
whether  the  loan  is  to  be  suspended  and  advises  the  director  general.  The  procedure  for 
suspension is provided in PAI 4.03, Suspension and Cancellation of Loans and accordingly, the 
director general recommends loan suspension to the relevant vice-president. The PTL advises 
for a project that closes on 30 September 2012, the project EA has to arrange for the audit of the last 9-month 
period of the project (1 January–30 September 2012). 
64  For example, if a loan was declared effective in June 2008, the first financial reporting year may be  extended to 
cover the period June 2008–31 December 2009 (18 months). Where there has been limited financial activity, the 
EA may request a waiver of the covenant requiring submission of the audited project financial statements for such 
period.  Hence  the  first  submission  of  the  audited  project  financial  statements  shall  cover  the  period  from  loan 
effectiveness date of June 2008 to 31 December 2010, which is the end of the second financial reporting period (1 
January 2010–31 December 2010). 
65  This includes the audited project (and/or independent entity’s) financial statements, audit report, and management 
letter. 
84 
Operations Services and Financial Management Department (OSFMD), CTL, OCO if the project 
is cofinanced, and OGC of the vice-president’s decision. 
3.  
Receipt  of  Annual  Audited  Project  Financial  Statement,  Audit 
Report, and Management Letter 
55. 
Upon receipt of the annual audited project financial statements, etc. and an independent 
entity’s  annual  audited  financial  statements  (where  applicable),  the  sector  or  country  director 
should  promptly  acknowledge  receipt  to  the  EA.  For  projects  that  are  subject  to  public 
disclosure of the annual audited project financial statements, a scanned copy of these together 
with  the  audit  opinion  on  these  financial  statements  should  be  uploaded  by  the  PTL  in  the 
eOperations project record within 30 calendar days of receipt.66 By activating the "Transmit for 
Disclosure" button the documents will be sent to the DER web team for uploading on adb.org.67 
For  projects  with  external  financing,  the  audit  requirements  specified  in  the  cofinancing 
agreement should be shared with the financing partner within the stipulated timeframe. 
For DMCs where audited project (and independent entity) financial statements are to be 
56. 
submitted  first  to  a  government  legislature  (hence  risking  substantial  delays  in  submission  to 
ADB),  unaudited  project  financial  statements  should  be  submitted  to  ADB  within  the  agreed 
timeframe.  However,  unaudited  financial  statements  should  not  be  used  to  determine 
compliance  with  the  financial  covenants.  After  approval  by  the  legislature,  the  EA  should 
immediately submit the audited financial statements and related documents to ADB. 
4.  Acceptability of the Audited Project Financial Statements 
57. 
Reviewing the annual audited financial statements of projects (and related audit reports 
and management letters), and/or independent entities (where applicable), is an important aspect 
of ADB’s project implementation oversight. Upon receipt of the annual audited project financial 
statements  the  director  general  should  ensure  the  necessary  review  is  conducted  within  6 
weeks  of  receipt:  (i)  to  determine  if  these  are  acceptable;  and  (ii)  to  analyze  the  financial 
information  from  the  project  financial  statements  as  part  of  project  progress  and  financial 
performance monitoring, and undertake any necessary measures.  
58. 
The  reviewer  (footnote  22)  evaluates  the  acceptability  based  on  an  analysis  of  the 
information  contained  in  the  audited  project  financial  statements,  the  audit  report  (which 
includes the  auditor’s opinion(s)),  and  management  letter  against the  requirements  detailed  in 
Section B.1.a, b, d, and e above. Scanned copies of the (i) reviewer's summary report; (ii) audit 
review  used to assess  acceptability;  and (iii)  annual  audited  project financial  statements,  audit 
report,  and  management  letter  should  be  uploaded to the  eOperations  project record  with key 
findings recorded in the project record.68  
59. 
In  the  case  of  projects  with  multiple  distinct  components  administered  by  different  IAs 
and  for  which  separate  submission  of  annual  audited  project  financial  statements  (including 
audit  report  and  management  letter)  has  been  agreed,  each  submission  will  be  evaluated 
separately. 
66  The  financial  management  specialist  should  be  consulted  prior  to  uploading  the  annual  audited  project  financial 
statement and audit opinion. 
67  DER will add this document in the list of mandatory documents (for loans) to be disclosed in eOperations. 
68  Although all audit documents are uploaded into the eOperations project record, the only information that is publicly 
disclosed is detailed in para. 23. 
85 
a.  Reviewing an Audit Report  
60.  When reviewing an audit report, the reviewer should note whether four principal features 
have been addressed: (i) authenticity, form, and timeliness of the report; (ii) quality, or tenor, of 
the  opinion;  (iii)  audit  scope,  significant  financial  reporting  policies,  auditing  practices, 
qualifications, and other matters addressed by the auditor; and (iv) substance of the emphasis 
of matter paragraph, if any.  
61. 
The auditor’s opinion should not be the basis for the acceptability or non-acceptability of 
the submitted audited project financial statements. In the case of any modification to the audit 
report  which  may  be  a  qualified  opinion,  adverse  opinion,  or  disclaimer  of  opinion  and  when 
there  is  an  emphasis  of  matter,  the  reviewer  should  determine,  to  the  extent  possible,  the 
materiality,  extent,  and  implication  of  the  modification and/or  emphasis  of matter. Of  particular 
concern are issues related to accountability for project funds.  
62. 
In  the  case  of  ―substantial‖  qualifications,  the  PTL,  in  consultation  with  the  reviewer, 
should ascertain as soon as possible what remedial measures the EA proposes to take. If the 
borrower  or  EA  is  unable  or  unwilling  to  take  corrective  action,  the  sector  or  country  director, 
after  investigating  the  reasons,  should  follow  the  course  of  action  recommended  in  cases  of 
noncompliance with covenants as provided in the Regulations and PAI 4.03.  
In  cases  where  the  qualifications  appear  not  to  be  of  a  material  nature  (e.g.,  limited 
63. 
inadequacies in financial reporting subsystems, failure by financial reporting staff to respond to 
inquiries, etc.,) the sector or country director should follow up with the borrower or EA to ensure 
that appropriate corrective action is taken.  
64. 
Depending on the assessed implication of the modified auditor’s opinion, the PTL should 
document appropriate course(s) of action to be taken by ADB and/or to be requested from the 
EA in future project progress reports.  
b.  Reviewing a Management Letter  
65. 
The  reviewer  should  review  each  management  letter  and  take  note  of  any  matters  to 
which the auditor has drawn attention that may adversely affect project implementation and/or 
the  operation  of  the  EA,  and  the  level  of  fiduciary  risk  to  which  ADB  is  exposed.  These  may 
include  but  not  limited  to:  (i)  internal  control  weaknesses  in  project  financial  management 
arrangements, (ii) implementation of the auditor’s recommendations made in prior  years’ audit 
reports, (iii)  compliance with financial  covenants,  (iv)  significant  variations  between the  interim 
and  the  annual  audited  financial  statements,  and  (v)  recommendations  to  enhance  project 
financial management arrangements.  
66. 
The  review  should  note  the  EA/IA’s  response  to  the  auditor’s  findings  and  any  action 
taken to address the issue. Failure to act or inadequate action by the EA/IA should prompt the 
sector or country director to pursue appropriate measures that would address the situation.  
c.   Reviewing an Independent Entity’s Audited Financial Statements 
The  review  of  an  independent  entity’s  audited  financial  statements  is  aimed  at 
67. 
determining  the  entity’s  continuing  capability  to  implement  the  ADB-financed  project.  This 
should include reviewing the auditor’s opinions, any matters deemed relevant by the auditors for 
disclosure, and analyzing the financial information provided in the financial statements.  
The review should also include an assessment of compliance by the entity with financial 
68. 
covenants in the legal agreement.  
86 
69. 
The  reviewer  should  be  alert  to  movements  in  financial  indicators  that  may  have  any 
adverse effect on the project’s success, such as, declining institutional capability, warning signs 
of decline in the entity’s financial performance and threats to the entity’s continuing operations 
(as  a  going  concern).  Such  issues  should  be  highlighted  in  documenting  the  results  of  the 
review  and  should  be  communicated  to  the  sector  or  country  director  together  with  proposed 
recommendations aimed to address the issues.  
5.  Communication of Review Results  
Based on the audit review checklist findings, the PTL, in consultation with the reviewer, 
70. 
should prepare a summary report which should discuss:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Whether  the  annual  audited  project  financial  statements  are  acceptable  and  if 
otherwise,  the  reasons for  the  assessed unacceptability  and  any  recommended 
action to correct the deficiencies.  
Any substantial modification in auditor’s opinion and/or audit findings reported in 
the audit report and/or the management letter, which may adversely affect project 
implementation,  the  operation  of  the  independent  entity  or  the  level  of  fiduciary 
risk to ADB. 
The adequacy of actions taken, proposed or the lack of it, by the EA on current 
and previous audit findings as reported in the audit report and the management 
letter. 
Recommended actions for ADB or the EA. 
The  PTL  should  submit  the  summary  report  to  the  sector  or  country  director  indicating 
71. 
the findings of the review and corresponding recommendations. 
72.  Where the sector or country director determines that the issues reported in the summary 
report  are  sufficiently  serious  and/or  the  quality  of  the  submitted  audited  financial  statements 
etc., is unacceptable, the matter should be discussed with the director general to determine the 
appropriate course of action. The EA should also be advised in writing of the issues.  
The sector or country director should request from the EA a time-bound action plan (to 
73. 
be agreed with ADB) to address the audit issues. Receipt of a response to such request should 
be  closely  monitored  by  the  PTL  and if the response  is  not  received  within the  specified  time, 
the  lack  of  response  must  be  noted  as  an  issue  to  be  addressed  in  the  project  performance 
report (PPR).  
74. 
Follow  up  should  be  made  through  subsequent  written  communication  and  during 
project  review  missions.  Results  of  follow  up  actions  should  be  recorded  in  project  review 
mission BTORs and in the PPR.  
75. 
Pursuant to the internal consultation discussed in para. 72 above, OSFMD, CTL, OCO 
(in the case of cofinanced projects), and OGC should be informed by the PTL of the results of 
the  consultation  if  they:  (i)  indicated  that  the  annual  audited  project  financial  statements  are 
unacceptable;  or  (ii)  raise  concerns  with  the  proper  use  of  loan  proceeds,  compliance  with 
financial  covenants, the proper  use  of  procedures for the  imprest  account(s)  and SOE  (where 
applicable), implementation of the project or other accountability issues.  
87 
Audit  risks  and  issues  identified  during  the  review  of  audited  project  and/or  the 
76. 
independent entity’s financial statements, including remedial actions taken or to be taken should 
be reflected in the PPR.  
6.  Unaudited Interim Project Financial Statements 
77. 
Unaudited  interim  project  financial  statements  should  be  included  in  project  progress 
reports. The reviewer should review the interim project financial statements. The review findings 
should be recorded by the PTL in the updated PPR as appropriate. Where the review identifies 
any issues of potential concern, these should be communicated by the sector or country director 
to the EA and explanations sought, including plans for remedial actions. 
This document is available at: 
http://lnadbg1.asiandevbank.org/cos0003p.nsf/f47286b4d1eb6e9b482569e500308fb9/9e729fd15174640448257b010
0294b6b!OpenDocument 
88 
DETAILED COST ESTIMATES  ($) 
Appendix 9 
AmountProposed Method of ProcurementOutput 1. Skills and Management Capacity of MSEs and their Employees  Developed365,730359,7300006,0001.1Equipment and SuppliesSubtotal17,50017,500 Training equipment, materials, manuals and support for training modules/venueslump-sums7025017,50017,500Shopping1.2Trainings, Workshops and Seminars Subtotal124,250124,2501.2.1Establish producer and retailer groups Activity7015010,50010,5001.2.2Seminars on gender equality, safe migration and life skills Courses351505,2505,2501.2.3Seminars to disseminate consumer preferences on market demand for selected products  Course351505,2505,2501.2.4Seminars with producers and suppliers on availability and sustainability of raw materials  Course351505,2505,2501.2.6Technical training: multiple food product lines including quality standards and food safetyCourses10530031,50031,5001.2.7Technical training: multiple product lines for handicrafts including quality Courses10530031,50031,5001.2.8Training of master trainers from project producer groups MTs501005,0005,0001.2.9Resource person(s) from Japanese institute(s)lumpsum215,00030,00030,0001.3Consulting ServicesSubtotal202,500202,5001.3.1National Handicrafts Training Consultantp-m22.04,12590,75090,750Firm1.3.2National Food Processing Training Consultantp-m22.04,12590,75090,750Firm1.3.3Value Chain, Market Studies & Traning Needs Assesssments - package (national)Lumpsum121,00021,00021,0001.4Other InputsSubtotal21,48015,4806,0001.4.2Election of Village Focal Point Representatives (VFPRs) 12 villagesperson days1,2005.06,0000 In-kind6,0001.4.3Village Focal Point Representatives (project support)person days6,1922.515,48015,480Output 2. Access to business services, credit and commercial networks strengthened268,750268,75000002.1Equipment and SuppliesSubtotal25,00025,0002.1.1 Packaging, labeling & branding materials for producer/retailer productslump-sums501005,0005,000Shopping2.1.2Promotional brochures, posters and other printed and visual medialump-sums120,00020,00020,000Shopping2.2Training, Workshops, and SeminarsSubtotal91,75091,7502.2.2Training materials and courses delivered on business start-up, management and basic accounting PGs-RGs352508,7508,7502.2.3Workshops by MFIs to explain procedures on accessing affordable credit Workshops352508,7508,7502.2.4Workshops to create independent savings & credit groupsWorkshops7015010,50010,5002.2.5Workshops to finalize business plans and submitted to the MFIs for processing Workshops352508,7508,7502.2.6Exposure visits to facilitate linkages with markets in Yangon & other major citiesTrips45,00020,00020,0002.2.7Promotion of "Made in Mon State" branding through participation in national and regional trade fairsTrade show45,00020,00020,0002.2.8Product Design competition for innovative handicraft for the souvenir marketCompetitions42,50010,00010,0002.2.9 Workshops to promote the brand strategy, marketing and promotion plan in Mon State - producerslump-sum105005,0005,000UnitQuantity UnitsCost Per UnitTotal $Supplies and Services RenderedCostsContributionsJFPRGovernmentOther DonorsCommunities 
DETAILED COST ESTIMATES (Continued) 
89 
a  To reach the project sites   located between 360  and 525 kilometers from the project office, to conduct adequate supervision and monitoring, the project team 
requires safe, affordable, and reliable transportation. In Mon state, options to rent such vehicles are limited and puts timely implementation of the project at risk, 
Further,  vehicle  rental  in  Myanmar  is  very  expensive,  estimated  to  be  about  twice  the  cost  of  purchasing  a  project  vehicle,  which  will  be  handed  over  to  the 
government  upon  completion  to  assist  counterparts  monitor  project  outputs.  Motor  cycles  are  needed  to  ensure  frequent/  weekly  field  visits  to  monitor  
beneficiaries and project activities in the 4 townships. 
AmountProposed Method of Procurement2.3Consulting Services Subtotal112,000112,0002.3.1International Business Development & Micro-credit Specialistp-m716,000112,000112,000         QCS2.4Other InputsSubtotal40,00040,0002.4.1 Graphic Design Agency Brand Image, Guidelines & Usagelump-sums120,00020,00020,000           shopping2.4.2 Funds to implement the marketing and brand strategy and promotion plan in Mon Statelump-sums120,00020,00020,000Output 3. Infrastructure to support  access to market and processing facilities improved1,108,000838,0000270,000003.1Civil WorksSubtotal917,500647,500270,0003.1.1Construct a local product and craft market with amenities in Mawlamyine.m2875500437,500437,500NCB3.1.2Land for market m21,200150180,0000GC180,0003.1.3Construct of 1 multi-product processing centre to services multiple villagesm2600350210,000210,000NCB3.1.4Land for processing centrem290010090,0000GC90,0003.2Equipment and SuppliesSubtotal98,00098,0003.2.1Equipment and fit out for market at Mawlamyine.lump-sums125,00025,00025,000Shopping3.2.2Equipment and fit out for 1 multi-product processing center lump-sums 145,00045,00045,000Shopping3.2.3 Processing and production equipment for home based producers & retailerslump-sums 7040028,00028,000Shopping3.3Consulting Services Subtotal81,50081,5003.3.1Civil Engineer Consultant (design and construction supervision)p-m124,12549,50049,500CQS3.3.3Environmental Consultant - Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) for market at Mawlamyine.p-m216,00032,00032,000QCS3.4Other InputsSubtotal11,00011,0003.4.1Supporting funds to establish Market management committee  & operationlump-sums 15,5005,5005,5003.4.2Supporting funds to establish processing facility management committees & operation lump-sums 15,5005,5005,500Output 4. Capacity of EA, IA, and key stakeholders enhanced1,205,3701,083,8100117,48004,0804.1Equipment and SuppliesSubtotal92,55092,55000004.1.1Establish and maintain PMU and PIU OfficesOffice481004,8004,8004.1.2PMU/PIT/PIU office furniture, computer printers and other electronic equipment lump-sum115,00015,00015,0004.1.3Vehicle aunit135,00035,00035,0004.1.3Motorcycles unit22,0004,0004,000 Shopping4.1.4Fuel, vehicle maintenance and insurancemonth4575033,75033,750Supplies and Services RenderedCostsContributionsJFPRGovernmentOther DonorsCommunitiesUnitQuantity UnitsCost Per UnitTotal $ 
90 
DETAILED COST ESTIMATES (Continued) 
AmountProposed Method of Procurement4.2Training, Workshops, and SeminarsSubtotal37,20037,20000004.2.1National Steering Committee MeetingsMeetings51,0005,0005,00004.2.2Project management training & capacity building for PMU & PIU staffTrainings121001,2001,2004.2.3Inception workshop at two project sites (1event*1day x 2 sites)workshops22,0004,0004,0004.2.4Gender training for  PMU and PIU, Consultants & implementation partners workshops31,0003,0003,000QCS4.2.5Bi-annual work planning and review meetings facilitated by PIT-PIUs (8 events*1day x 2)meetings83,00024,00024,0004.3Consulting Services Subtotal884,250884,25000004.3.1Start-up Specialist (Individual - international consultant)p-m3.015,00045,00045,000ADB -ICS4.3.2Team Leader (TL - international)p-m20.016,000320,000320,000QCS4.3.3Deputy Team Leader (DTL - national)p-m424,125173,250173,250QCS4.3.4PMU Accountant (contractual staff)p-m423,000126,000126,000individual4.3.5PIU - Accountant  (contractual staff)p-m402,00080,00080,000individual4.3.6International Social DevelopmentSpecialistp-m516,00080,00080,000QCS4.3.7External Auditor (Office of Auditor General)unit410,00040,00040,000QCS4.3.8Baseline, MTR, Final Impact Assessment Package (national research assistant -contractual staff,  intermittent)lumpsum120,00020,00020,0004.4Grant Management Subtotal126,18135,821086,28004,0804.4.1PMU National Project Directorp-m4823011,040GOM Appointed11,0404.4.2PMU Deputy Project Directorp-m4821010,080GOM Appointed10,0804.4.3PMU Project Accountant p-m481909,120GOM Appointed9,1204.4.4PMU Project Assistantp-m481708,160GOM Appointed8,1604.4.5PIU Project Managerp-m4823011,040GOM Appointed11,0404.4.6PIU Deputy Project  Managerp-m4821010,080GOM Appointed10,0804.4.7PIU Accountantp-m481909,120GOM Appointed9,1204.4.8PIU Member - General Administration Department (PIUs) p-m122102,520GOM Appointed2,5204.4.9PIU Member -  Dept. of Trade Promotion p-m122102,520GOM Appointed2,5204.4.10PIU Member Dept. of Cooperativesp-m122102,520GOM Appointed2,5204.4.11PIU Member - Dept. of Social Welfare,p-m122102,520GOM Appointed2,5204.4.12PIU Member Dept. of Agriculture, p-m122102,520GOM Appointed2,5204.4.13PIU Manger (Kyaiktho) p-m242105,040GOM Appointed5,0404.4.15VFPRs and community participation ( (Mawlamyine, Mudon)p-m121702,040Elected2,0404.4.16VFPRs and community participation (Kyaiktho; Chaungzon)p-m121702,040Elected2,0404.4.17PMU travel and per diemTrip165008,0008,0004.4.18PIU travel and per diem (Project areas)month4850024,00024,0004.4.19PIU Drivermonth48803,8213,821UnitQuantity UnitsCost Per UnitTotal $Supplies and Services RenderedCostsContributionsJFPRGovernmentOther DonorsCommunities 
DETAILED COST ESTIMATES (Continued) 
91 
AmountProposed Method of Procurement4.5Other InputsSubtotal65,18933,989031,200004.5.1PMU office and utilities at MOHT - NPTmonth4835016,8000GC16,8004.5.2PIU office and utilities in Mon State month4830014,4000GC14,4004.5.4Website development and maintenance Lumpsum19,9009,9009,900Shopping4.5.5PMU Language translation services Lumpsum19,0009,0009,0004.5.6PIU Language translation services Lumpsum115,08915,08915,089Components A to D = Subtotal2,947,8502,550,2900387,480010,080Contingency 504,136449,71052,0492,377- Physical161,153143,75516,638760- Price342,983305,95535,4111,617TOTAL JFPR Grant CostsTotal Project Cost3,451,9863,000,0000439,529012,457UnitQuantity UnitsCost Per UnitTotal $Source: Asian Development Bank Estimates Supplies and Services RenderedCostsContributionsJFPRGovernmentOther DonorsCommunitiesICS = Individual Consultant Selection; CSO- Civil Society Organization, IEE = Initial Environmental Examination; JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction; NCB = National Competitive Bidding; O&M = operations and maintenance; PMU = Project Management Unit Team; PIT = Project Implementation Team; PIU = Project Implementation Team, S = Shopping; SW=Shopping Works. SOE = Statement of ExpendituresVehicles will be used to support the day-to-day field activities of the PIT in Mon State and will be handed over to the government upon completion of the project  
