 Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project (RRP MYA 48409-003) 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 48409-003 
Loan and Grant Numbers: LXXXX, GXXXX  
August 2018 
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar: Climate-
Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project 
ADB 
ADFS 
CDZ 
CSA 
DALMS 
DMF 
DOA 
DOP 
DRD 
EARF 
EGDF 
EMP 
GAP 
GAFSP 
IEE 
IWUMD 
LARF 
LARP 
MOALI 
MOC 
MOPF 
MTPO 
NCB 
PIC 
PMU 
PPMS 
PSC 
SOE 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Asian Development Bank 
agricultural digital finance service 
central dry zone 
climate smart agriculture 
Department of Agricultural Land Management and Statistics 
design and monitoring framework 
Department of Agriculture 
Department of Planning 
Department of Rural Development 
environmental assessment and review framework 
ethnic group development framework 
environmental management plan 
Good Agricultural Practices / gender action plan 
Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme 
initial environmental examination 
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation 
Ministry of Commerce 
Ministry of Planning and Finance 
Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization 
national competitive bidding 
project implementation consultants 
project management unit 
project performance management system 
project steering committee 
statement of expenditure 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
1.  The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes  the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with the policies and procedures of the government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The 
PAM  should  include  references  to  all  available  templates  and  instructions  either  through 
linkages to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM. 
2.  The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MOALI) and its departments at national 
and regional levels, in coordination with the Ministry of Planning of Finance (MOPF) and the 
Ministry of Commerce (MOC), are wholly responsible for the implementation of the project, as 
agreed  jointly  between  the  borrower  and  ADB,  and  in  accordance  with  the  policies  and 
procedures  of 
for  supporting 
implementation,  including  compliance  by  MOALI,  MOPF,  and  MOC  of  their  obligations  and 
responsibilities for project implementation, in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
the  government  and  ADB.  ADB  staff 
is  responsible 
3.  At  loan  and  grant  negotiations,  the  borrower  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  the  PAM  and  ensure 
consistency  with  the  loan  and  grant  agreements.  Such  agreements  shall  be  reflected  in the 
minutes of the loan negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the 
PAM and the loan and grant agreements, the provisions of the loan and grant agreements shall 
prevail. 
4.  After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP), 
changes in implementation arrangements are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to 
relevant government and ADB administrative procedures (including the Project Administration 
Instructions) and upon such approval, they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM. 
Table of Contents 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Rationale 
Impact and Outcome 
Outputs 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Project Readiness Activities 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Project Organization Structure 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions 
Key Assumptions 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
Fund Flow Diagram 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
Advance Contracting 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
Consultant’s Terms of Reference 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
Resettlement and Land Acquisition 
Indigenous People and Ethnic Groups 
Environment 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
Gender Dimensions of the Project 
Social Dimensions of the Project 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
3 
3 
8 
8 
17 
20 
22 
22 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
30 
31 
33 
33 
35 
35 
35 
36 
40 
43 
43 
44 
45 
46 
46 
54 
55 
55 
58 
59 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
X. 
XI. 
XII. 
APPENDIXES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Implementation Procedures 
Project Performance Monitoring System 
Gender Action Plan 
Agricultural Digital Finance Service 
Consultants Terms of Reference 
60 
60 
66 
66 
66 
67 
85 
96 
97 
117 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Rationale 
Agriculture sector  in  Myanmar  accounted for  30%  of gross  domestic  product,  60%  of 
1. 
employment, 29% of value addition, and 23% of exports in 2016 (including $1.1 billion in pulses 
alone).1It is considered the second largest contributor to future growth of Myanmar. Rice, pulse, 
bean and oilseed sub-sectors are important due to their potential for job creation, contribution 
to gross  domestic  product,  and  export.  Of  the  total  national  production,  the  central  dry  zone 
(CDZ) produces 25% of rice, 48% of pulses and 89% of sesame. The potential for developing 
the value chains for these crops is significant.  
The Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project supports implementing 
2. 
the government’s Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS), 2018-2023 and the National Export 
Strategy, 2015-2019 by boosting competitiveness in value chains for rice, beans, pulses, and 
oilseeds in the Magway, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions in the CDZ.2  The project will increase 
testing 
climate  resilience  for  critical  rural 
capacity,strengthen technical and institutional capacity for climate smart agriculture (CSA), and 
create  an  enabling  policy  environment  for  climate-friendly  agribusinesses.  The  project  will 
reduce  food  insecurity  and  rural  poverty,  increase  smallholders’  incomes  and  access  to 
markets, and improve resource efficiency and environmental sustainability for agribusinesses.  
infrastructure,  promote  quality  and  safety 
Impact and Outcome  
The  project  aims  to  create  an  enabling  environment  that  reduces  the  incidence  of 
3. 
poverty, malnutrition, and food insecurity among the rural poor. The project is aligned with the 
following  impact:  agricultural  competitiveness  improved.3  The  project  will  have  the  following 
outcome:  productive  and  resource-efficient  agribusiness  value  chains  in  project  areas 
developed. 4 
Outputs5 
 Output  1:  Critical  agribusiness  value  chain  infrastructure  improved  and  made 
4. 
climate-resilient. This output involves improving infrastructure to increase crop productivity and 
diversification, and boost agricultural product quality and safety. Key activities include:  
(i) 
(ii) 
upgrading infrastructure (irrigation, farm roads, buildings, farm machinery, post-
harvest equipment, seed testing equipment, and agrometeorological stations) in 
10 Department of Agriculture (DOA) seed farms for producing improved  climate-
resilient seed of rice, beans, pulses, and oilseeds;  
rehabilitating tertiary canals and community reservoirs, and constructing shallow 
tube  wells  (with  some  linked  to  drip  and  sprinkler  technologies)  to  bring  an 
additional 13,000 hectares under irrigation to benefit up to 35,000 households; 
1  The European Chamber of Commerce in Myanmar. 2017. Myanmar: Agriculture Guide 2018. Yangon. 
2 Government of Myanmar, Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation. 2018. Myanmar Agriculture Development 
Strategy and Investment Plan (2018-2023). Nay Pyi Taw; and Government of Myanmar. Ministry of Commerce. 
2014. National Export Strategy (2015-2019). Nay Pyi Taw. 
3  The impact is reflected through enhanced productivity, climate resilience, quality and safety, value addition and 
rural household incomes. 
4  The design and monitoring framework is detailed in Section IXA. 
5  The detailed implementation procedures are in Appendix 1. 
2 
(iii) 
(iv) 
rehabilitating farm roads to climate-resilient condition for improved connectivity 
to markets and for farm mechanization; and  
upgrading the safety and quality testing equipment and instrumentation in MOALI 
Plant Protection Division’s Pesticide Testing Laboratory and Food Safety Testing 
Laboratory,  and  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  Commodity  Testing  and  Quality 
Management Laboratory to meet ISO 17025 standards, and providing rapid food 
safety testing kits to DOA and the private sector.  
Output 2: Climate-smart agriculture7 and agribusiness promoted. This output will 
5. 
enhance capacity to integrate climate change concerns into agriculture and train farmers and 
agribusinesses  in  post-harvest  crop  handling  to  improve  quality  and  market  access,  value 
addition, and contract harvesting. Key activities include:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
deploying climate-resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses, and oilseeds; 
strengthening  capacity  of  seed  growers,  agro-dealers,  and  government  staff 
regarding GAPs, CSA, certified seed production, and farm mechanization, and 
of  agribusinesses  regarding  business  plan  development,  good  manufacturing 
practices, value addition, and improvement of food quality and safety; and 
facilitating access to inputs (seeds, quality agrochemicals), farm mechanization 
services, and off-farm rural livelihood opportunities by establishing an agricultural 
digital finance service to benefit at least 35,000 smallholders.  
6. 
Output 3: Enabling environment for climate-friendly agribusiness enhanced. The 
project will support MOALI and the Ministry of Commerce in crafting policies to promote private 
sector  investments  and  expand  access  to  high-end  markets  such  as  Japan.  Key  activities 
include:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
establishing an agribusiness policy cell within MOALI’s Department of Planning 
for  research  and  advocacy  on  policies  related  to  land  management,  contract 
farming,  tenure  security,  public-private  partnerships,  and  on  harmonization  of 
quality and safety standards;  
raising awareness and capacity of financial institutions to support climate-friendly 
agribusinesses;  
enhancing weather, market, and credit information networks; and  
improving  delivery  of  land  administration  services  in  townships  by  building 
capacity in participatory land management.  
7  FAO  defines  climate  smart  agriculture  (CSA)  as  agriculture 
increases productivity, 
enhances climate resilience (adaptation), reduces/removes greenhouse gas emissions (mitigation), and promotes 
achievement of national food security and development goals. 
that  sustainably 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Project Readiness Activities 
Table 1: Indicative Project Readiness Activities 
2019 
Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec  Jan 
2018 
Indicative Activities 
Establish program implementation arrangements   
Loan Negotiations 
ADB Board approval 
Loan and Grant signing  
Government legal opinion provided 
Loan and Grant effectiveness  
3 
Responsible 
Agency 
MOALI 
ADB/MOALI/MOPF 
ADB 
ADB/ MOPF 
MOPF 
ADB 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank;    MOALI  =  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and  Irrigation;  MOPF  =  Ministry  of 
Planning and Finance; PIC = project implementation consultants. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
Project implementation key activities are presented in the Table 2. This will be updated 
7. 
annually  and  submitted  to  ADB  with  contract  and  disbursement  projections  for  the  following 
year.  
4 
Table 2: Overall Implementation Plan 
2018Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Establishment and Staffing of PMU, NPSC, and RPIUs and TPIUsMOALIStart-up Specialists recruitment and mobilizationMOALI/ PMUPIC firm recruitment and mobilizationPMU (DOA)PPMS set-upPMU (DOA)FSDD firm recruitement and mobilizationPMU (DOA)Preparation of procurement documents, tendering and contracting for Chepa Seed FarmDOA-SD/ PMU/DOAInstallation of equipment and civil works at Chepa Seed FarmDOA-SD/ PMU/DOAPreparation of specifications, procurement documents, tendering and contracting for other seed farmsDOA-SD/ PMU/DOAInstallation of equipment, civil works and establish management systems for O&MDOA-SD/ PMU/DOAConfirm implementation plans for rehabilitating critical infrastructure, land availability, locations, suitability and connectivityPMU/IWUMD/DOAPreparation of procurement documents, tendering, contracting and civil works for representative subproject (Kunn Village, Pakokku)PMUFinal selection and design of additional schemesIWUMD/FSDDPreparation of procurement documents, tendering, contracting and civil works, and establishment of O&MPMU/IWUMD/DOAConfirm implementation plans for installing tube wells, land availability, locations, and suitabilityIWUMD/PMUPreparation of TOR and procurement docs, tendering, contracting and implementation of groundwater surveyPMU/IWUMDSelection of and disbursement of funds to beneficiariesIWUMD/PMUDrilling and installationContractorsEstablish management systems for O&MPMU/ DOASelection, survey and design of roadsDRDBid preparation, tendering, contracting and constructionDRD/PMUEstablish management systems for O&MPMU/ DOA/DRDReviewing and approving the list of equipment to be purchasedDOA-PPDBid preparation, tendering, contracting and installation of equipmentDOA-PPD/PMUReviewing and approving the list of equipment to be purchasedDOA-PPDBid preparation, tendering, contracting and installation of equipmentDOA-PPD/PMUa. Rehabilitation of tertiary canals and community reservoirsb. Installation of shallow tubewells a. Upgrading the MOALI – Plant Protection Division (PPD) Pesticide Testing Laboratory (PTL)b. Upgrading the MOALI - PPD Food Safety Testing Lab (FSTLAB)Activity 1.3: Improving connectivity and farm mechanization through climate resilient farm road networksActivity 1.4: Strengthening infrastructure for agricultural quality and safety testingActivity 1.1: Upgrading infrastructure in ten Department of Agriculture (DOA) seed farms for production of improved and climate resilient seedActivity 1.2: Rehabilitating irrigation and water management infrastructure (tertiary canals, community reservoirs, and shallow tube wells) to climate resilient conditionOutput and ActivitiesResponsible Agency(ies)2019Project Start-up PeriodOutput 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate resilient2020202120222023202420262025 
5 
2018Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Reviewing and approving the list of equipment to be purchasedMOC-CABid preparation, tendering, contracting and installation of equipmentMOC-CA/PMUIdentification of beneficiaies and equipment needsDOA and MyanTradePreparation of procurement documents, tendering and contractingPMUDisbursement of kits to beneficiaires (plus training)DOA and MyanTradeOutput 2: Climate-smart agriculture and agribusiness promotedAssess the most demanded varieties of rice, beans, pulses and oil seedsDOA-SDSupport DAR on development of climate resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and oilseedsDOA and DARPlan availability and production of breeder, foundation and registered seeds, and undertake field inspectionsDOA and DARLocational and on-farm trials, Seed bulking up & farmer field days, Varietal release, and Commercialization initiativesDOA and DARIdentify existing documentation of best practices on CSA, GAP, and upgrade GAP  guidelinesDOA-ED and MyanTradeIdentify trained FFS Facilitators and then implement FFSDOA-EDIdentify trainers  and lead farmers by village tracts and then design and implement a certifiable training program on CSA, GAP and organic agricultureDOA-EDIdentify existing mobile phone based extension platform and adopt IT based extension and knowledge dissemination technologiesDOA-EDOrganize a study visit for DOA and Lead Farmers to neighboring countriesDOA-EDTrain water user groups on irrigation management and maintenanceIWUMDFSTLAB technical staff attend regional training in testing for food safety and laboratory techniques DOA-PPDIdentify existing documentation of best practices and upgrade GMP guidelines for improving product quality along the downstream value chainMyanTrade Implement a training of trainers (ToT) approach for agribusinesses MyanTradePrepare and implement training packages on GMP, quality and safetyMyanTradeDevelop design and management of ADFSPMU/DRDTendering and contracting of a consulting services providerPMU/DRDTendering and contracting of financial service providers (FSPs)PMU/DRDAwareness raising on ADFSPMU/DRDIdentification of households for ADFSPMU/DRDImplementation and monitoring of the ADFS by the FSPsFSPs/DRDEstablish  list of interested agro-input dealers who qualify to participate in the ADFSDOA-PPD and LUDIdentify farmers who want to engage in commercial seed production DOA-SDIdentify seed companies to partner with seed producer groups DOA-SDIdentify preferred retailers and agrochemical testing arrangements with the Myanmar Fertilizer, Seed and Pesticide Entrepreneurs AssociationDOA-PPD and LUDIntroduce / upscale the use of leaf color charts for rice growing farmers in target townshipsDOA-PPD and LUDIdentify qualified trainers on fertilizer and agrochemical usageDOA-PPD and LUDc. Upgrading the MOC – Consumer Affairs (CA) Commodity Testing & Quality Management Laboratory (CTQM)d. Rapid Reaction Test Kits Output and ActivitiesResponsible Agency(ies)20192020202120222023202420262025Activity 2.1: Deploying climate resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and oilseedsActivity 2.2: Strengthening capacity of farmers and agribusinesses in climate friendly production practices and technologies(i) Seeds, fertilizers and other agrochemicalsActivity 2.3: Facilitating access to inputs (seeds, fertilizers and other agrochemicals), farm mechanization services and off-farm rural livelihood opportunities through agricultural digital finance service (ADFS) 
6 
2018Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Establish a training programme for agro-input dealers and farmers DOA-PPD and LUDFacilitate soil testing and optimized fertilizer application DOA-PPD and LUDDevelop or improve existing guidelines on fertilizer use and integrated pest management in selected cropsDOA-PPD and LUDProduce videos on fertilizer and agrochemical usage and train extension agents and lead farmers on the use of those videosDOA-PPD and LUDIdentify  leading suppliers of mechanization equipment who qualify to participate in the ADFSDOA-ED/ AMDIdentify suitable mechanization options for farm and post-harvest operations and female headed householdsDOA-ED/ AMDOrganise  private sector and DOA-ED / AMD mechanization demonstrations on lead farmers’ fieldsDOA-ED / AMD) / Private sectorAssess  demand for machinery operation and repair skills and organize training programsDOA-ED / AMD) / Private sectorIdentify enterpreneur households seeking off-farm opportunities and who qualify to participate in the ADFSDRDTrain enterpreneur households seeking off-farm opportunities and encourage them to access ADFSDRDEstablish agribusiness policy unitDOPDevelop work plan for policy formulation, analysis, and advocacy focusing on land use and management, contract farming, tenure security, public-private partnerships, and on harmonization of quality and safety standardsDOPFormulate climate friendly and gender-sensitive agribusiness policies focusing on PPPs and contract farming arrangementsDOP/DOA/PMUOrganize public-private forums to raise awareness on climate friendly agribusiness policies and standards, including organic cerification, GMP and HACCP standardsDOP and MyanTradeDevelop environmental and climate screening criteria and tools to guide lending activities of financial institutionsPIC/PMUBuild capacity of financial institutions for evaluating loans against these environmental and climate risk screening criteriaPIC/PMUTraining on green finance, climate risk sharing instruments and structuring of PPPsPIC/PMUSupport existing weather, market and credit information systems to expand their servicesDOP/PMU/and other IAsProvide multimedia-based weather, market and credit information services to farmers and agribusinessesDOP/PMU/and other IAsProcurement of RapidEye 5m resolution satellite imageryPMUPresent participatory land use mapping for target townshipsDALMS and LUDFit for purpose information compilation into a GIS database DALMSEstablish township crop suitability for on and off-season production DALMS and LUDProduce township land management plansDALMSOutput 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly agribusiness enhanced Activity 3.1: Establishing an agribusiness policy unit within MOALI’s Department of Planning (DOP) to formulate agribusiness policies and standardsActivity 3.2:  Raising awareness and capacity of financial institutions to support climate friendly agribusinessesOutput and ActivitiesResponsible Agency(ies)20192020202120222023202420262025Activity 3.3: Enhancing weather, market and credit information networks(iIi) Off-farm rural livelihood opportunities(i) Capacity building of DALMS, regional and township administrations for land management planning(ii) Farm mechanization servicesActivity 3.4: Improving the delivery of land administration services 
7 
ADFS = Agricultural Digital Finance Service; AMD = Agriculture Mechanization Department;  CSA = climate smart agriculture; DALMS  = Department of Agricultural Land Management 
Services; DOA = Department of Agriculture; DAR = Department of Agricultural Research; DRD = Department of Rural Development; DOP =  Department of Planning; ED = extension 
department; FI = financial institution;  FFS = farmer field school; FSDD = feasibility study and detailed design; FSP = financial service provider; ICT = information and communication 
technologies; IWUMD = Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; LUD = Land Use Department; MOALI =Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation; MOC = 
Ministry  of  Commerce;  MyanTrade  =  Myanmar  Trade  Promotion  Organization;  O&M  =  operation  and  maintenance;  PIC  =  project  implementation  consultants;  PMU  =  Project 
Management Unit; PPD = Plant Protection Department; PPP = public-private partnership; SD = Seed Department. 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
2018Q4 Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Q3Q4Q1Q2Capacity building to validate, strategize and implement participatory township land management plans produced at the national level DALMSTraining in techniques to handle routine and new land administration tasks and land use planning, work ethics, and relationship with clients, land dispute management; DALMSDigitizing maps and satellite imagery to targeted Village TractsDALMSComplete/update map coverageDALMSAwareness raising, sensitization and training on available land administration/management services and procedures PMU/DALMSDevelopment of participatory village land management plans to strategize and demand servicesPMU/DALMSDelivery of services such as land certification, recording land lease contracts and land use changes, land dispute management, identification of land for possible allocation to the landless and poorer households, including women.PMU/DALMSProject Management Cross-Cutting ActivitiesEnvironment management plan key activitiesGender action plan key activitiesInception ReportCommunication strategy key activitiesProject ReviewMidterm ReportProject completion reportFinancial Closing(iii) Creating demand for land administration services at village level Output and ActivitiesResponsible Agency(ies)20192020202120222023202420262025(ii) Capacity building of township administrations to deliver land administration/management services 
8 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Ministry of Planning and 
Finance (MOPF) 
Project Steering 
Committee 
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Irrigation 
(MOALI), executing 
agency 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
(i) 
fulfill  government  fiduciary  and  financial  management  oversight  for 
fund flows;  
(ii)  allocate and release counterpart funds in a timely basis; 
(iii)  ensure sufficient counterpart support for project activities in a timely 
manner in coordination with MOALI; and 
(iv)  ensure  that  delays  are  not  encountered  in  procurement  and 
recruitment. 
A  project  steering  committee  (PSC)  chaired  by  the  Minister  or  Deputy 
Minister  of  MOALI,  and  co-chaired  by  the  Ministers  of  Agriculture  of 
Magway, Mandalay and Sagaing regions of the CDZ will serve as steering 
committee  for  the  project  to  provide  oversight  and  policy  guidance.  The 
PSC  will  comprise  representatives  (at  the  level  of  Director  General  or 
above) of DOA, DOP, DAR, DRD, IWUMD, and DALMS from MOALI and 
of MOPF, MOC, MOI and  MONREC. Other ministries may  be invited as 
observers  when  specific  issues  of  their  concern  are  for  discussion.  The 
PSC will: 
(i)  ensure interagency cooperation at national level;  
(ii)  review and advise on policy issues and implementation constraints; 
(iii)  ensure 
integration  with  other  donors  and  government  related 
development activities;  
(iv)  meet at least twice a year and monitor implementation progress;  
(v)  approve annual work plans and budgets; 
(vi)  set up a multi-departmental procurement committee for the project to 
evaluate tenders; and 
(vii) provide overall guidance on project implementation. 
(i)  primarily 
responsible 
financial 
management  of  the  project,  in  close  coordination  with  MOPF  and 
MOC; 
for  overall  coordination  and 
(ii)  set  up  a  PMU  in  Naypyidaw,  and  PIUs  in  the  regional  offices  in 
Magway, Sagaing, and Mandalay, and in the 14 project townships; 
(iii)  delegate  sufficient  powers  to  the  PMU  and  PIU  team  members  to 
operate their affairs with minimum disruption and interference; 
(iv)  recruit  qualified  PMU  and  PIU  staff  to  avoid  frequent  staff  turnover 
during the whole project implementation period; 
(v)  ensure that selection criteria and implementation arrangements of the 
project activities complies with the financing agreements and manage 
the associated fiduciary risk;  
(vi)  ensure  that  delays  are  not  encountered  in  procurement  and 
recruitment; 
(vii)  ensure full safeguards compliance; 
(viii) through PMU and PIUs, monitor the project performance and submit 
project reports to the concerned parties; and 
(ix)  ensure  all  implementing  agencies  are  actively  participating  in  the 
project as per their designated roles and responsibilities. 
Project Management 
Unit (PMU) in MOALI  
The implementing agencies (IAs) will be supported by the PMU at central 
level  and  project  implementation  units  (PIUs)  at  regional  and  township 
level.  
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
9 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Located in MOALI central office in Naypyidaw, PMU will be led by a Project 
Director, seconded from MOALI and devoting approximately 50% of his/her 
time  to  the  project.  S/he  will  be  assisted  by  full-time  seconded  staff 
including  a  project  manager,  financial  officer,  procurement  officer,  M&E 
officer, social and environment safeguard officer and administrative officer. 
The PMU will: 
(i) 
facilitate the set up of regional project implementation units (PIUs) 
in the regional MOALI offices in Magway, Sagaing, and Mandalay, 
and in the 14 project townships, and provide guidance to them; 
oversee day-to-day implementation of the project by supporting IAs 
at the national level and ensure coordination between activities and 
components; 
establish  two  advance  accounts  (one  each  for  ADB  loan  and 
GAFSP Grant) and 10 sub-accounts (one each for ADB loan  and 
GAFSP Grant in each of five IAs: DOA, DRD, DALMS, IWUMD and 
MTPO) to be used exclusively for ADB’s eligible expenditures;  
prepare and send withdrawal applications to ADB; 
(iv) 
(v)  manage disbursement applications (to subaccounts in DOA, DRD, 
DALMS,  IWUMD  and  MTPO,  and  at  regional  and  township  PIU 
level) and maintain supporting documents; 
direct  payment  requests  to  ADB  are  duly  certified  by  the  project 
director based on the payment terms in the contracts; 
(vii) 
assist IAs in requesting budgetary allocations for counterpart funds; 
(viii)  communicate  with  MOPF  and  ADB  for  any  amendments  in  the 
(vi) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
allocation of the loan and grant amounts;  
recruit a firm for the annual audit of project accounts; 
collate and consolidate planning, financial management, budgeting 
and procurement documents (including annual forecasts of contract 
awards  and  disbursements),  and  oversee  adherence  to  these 
across the IAs; 
conduct  monitoring  and  ensure  full  compliance  of  environmental 
and social safeguards, including the gender action plan, and provide 
guidance to the IAs on these; 
take the role of the project public complaints unit – effectively setting 
up a complaints log, so that complaints can then be responded  in 
accordance with the grievance redress mechanism; 
(xiii)  establish  and  implement  a  project  performance  management 
system  -  measure,  monitor  and  evaluate  the  performance  in 
delivering  development  impact  against  established  performance 
targets and goals of the project; 
report  to  PSC  and  ADB  on  the  project  implementation  progress 
(including  preparation  of  semi-annual,  annual  and  project 
completion reports);  
(xiv) 
(xv)  procure  goods,  works  and  services,  including  recruitment  of 
consultants; 
(xvi)  sign and manage supplier contracts in coordination with IAs; 
(xvii)  oversee  preparation  of  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs 
undertaken  by  IAs/PIUs  with  project  implementation  consultants 
(PIC) support; and  
(xviii)  make contractor payments based on milestone payment approvals 
from PIU level.   
10 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
a.  Department of 
Agriculture (DOA) of 
MOALI 
b.  Department of 
c. 
Planning (DOP) of 
MOALI 
Irrigation and Water 
Utilization 
Management 
Department (IWUMD) 
of MOALI 
d.  Department of Rural 
Development (DRD) of 
MOALI 
e.  Department of 
Agricultural Land 
Management and 
Statistics (DALMS) in 
MOALI 
f.  Myanmar Trade 
Promotion 
Organization 
(MyanTrade) of MOC 
(implementing agencies) 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Each IA will have a project coordination unit (PCU) to be represented by a 
seconded Project Coordinator as well as procurement and finance officers 
at the national level departments. The PCU will coordinate and oversee the 
work  at  the  national,  regional  and  township  levels.  In  broad  terms,  the 
responsibilities of the IAs are to: 
(i)  prepare work plans and budgets, and implement the project activities 
within their Department on a day-to-day basis; 
(ii)  establish  and  manage  the  subaccount,  and  organize  disbursement 
with assistance from PMU; 
(iii)  oversee  financial  management  activities  and  prepare  procurement 
plans including preparation of annual forecasts of contract awards and 
disbursements; 
(iv)  assist  the  PMU  (and  RPIUs  and  TPIUs  where  applicable)  in  the 
procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  through  the  provision  of 
technical  documentation  and 
for  bidding 
documents (specifications, etc); 
information  required 
(v)  monitor  and  report  on  project  activities,  providing  information  to  be 
collected  as  part  of  the  PPMS,  managed  by  the  M&E  officer  in  the 
PMU; and 
(vi)  conduct  monitoring  and  compliance  of  environmental  and  social 
safeguards,  including  gender  action  plan  (based  on  training  and 
guidance provided by PMU and PIC). 
a.  Department of Agriculture (DOA). Project responsibilities of DOA are 
divided  among  various  divisions, 
the  Seed  Division, 
Extension Division, Plant Protection Division, and Land Use Division. 
including 
•  DOA Seed Division (SD) 
(i)  review and approve 10 DOA seed farms technical designs, bidding 
documents,  and  tenders,  supervise  the  construction,  evaluate 
construction for quality control, and approve payments for meeting 
the milestones. Procurement of goods, works and services for the 
seed farms will be done by the PMU. Evaluation will be done by a 
bid  evaluation  committee  set  up  by  PMU,  which  should  include 
DOA and seed division representatives; 
(ii)  organize,  with  support  from  PIC  sector  specialists,  technical 
training  and  guidance  in  water  management  and  water  use 
efficiency, GAP, GSP, GMP and other relevant techniques; and 
(iii)  Coordinate  and  work  closely  with  the  Department  of  Agricultural 
Research (DAR) in planning the seed flow and the multiplication of 
the  various  classes  of  seed,  in  distributing  the  foundation  seed 
based  on  the  DAR  resources  and  the  needs  of  the  DOA  seed 
farms.  
•  DOA Extension Division (ED) 
(i)  select the lead seed growers and their associated farmer groups 
that  will  be  eligible  for  the  TOT  training  in  seed  production  and 
certification, CSA, and codes of practice for drying and storage; 
(ii)  organize and serve as technical trainers at the project-supported 
Farmer Field Schools and the on-farm demonstrations; and 
(iii)  coordinate training on mechanization and machinery operation and 
repair. 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
11 
•  DOA Plant Protection Division (PPD)  
(i)  review  and  approve  the  list  of  laboratory  equipment  to  be 
purchased for PPD’s Pesticide Testing Laboratory (PTL) and the 
Food Safety Laboratory (FSTLAB);  
(ii)  utilize  the  new  PTL  equipment  in  testing  of  pesticides  to  be 
registered before being marketed;  
(iii)  utilize  the  new  equipment  in  the  FSTLAB  to  measure  pesticide 
residue for trace analysis in agricultural commodities; and 
(iv)  facilitate access to pesticides.  
•  DOA Land Use Division (LUD) 
(i) 
(ii)  undertake land management planning (with DALMS). 
facilitate access to fertilizers; and 
b.  Department of Planning (DOP) 
(i)  support the establishment of the Agribusiness Policy Unit;  
(ii)  assist  in  the  recruitment  of  the  Director  and  the  two  research 
officers; 
(iii)  support  the  systematic  policy  research,  analysis,  and  advocacy 
work in various policy topics; 
(iv)  assist in the dissemination of the project’s adopted policy reforms 
among the project’s value chain stakeholders; and  
(v)  implement the market information network activity. 
c. 
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department (IWUMD) 
(i)  with  assistance  from  PIC  and  the  PIU  regional  engineers, 
undertake  feasibility  and  detailed  designs  for  rehabilitation  and 
upgrading  of  selected  minor  canals  and  community  ponds  and 
reservoirs; 
(ii)  assist  PMU  in  the  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services 
through the provision of technical documentation and information 
required for bidding documents (specifications, etc); 
(iii)  undertake  construction  supervision  and  approve  payments  for 
meeting milestones;  
(iv)  together with the PIC irrigation engineer, provide technical training 
and  guidance  in  water  management,  water  use  efficiency  and 
maintenance of the renovated minor canals, new tube wells, and 
rehabilitated small reservoirs; 
(v)  help  establish  Water  User  Groups  (WUGs)  for  the  farmers 
accessing water from the project’s improved irrigation works; 
(vi)  help prepare a TOR for a  groundwater survey  and help oversee 
the work; and 
(vii) coordinate  with  DRD  in  selecting  beneficiaries  and  determining 
needs for tube wells.  
d.  Department of Rural Development (DRD) 
(i)  with assistance from PIC and PIU regional engineers, undertake 
feasibility and detailed designs for farmer feeder roads; 
(ii)  assist  PMU  in  the  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services 
through the provision of technical documentation and information 
required for bidding documents (specifications, etc); 
(iii)  undertake  construction  supervision  and  approve  payments  for 
meeting milestones; and 
(iv)  manage the Agricultural Digital Finance Service. 
12 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
e.  Department  of  Agricultural  Land  Management  and  Statistics 
(DALMS)  
(i)  undertake land management planning; and 
(ii)  deliver improved land administration/management services. 
f.  Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization (MyanTrade), Ministry of 
Commerce 
(i) 
implement  training  programs  in  food  safety  (GMP,  HACCP) 
involving  the  primary  and  value  added  processed  pulse,  beans, 
and sesame; 
(ii)  train  value  chain  stakeholders  in  product  branding  and  market 
promotion; and 
(iii)  work  with  the  Department  of  Consumer  Affairs  to  upgrade  the 
Commodity Testing and Quality Management Laboratory (CTQM). 
Specifications  have  been  prepared  by  CTQM  professional  staff 
which  the  PMU  will  review  (with  PIC  support)  before  bidding 
documents are finalized.   
Other collaborating 
government agencies 
Agricultural Mechanization Department (AMD) - support to DOA-ED on 
mechanization training.  
Department  of  Agricultural  Research  -  work  with  the  DOA-SD  in 
planning the seed flow and the multiplication of the various classes of seed, 
in distributing the foundation seed based on the DAR resources and the 
needs of the DOA seed farms. 
General  Administration  Department  (GAD)  -  support  to  awareness 
raising of land administration services.  
Department  of  Consumer  Affairs,  MOC  -  working  with  the  MTPO, 
upgrade  the  Commodity  Testing  and  Quality  Management  Laboratory 
(CTQM).  Specifications  have  already  been  prepared  by  CTQM 
professional  staff  which  will  be  reviewed  by  the  PMU  (with  PIC  support) 
before bidding documents are finalized. 
Department  of  Rural  Roads  Development  (DRRD),  Ministry  of 
Construction  -  support  the  DRD  as  needed  in  the  farm  feeder  roads 
activities.  
Ministry of Commerce 
(MOC) Project 
Coordination Unit 
Ministry  of  Education  -  DOA  will  also  work  closely  with  the  Intellectual 
Property  Division  of  the  Science  and  Technology  Department  of  the 
Ministry of Education in registering Shwebo Paw San rice as a geographic 
indication  (GI),  getting  a  trademark  for  it,  and  pursuing  any  additional 
geographic indication requirements, legal or otherwise.  
(i)  responsible 
implementation  of  MOC-related  project 
activities and financial management, in close coordination with MOALI 
and PMU; 
for  overall 
(ii)  set  up  a  PCU  in  MTPO  and  assign  a  seconded  Project  Coordinator 
expected to dedicate approximately 25% of his/her time to the project, 
as  well  as  a  seconded  finance  and  administration  officer  to  manage 
the subaccount withdrawals and expenditure; 
(iii)  delegate  sufficient  powers  to  the  PCU  and  PIU  team  members  to 
operate their affairs with minimum disruption and interference; 
(iv)  recruit  qualified  PCU  and  PIU  staff  to  avoid  frequent  staff  turnover 
during the whole project implementation period; 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
13 
Regional Project 
Implementing Units 
(RPIUs) 
Township Project 
Implementing Units 
(TPIUs) 
(v)  ensure that selection criteria and implementation arrangements of the 
project activities complies with the financing agreements and manage 
the associated fiduciary risk; and  
(vi)  Through  PCU,  monitor  the  project  performance  and  submit  project 
reports to the concerned parties. Support to the office will be provided 
by the PMU. 
The IAs will be supported by a regional PIU located in the regional office of 
MOALI  and  will  include  two  externally  contracted  staff  –  a  design  and 
supervision  engineer  and  an  agriculturalist.  They  will  provide  support  to 
government  IA  staff  at  the  township  (and  regional)  level  involved  in  the 
implementation of activities.  
The RPIU will include government seconded staff, including a finance and 
admin officer, and project coordinators representing  DOA (with the DOA 
Director  acting  as  the  RPIU  Head),  IWUMD,  DRD  and  DALMS  (deputy 
director level). They will support regional IAs in: 
(i)  conducting regional level activities (e.g. organizing venues for project 
training, meetings, etc); 
(ii)  coordinating the work of the TPIUs;  
(iii)  keeping the regional and district government officials aware of project 
activities  and  requesting  their  support  as  required.  The  RPIUs  will 
report to the PMU and will support implementation of the PPMS and 
ensure safeguards implementation;   
(iv)  a subaccount will be opened, if necessary, at regional PIU level. The 
RPIU  head  will  be  accountable  for  proper  use  of  advances  and 
reconciliation  of  the  subaccount.  This  is  likely  to  be  limited  to  small-
scale  expenditures  such  as  through  the  shopping  mechanism 
(following training provided by PMU procurement staff) with all national 
competitive bids managed by the PMU; and  
(v)  the regional MOC office may also be involved in the training programs 
in food safety (GMP, HACCP) involving the primary and value added 
processed pulse, beans, and sesame, or such training staff may come 
directly from central level.  
At township level, the IAs will be supported by a township PIU located in 
the General Admin Office of the Township building. The TPIU is composed 
of the following seconded IA representatives: 
•  Project coordinators representing DOA (who will act as the PIU head), 
IWUMD, DRD and DALMS 
•  From DOA, 2 agriculturalists 
•  From the IWUMD, 3 irrigation engineers, plus a water use efficiency 
officer  
•  From DRD, a road engineer 
•  From DALMS, a land administration officer 
•  Finance and admin officer 
The TPIUs will:  
(i)  oversee  the  implementation  of  field-level  activities,  keeping  the 
township  government  officials  aware  of  project  activities  and 
requesting their support as required; 
(ii)  report  to  the  RPIUs  and  support  implementation  of  the  PPMS  and 
ensure safeguards are implemented;  
(iii)  A subaccount will be opened, if necessary, at township PIU level. The 
TPIU  head  will  be  accountable  for  proper  use  of  advances  and 
14 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Regional, District, and 
Township Governments  
Asian Development 
Bank 
reconciliation  of  the  subaccount.  This  is  likely  to  be  limited  to  small-
scale  expenditures  such  as  through  the  shopping  mechanism 
(following training provided by PMU procurement staff) with all national 
competitive bids managed by the PMU; and 
(iv)  The  township  MOC  office  may  also  be  involved  in  assisting  in  the 
training programs in food safety (GMP, HACCP) involving the primary 
and  value  added  processed  pulse,  beans,  and  sesame,  or  such 
training  staff  may  come  directly  from  central  level.  Either  way,  it  is 
unlikely that a separate regional PIU for MOC will be required. 
The Regional, District and Township Government officials are responsible 
for: 
(i)  providing regulatory support (e.g. in approval and registration 
processes) to project stakeholders in an efficient and effective 
manner; and 
(ii)  helping in the subproject selection process e.g. for minor canals to be 
renovated in the various irrigation scheme locations in the three 
regions.  
(i)  ensure timely release of funds from ADB to the project; 
(ii) 
(iii)  monitor project implementation arrangements, disbursement, 
issue no-objection for subproject feasibility studies for financing; 
procurement, consultant selection, and reporting; 
review compliance with agreed procurement procedures; 
(iv)  monitor schedules of activities;  
(v) 
(vi)  review compliance with loan and grant covenants; 
(vii)  monitor effectiveness of safeguard procedures and ensure full 
safeguards compliance; 
(viii) monitor conformity with ADB anti-corruption policies; and 
(ix)  undertake periodic review missions with the government (including 
inception, midterm and project completion) 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; AMD = Agricultural Mechanization Division; CDZ = central dry zone; CSA = climate 
smart agriculture; CTQM = commodity  testing and  quality management; DALMS = Department of Agricultural Land 
Management and Statistics; DAR = Department of Agricultural Research;  DOA = Department of Agriculture; DMF = 
design  &  monitoring  framework;    DOP  =  Department  of  Planning;  DRD  =  Department  of Rural  Development;  EA = 
executing agency; ED = extension division; FSTLAB = Food Safety Testing Laboratory; GAD = General Administration 
Department; GAP = good agricultural practices; GHP = good hygienic practices;   GMP = good manufacturing practices;  
GSP = good storage practices; HACCP = hazard analysis critical control point;  ICT = information and communication 
technologies; IWUMD = Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; LUD = Land Use Division; MOALI = 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation; MOC = Ministry of Commerce; MOE = Ministry of Education; MOI = 
Ministry of Industry; MONREC = Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation; MOPF = Ministry of 
Planning and Finance; MTPO = Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization; M&E = monitoring and  evaluation; PCU= 
project  coordination  unit;  PIC =  project  implementation  consultants;  PMU  =  project  management  unit;  PPD  =  Plant 
Protection Division; PSC = project steering committee; PTL = Pesticide Testing Laboratory; SD = Seed Division; TOT 
= training of trainers. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Position 
National Project 
Director (part-time) 
National Project 
Manager (PMU) / 
Project Coordinator 
of each IA 
Finance Officer  
Table 3: Roles of the Project Management Unit Staff  
15 
Qualification 
A senior government official with at 
least 12 years project management 
experience with preference to ADB 
project  implementation.    Master’s 
degree 
and 
competence in spoken and written 
English.    
equivalent 
or 
A senior government official with at 
least 10 years project management 
experience  A  Master’s  degree  or 
equivalent  and  competence 
in 
spoken and written English.    
A  government  official  with  formal 
accounting  qualifications  and  at 
least  5  years  previous  experience 
in 
of 
financial  management 
financed  projects, 
internationally 
preferably  projects 
financed  by 
ADB  or  World  Bank.  Bachelor’s 
degree or equivalent. Competence 
in spoken and written English.    
and 
fixed 
project 
assets, 
budgets, 
coordinating 
timely  disbursement 
Job Description 
The  Project  Director  reports  to  the  PSC  on  the  overall 
supervision  and  implementation  of  the  project  and 
ensures  that  the  PSC  and  ADB  are  kept  informed  of 
project developments, issues and progress. The Project 
Director oversees and coordinates the work of PMU staff, 
and the recruitment and performance of international and 
national  consultants,  ensures  budgets  and  work  plans 
are approved and executed on time and on target, and 
supervises  and  approves  all  project  activities  and 
expenditures.  
The  Project  Manager  will  ensure  effective  coordination 
implementation, 
among  project  stakeholders  on 
administrative  and  finance  aspects.  The  main  duties 
involve preparing and implementing detailed annual work 
plans 
all 
admin/finance/procurement, managing project account to 
for  project  activities, 
ensure 
managing  consultant  recruitment  and  procurement, 
managing 
oversee 
implementation of the Project Performance Management 
System  (PPMS).  S/he  reviews  and  endorses  budget 
requests of regional and township project implementation 
units  for  onward  submission  for  approval  of  the  Project 
Director  and  will  liaise  with  the  National  Technical 
Departments/Focal points of MOALI and MTPO and will 
be supported by PIC.  
The  PMU  Finance  Officer  oversees  the  day-to-day 
financial  management  of  the  project  and,  supported  by 
the  procurement  officer  and  PIC  international  and 
national 
the 
establishment  of  the  necessary  accounts  at  the  PMU, 
implementing  agencies  and  the  PIUs;  (ii)  establish  the 
required  accounting,  withdrawal  approval  and  audit 
systems and procedures; (iii) set up accounting software 
in line with project requirements; (iv) establish a system 
tender  documents,  minutes  of 
for  safekeeping  of 
committee  meetings,  contracts  and  financial  and  audit 
reports;  (v) prepare financial projections against the work 
plans;  (vi)  carry  out  a  financial  management  training 
program  for  relevant  PIU  staff;  (vii)  provide  ongoing 
training  and  coaching  to  PIU’s  as  needed;  and  (viii) 
supervise the preparation of regular financial reports for 
transmission to the EA and the ADB.   
finance  consultants,  will  (i) 
facilitate 
and 
Safeguards Officer 
the  procurement  activities  as  per 
Procurement Officer  The  Procurement  Officer,  with  support  from  the  PIC 
international  and  national  procurement  consultants, 
the 
undertakes 
procurement  plan  and  ensures  all  project  procurement 
activities  are  undertaken  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
Procurement Guidelines.  
The  Environment,  Safeguards,  and  Gender  Officer 
supported  by  PIC  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring 
implementation  and  monitoring  of  gender,  social  and 
environmental safeguards in accordance with ADB’s SPS 
2009.  The  Safeguards  Officer  will  be  responsible,  with 
PIC  support,  for  preparing  safeguards  documents  and 
GAP for subprojects and preparing quarterly reports on 
safeguards compliance.  
5 
least 
years 
At 
previous 
experience  as  procurement  officer 
on ADB or internationally financed 
projects  and  good  command  of 
spoken and written English 
A  degree  in  environment  /  social 
science  and  at  least  3  years  work 
experience 
field, 
internationally 
preferably 
supported 
Good 
command  of  spoken  and  written 
English. 
projects. 
related 
in 
on 
16 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation Officer 
The  M&E  Officer  ensures  the  project  M&E  system  is 
established, updated, monitored, and reported. 
Administrative 
Officer 
The  Administrative  Officer  provides logistical  support  to 
PMU  operations  as  needed,  frequently  interacting  with 
senior government officials, PIU staff members and the 
consultants  and  acts  as  an  assistant  to  the  Project 
Director. 
Providing  planning  and  logistics  support  for  the  PMU 
offices and to the Regional Representatives, the Officer 
will  plan,  schedule,  arrange  meetings  and  project 
programs, coordinate activities with the public and private 
sector stakeholders in the project, and maintain a log of 
all logistics, meetings, etc. 
3 
least 
years 
previous 
At 
experience working as M&E officer 
on ADB or internationally financed 
projects.  Ability  to  use  Microsoft 
programs and good English ability. 
previous 
At 
experience  working  on  ADB  or 
internationally 
financed  projects. 
Ability  to  use  Microsoft  programs 
and good English language ability. 
years 
least 
3 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; MOALI = Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation; MTPO = Myanmar Trade 
Promotion  Organization;  PMU=  Project  Management  Unit;  PIU  =  project  implementation  unit;  PIC  =  project 
implementation consultants. 
Position 
Regional PIU 
Director   
Table 4: Roles of the Project Implementation Unit Staff  
Job Description 
The Regional PIU Director oversees implementation of project 
activities at regional level. Main duties include leading preparation 
of the regional and township project work plans and budget, 
coordinating with related government agencies and development 
partners in the implementation of civil works subprojects and 
capacity building activities, ensuring compliance with policies and 
regulations, supervising and approving all project activities and PIU 
expenditures.   
Requirements 
Regional Director 
DOA 
Deputy Regional 
PIU Director  
The Deputy Director will ensure effective implementation of project 
activities in relation to water management rehabilitation activities 
and capacity building. 
Deputy Director from 
IWUMD  
Main duties include assisting PIU Regional Director in coordinating 
development of regional and township work plan and budget, 
coordinating with related government agencies and development 
partners in the implementation of civil works subprojects and 
capacity building activities, supervising and reviewing design 
engineers work and following up and monitoring field 
implementation, and consolidating and reporting project benefit 
monitoring and evaluation.   
S/he will be responsible for the monitoring and evaluation within the 
water management systems for social safeguards and social 
development as well as gender. 
The Finance and Administration Assistant reports to the PIU 
Director overseeing the establishment and monitoring the PIU 
accounting systems and procedures, tracks the use of project 
funds, and ensures that accurate, up-to-date financial accounting 
information is available  
S/he will provide administrative support to PIU office and to the 
regional representatives to plan, schedule, arrange meetings and 
project programs, coordinate activities with the public and private 
sector stakeholders in the project, and maintain a log of all logistics, 
meetings 
At least 2 years of 
experience as 
accountant on ADB or 
internationally financed 
projects. Ability to use 
accounting and word 
processing software. 
Working ability in 
English. 
Finance and 
Administration 
Assistant  
17 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Ministry of Planning and Finance (MOPF) 
Foreign Economic Relations 
Department 
U Moh Moh Naing 
Director 
Tel: +95 67 407344 
Executing Agency  
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock 
and Irrigation (MOALI) 
Project Director: 
U Aye Ko Ko, Deputy Director General, DOA  
Phone No: 09-428306725  
Email: dydgdoa@gmail.com 
Project Manager: 
U Myint Oo, Director, DOA 
Phone No: 09-255708400; 
 Email: director.extension.doa@gmail.com 
Implementation Agencies 
MOALI – Department of 
Agriculture 
Dr. Ye Tint Tun, Director General 
Tel: +95 67 410007 
Project Coordinator: 
Daw Myint Myint Aye, Assistant Director 
Phone No: 09-420700440; Email: myintma@gmail.com 
MOALI – Department of Planning U Kyaw Min Oo, Director General 
Tel: +95 67 410011 
Project Coordinator: 
Dr. Thanda Kyi, Director 
Phone No.: 09-448534742; Email.: 
thanda2010.kyi@gmail.com 
MOALI – Irrigation and 
Management of Water Utilization 
Department 
U Kyaw Myint Hlaing, Director General 
Tel: +95 67 410539 
Project Coordinator: 
U Zaw Win Chit, Director 
Phone No:  09-8301941; Email 
MOALI – Department of Rural 
Development 
U Khant Zaw, Director General 
Email: kzaw.dda@gmail.com 
Project Coordinator: 
Dr. Zar Ni Min, Director 
Phone No: 09-440935588; Email: minnzarni@gmail.com 
18 
MOALI – Department of Land 
Administration and Statistics 
U Thet Naing Oo 
Director General 
Project Coordinator: 
U Hlwan Moe, Director 
Phone No:  09-49205069; Email: hm.slrd@gmail.com 
Ministry of Commerce (MOC) 
- Myanmar Trade Promotion 
Organization 
U Aung Soe 
Director General 
Tel: +95 67 430206 
Project Director: 
Daw Thida Win Htay, Deputy Director 
Phone No:  09-5091821; Email: thidawinhtay@gmal.com 
MOC – Department of Consumer 
Affairs 
U Myint Zaw Oo 
Deputy Director 
Tel: +95 52 2222123 
Project Coordinator: 
Dr. Wai Yee Lin, Assistant Director  
Phone No:  09-795454667; Email: waiyeelin@gmail.com 
Asian Development Bank 
Environment, Natural  
Resources, and Agriculture  
Division (SEER) of the Southeast 
Asia Department (SERD) 
Mr. Jiangfeng Zhang, Director   
SEER/SERD Telephone No.: +63 2 632 6234  
Fax No.: +63 2 636 2231  
Email address: jzhang@adb.org 
 6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City  
1550 Metro Manila, Philippines  
ADB Myanmar Resident Mission  Mr. Newin Sinsiri, Country Director  
Myanmar Resident Mission  
Telephone No.:  +95 1 860 3433  
Fax No.: +95 1 860 3439 
Email address: nsinsiri@adb.org 
Project Officer 
Dr. Srinivasan Ancha 
Principal Climate Change Specialist, SEER/SERD  
Telephone No. +63-2-632-4786 
Email address: asrinivasan@adb.org  
Confirmed Staff of the Project Management Unit (PMU)  
Name/ Position/Department 
Role 
19 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
 U Soe Moe  
Deputy Director, DOA, MOALI 
Phone No:  09-8302294;  
 Daw Htay Htay Oo  
Deputy Director, DOA, MOALI 
Phone No:  09-428304173  
Email: directorfinance43@gmail.com 
 Dr. Cho Cho San  
Program Officer, DOP, MOALI 
Phone:09-784084939 
Email: cho.thirimon@gmail.com 
 Daw Nwet Nwet San  
Program Officer, DOP, MOALI  
Phone: 09-43017178 
Email: nwetnwet.san@gmail.com 
 Daw Thida Swe  
Assistant Director, DOA, MOALI 
Phone:09-421171797 
Procurement Officer 
Finance Officer 
Safeguards Officer and Gender 
focal 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officer 
Administration Officer 
20 
Project Organization Structure 
The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MOALI) is the executing agency (EA), 
8. 
in close coordination with MOC and MOPF.  
9. 
A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the Minister or Deputy Minister of MOALI, 
and co-chaired by the Ministers of Agriculture of Magway, Mandalay and Sagaing regions of the 
CDZ will provide oversight and policy guidance (Figure 1). The PSC will comprise representatives 
(at  the  level  of  Director General  or  above)  of  Department  of  Agriculture (DOA),  Department  of 
Agricultural  Land  Management  and  Statistics  (DALMS),  Department  of  Agricultural  Research 
(DAR), Department of Planning (DOP), Department of Rural Development (DRD), and Irrigation 
and  Water  Utilization  Management  Department  (IWUMD)  from  MOALI,  and  of  the  Ministry  of 
Planning and Finance (MOPF), Ministry of Commerce (MOC), Ministry of Industry (MOI), and the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation (MONREC). Other ministries may 
be invited as observers when specific issues of their concern are for discussion. For more effective 
decision making, the persons attending should not exceed 20 people. 
10. 
The implementing agencies (IAs) will be the DOA, DALMS, DOP, DRD, and IWUMD within 
MOALI,  and  the  Myanmar  Trade  Promotion  Organization  (MTPO)  in  MOC.  Each  will  have  a 
Project Coordinator to ensure that the work delegated to their respective departments is being 
undertaken efficiently and effectively. They will be the main liaison points of the PMU. 
11. 
The  implementing  agencies  will  be  supported  by  PMU  headed  by  a Project  Director (a 
coordinating unit in MTPO will be set up rather than a separate PMU). The PMU will be in the 
MOALI central complex in Naypyidaw. At regional level, the IAs will be supported by RPIUs (see 
Figure 3) located in the offices of the regional ministers of agriculture in Magway, Sagaing, and 
Mandalay, and at township level PIUs in the general administrative office of the township building 
in the 14 selected townships. The overall project organization structure is in Figure 2. 
The PMU and PIUs will be supported by the project implementation consultants (PIC) to 
12. 
be contracted by the project. Individual project start-up consultants will also be engaged to help 
MOALI. The consultants’ terms of reference are provided in Appendix 5. 
Figure 1: Project Steering Committee Composition 
Figure 2: Overall Project Organization Structure 
21 
*Project Coordinators (counterpart seconded staff) in each IA. Coordinate inputs to the project of technical staff within 
their department. 
Figure 3: Regional and Township Project Implementation Unit (PIU) Structure 
22 
IV.  COSTS AND FINANCING 
13. 
The project is estimated to cost $64.92 million. The government has requested a loan in 
the amount of $40.50 million from ADB’s concessional ordinary capital resources and a grant of 
$22.00  million  from  the  Global  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  Program  (GAFSP)  to  be 
administered by ADB on a cost-sharing basis. 
14. 
 The ADB loan will have a 32-year term, including a grace period of 8 years, an interest 
rate of 1.0% per annum during the grace period and 1.5% per annum thereafter, and such other 
terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreement.  
15. 
The  ADB  loan  and  ADB-administered  grant  proceeds  will  finance  (i)  civil  works; 
(ii) equipment  and  materials;  (iii)  studies,  surveys  and  design;  (iv)  training  and  demonstration; 
(v) policies  and  standards; 
(vii)  consulting  services; 
(viii) information  and  communication  technology;  (ix)  agriculture  digital  finance  service; 
(x) operating costs; and (xi) taxes and duties.  
(vi)  monitoring  and  evaluation; 
The  Government  of  Myanmar  will  finance the  equivalent  of  $1.43 million  for  salaries of 
16. 
counterpart  staff  and  office  space,  inclusive  of  applicable  taxes  and  duties.  Contribution  from 
beneficiaries of $0.99 million for the tube well materials can be in-kind or in cash. 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions  
17. 
The  cost  estimates  were  prepared  by  ADB  consultants  using  data  from  primary  and 
secondary  sources.  Figures  are  based  on  unit  cost  and  rates  prevailing  in  Myanmar  in  2017. 
During implementation, project staff and consultants will revise the costs in accordance with the 
final detailed designs and will also be responsible for detailed costing of additional subprojects to 
be implemented. Tables may be revised during midterm review or special administration review 
mission. 
Key Assumptions 
18. 
The following key assumptions underpin the cost estimates and financing plan: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Exchange rate: MMK1,360 = $1.00 (as of 31 Jan 2018).  
Price  contingencies  based  on  expected  cumulative 
implementation period are as follows:  
inflation  over 
the 
Table 5: Escalation Rates for Price Contingency Calculation 
Item 
Foreign rate of price inflation 
Domestic rate of price inflation 
2018 
1.5% 
7.5% 
2019 
1.5% 
7.5% 
2020 
1.5% 
7.5% 
2021 
1.6% 
8.0% 
2022 
1. 6% 
8.0% 
2023 
1. 6% 
8.0% 
2024 
1. 6% 
8.0% 
2025  Average 
1. 6% 
8.0% 
1.6% 
7.8% 
Source(s): ADB Domestic Inflation Forecast April 2017, World Bank MUV Index, Oct 2017.
23 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category  
Table 6: Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Item 
A. Base Costsa,b,c 
Civil Works 
  Machinery and Equipment 
  Shallow Tube wells 
  Materials and Supplies 
  Vehicles 
  Training, Workshops and Studies 
  Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 
  Consultants 
  Feasibility Studies and Detailed Design 
  Digital Finance Design and Management 
  Project Implementation Support 
  Government Counterpart Support 
  Agricultural Digital Finance Service 
  Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingenciesd 
Physical 
  Price 
  Subtotal (B) 
C. Financing Charges During Implementatione 
Interest during construction 
  Subtotal (C) 
$ Million 
Local  Foreign 
Total 
% of Base 
Costs 
12.66 
1.36 
4.77 
3.16 
0.10 
2.80 
0.85 
2.57 
0.66 
0.80 
1.82 
1.04 
3.81 
3.16 
2.03 
3.18 
1.35 
0.22 
0.70 
0.21 
2.12 
0.16 
0.20 
0.45 
0.12 
0.95 
15.82 
3.39 
7.94 
4.51 
0.32 
3.50 
1.06 
4.70 
0.82 
1.00 
2.27 
1.16 
4.76 
30.86 
6.61 
15.50 
8.80 
0.63 
6.83 
2.07 
9.16 
1.60 
1.95 
4.44 
2.26 
9.29 
36.38 
14.87 
51.25 
100.00 
2.22 
6.83 
9.05 
0.00 
0.00 
0.86 
2.40 
3.26 
1.36 
1.36 
3.08 
9.23 
12.31 
1.36 
1.36 
6.01 
18.00 
24.02 
2.65 
2.65 
Total Project Costs (A+B+C) 
45.43 
19.49 
64.92 
126.67 
a  Figures may not sum due to rounding. 
b  Includes taxes and duties of $2.56 million to be financed by ADB loan and GAFSP grant. 
c  In 1st quarter 2018 prices. 
d  Physical contingencies computed at 10% for civil works and equipment, and 5% for the other expenditure 
categories. Price contingencies on foreign currency costs computed at 1.5% between 2018 and 2020, and 1.6% 
thereafter. Price contingencies on local currency costs computed at 7.5% between 2018 and 2020, and 8.0% 
thereafter. Includes provision for potential exchange rate fluctuation under the assumption of a purchasing power 
parity exchange rate.  
e  Interest during construction for the ADB loan is computed at 1% during the grace period. 
Source. Asian Development Bank estimates.  
24 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds 
Table 7: Allocation of ADB Loan Proceeds 
No.  Expenditure Item 
1. 
Civil Works, Machinery and 
Equipment, Feasibility and Design, 
and Project Implementation 
Support 
Training, Workshops and Studies 
2. 
3.  Weather, Credit and Market 
Information Support 
Consultants 
Interest during construction 
Total 
4. 
5. 
Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 
Financing 
($) 
34,490,000  100.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan 
Account 
2,010,000 
                620,000 
45.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
   45.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
2,020,000 
1,360,000  100.0%  of amount due 
36.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
40,500,000 
Note:  Totals include contingencies. 
Table 8: Allocation of GAFSP Grant Proceeds 
No.  Expenditure Item 
Shallow Tube wells 
1. 
Vehicles and Agricultural Digital 
2. 
Finance Service 
Training, Workshops and Studies 
3. 
4.   Weather, Credit and Market 
Information Support 
Consultants 
Total 
Note:  Totals include contingencies. 
5. 
Total Amount 
Allocated for GAFSP 
Financing 
($) 
8,870,000 
6,410,000 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Grant 
Account 
100.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
100.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
2,410,000 
               750,000 
55.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
   55.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
3,560,000 
22,000,000 
64.0%  of total expenditure claimed 
25 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Item 
Table 9: Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
ADB Loan 
Amount 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
GAFSP Grant 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
Amount 
Beneficiaries 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
Amount 
Gov't of Myanmar 
Total 
Amount 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
Amount 
Taxes 
and 
duties 
A. Investment Costs 
  Civil Works 
  Machinery and Equipment 
  Shallow Tube wellsa 
  Materials and Supplies 
  Vehicles 
  Training, Workshops and Studies 
  Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 
  Consultants 
  Feasibility Studies and Detailed Design 
  Digital Finance Design and Management 
  Project Implementation Supportb 
  Government Counterpart Support 
  Agricultural Digital Finance Service 
  Subtotal (A) 
B. Financing Charges During Implementation 
Interest during construction  
  Subtotal (B) 
Total Project Costs (A+B) 
21.23 
3.94 
0.00 
5.50 
0.00 
2.00 
0.62 
2.02 
1.05 
0.00 
2.77 
0.00 
0.00 
100.0 
100.0 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
45.4 
45.4 
36.2 
100.0 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.00 
0.00 
8.87 
0.00 
0.35 
2.41 
0.75 
3.56 
0.00 
1.26 
0.00 
0.00 
4.81 
39.14 
61.6 
22.00 
1.36 
1.36 
100.0 
100.0 
0.00 
0.00 
40.50 
62.4 
22.00 
0.0 
0.0 
90.0 
0.0 
100.0 
54.6 
54.6 
63.8 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
34.6 
0.0 
0.0 
33.9 
0.00 
0.00 
0.99 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.99 
0.00 
0.00 
0.99 
0.0 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.6 
0.0 
0.0 
1.5 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.43 
0.00 
1.43 
0.00 
0.00 
1.43 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
2.3 
0.0 
0.0 
2.2 
21.23 
3.94 
9.85 
5.50 
0.35 
4.41 
1.37 
5.59 
1.05 
1.26 
2.77 
1.43 
4.81 
63.56 
1.36 
1.36 
64.92 
1.03 
0.16 
0.38 
0.21 
0.05 
0.17 
0.05 
0.30 
0.04 
0.05 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
2.56 
0.00 
0.00 
2.56 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
a  Beneficiaries will contribute 10% of the total cost of shallow tube well installation, in cash or in kind, directly to the  contractor. The GAFSP grant will finance 
100% of the balance invoiced by the contractor.  
b   Includes costs of office equipment (furniture), office supplies, telecommunications, travel including per diem, monitoring and evaluation, and external monitoring 
agency for safeguards. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.  
26 
Item 
  Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components 
Table 10: Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs ($million)  
Output 1 
Output 2 
Output 3 
Amount 
% of 
cost 
category 
Amount 
% of 
cost 
category 
Amount 
% of 
cost 
category 
Project 
Management 
% of 
cost 
category 
Amount 
Total Cost 
Amount 
15.82 
3.19 
7.94 
1.35 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.82 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
29.12 
A. Investment Costs 
Civil Works 
Machinery and Equipment 
Shallow Tube wells 
Materials and Supplies 
Vehicles 
Training, Workshops and Studies 
Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 
Consultants 
Feasibility Studies & Detailed Design 
Digital Finance Design and Management 
Project Implementation Support 
Government Counterpart Support 
Agricultural Digital Finance Service 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingencies 
Physical 
Price 
Subtotal (B) 
C. Financing Charges During Implementation (FCDI) 
Interest during construction 
Subtotal (C) 
Total Project Costs (A+B) 
2.25 
6.12 
8.37 
0.77 
0.77 
 38.27 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
100.0 
94.1 
100.0 
29.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
56.8 
72.9 
66.4 
68.0 
56.8 
56.8 
   58.9 
0.00 
0.20 
0.00 
2.13 
0.00 
2.14 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.76 
10.23 
0.27 
1.08 
1.36 
0.27 
0.27 
11.86 
0.0 
5.9 
0.0 
47.2 
0.0 
61.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
20.0 
8.9 
11.7 
11.0 
20.0 
20.0 
18.3 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.03 
0.00 
1.36 
1.06 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.45 
0.17 
0.71 
0.88 
0.09 
0.09 
4.42 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
22.8 
0.0 
38.8 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
6.7 
5.6 
7.7 
7.2 
6.7 
6.7 
6.8 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.32 
0.00 
0.00 
4.70 
0.00 
0.00 
2.27 
1.16 
0.00 
8.45 
0.39 
1.31 
1.70 
0.22 
0.22 
10.38 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
100.0 
0.0 
16.5 
12.6 
14.2 
13.8 
16.5 
16.5 
16.0 
15.82 
3.39 
7.94 
4.51 
0.32 
3.50 
1.06 
4.70 
0.82 
1.00 
2.27 
1.16 
4.76 
51.25 
3.08 
9.23 
12.31 
1.36 
1.36 
64.92 
27 
  Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Table 11: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year ($million) 
Item 
A. Investment Costs  
Civil Works 
Machinery and Equipment 
Shallow Tube wells 
Materials and Supplies 
Vehicles 
Training, Workshops and Studies 
Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 
Consultants 
Feasibility Studies & Detailed Design 
Digital Finance Design and Management 
Project Implementation Support 
Government Counterpart Support 
Agricultural Digital Finance Service 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingencies 
Physical 
Price 
Subtotal (B) 
C. Financial charges during implementation 
Interest during construction  
Subtotal (C) 
Total Project Costs (A+B+C) 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Year 7 
Total 
0.47 
0.10 
0.24 
0.13 
0.01 
0.10 
0.03 
0.14 
0.02 
0.03 
0.07 
0.03 
0.14 
1.52 
0.09 
0.27 
0.37 
0.04 
0.04 
1.93 
0.84 
0.18 
0.42 
0.24 
0.02 
0.19 
0.06 
0..25 
0.04 
0.05 
0.12 
0.06 
0.25 
2.71 
0.16 
0.49 
0.65 
0.07 
0.07 
3.44 
2.44 
0.52 
1.22 
0.70 
0.05 
0.54 
0.16 
0.72 
0.13 
0.15 
0.35 
0.18 
0.73 
7.90 
0.48 
1.42 
1.90 
2.69 
0.58 
1.35 
0.77 
0.05 
0.60 
0.18 
0.80 
0.14 
0.17 
0.39 
0.20 
0.81 
8.72 
0.52 
1.57 
2.09 
3.75 
0.80 
1.88 
1.07 
0.08 
0.83 
0.25 
1.11 
0.19 
0.24 
0.54 
0.27 
1.13 
12.14 
0.73 
2.19 
2.92 
3.16 
0.68 
1.59 
0.90 
0.06 
0.70 
0.21 
0.94 
0.16 
0.20 
0.45 
0.23 
0.95 
10.25 
0.62 
1.85 
2.46 
2.47 
0.53 
1.24 
0.71 
0.05 
0.55 
0.17 
0.73 
0.13 
0.16 
0.36 
0.18 
0.74 
8.01 
0.48 
1.44 
1.93 
15.82 
3.39 
7.94 
4.51 
0.32 
3.50 
1.06 
4.70 
0.82 
1.00 
2.27 
1.16 
4.76 
51.25 
3.08 
9.23 
12.31 
0.21 
0.21 
10.01 
0.23 
0.23 
11.04 
0.32 
0.32 
15.37 
0.27 
0.27 
12.98 
0.21 
0.21 
10.15 
1.36 
1.36 
64.92 
28 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve  
The estimated disbursement progress over the implementation period for the ADB loan 
19. 
and the GAFSP grant are shown in Figure 4.  
Figure 4: Contract and Disbursement S-Curve Projections 
Total Proceeds 
ADB Loan Proceeds 
GAFSP Grant Proceeds 
Q1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total20190.000000.117280.080362.113032.310670.000000.000000.345880.455230.8011120200.135111.820260.757200.986113.698680.000000.686960.705270.804292.1965120210.000001.211173.528342.279657.019160.020911.064310.370853.530594.9866620220.000004.899454.213324.1738213.286600.000002.355365.242255.6814213.2790320230.537556.548592.609523.7551913.450860.154473.775201.1664010.6191715.7152420245.685421.487661.065484.2605812.499140.154472.434153.264578.4200414.2732420253.490940.596512.886501.079168.053110.000002.826102.354434.688999.8695320260.709950.111730.000000.000000.821680.453680.663620.111730.149651.3786761.139962.5000 Contract Awards (in USD million) Disbursements  (in USD million)Total Contract Awards   Total Disbursements  Q1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total20190.000000.046910.032140.845210.924270.000000.000000.138350.308830.4471820200.055110.452920.757200.986112.251340.000000.510420.408840.360211.2794720210.000001.034633.277272.200536.512420.020910.887770.211223.086514.2064120220.000001.032873.675773.960988.669630.000002.104285.082631.072688.2595920230.000003.445111.847083.755199.047390.154473.364491.126845.8903710.5361720242.348951.023740.527934.047747.948370.154472.183073.264573.942329.5444320250.154470.132592.348950.866333.502350.000002.666481.279331.286375.2321820260.172400.111730.000000.000000.284120.069570.663620.111730.149650.9945739.139940.5000 Contract Awards (in USD million) Disbursements  (in USD million)Total Contract Awards   Total Disbursements  Q1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total20190.000000.070370.048221.267821.386400.000000.000000.207530.146400.3539320200.080001.367340.000000.000001.447340.000000.176540.296420.444080.9170520210.000000.176540.251080.079120.506740.000000.176540.159630.444080.7802520220.000003.866580.537550.212844.616970.000000.251080.159634.608745.0194420230.537553.103480.762440.000004.403470.000000.410700.039564.728805.1790720243.336470.463910.537550.212844.550770.000000.251080.000004.477734.7288020253.336470.463910.537550.212844.550770.000000.159631.075103.402624.6373520260.537550.000000.000000.000000.537550.384100.000000.000000.000000.3841022.000022.0000Total Contract Awards   Total Disbursements   Contract Awards (in USD million) Disbursements  (in USD million) 
Fund Flow Diagram 
29 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; DOA = Department of Agriculture; DRD = Department of Rural Development; IWUMD 
= Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; MOALI = Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation; 
MOC = Ministry of Commerce; MTPO = Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization; PIU= project implementation unit; 
PMU = project management unit. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
30 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Financial Management Assessment 
The  financial  management  assessment  (FMA)  was  conducted  in  December  2016  and 
20. 
October 2017 in accordance with ADB’s Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis 
of  Projects  and  the  Financial  Due  Diligence:  A  Methodology  Note.  The  FMA  considered  the 
capacity of MOALI as executing agency and the Department of Agriculture (DOA), Irrigation and 
Water  Utilization  Management  Department  (IWUMD),  and  Department  of  Rural  Development 
(DRD) as implementing agencies through which 90% of funds are expected to be spent. The FMA 
assessed  the  funds-flow  arrangements,  staffing,  accounting  and  financial  reporting  systems, 
financial  information  systems,  and  internal  and  external  auditing  arrangements.  Based  on  the 
assessment, the key financial management risks identified are: (i) vulnerability of macroeconomic 
stability and the fiscal position from external shocks; (ii) weak public financial management and 
internal audit processes, (iii) lack of transparency and accountability; (iv) limited experience on 
implementation  of  externally  funded  projects,  (v)  limited  financial  management  capability  and 
resources;  and  (v)  management  and  skill  capacity  issues  in  financial  management  and  weak 
administrative  capacity  to  implement  reform  and  modernization  of  financial  management  and 
reporting systems. It is concluded that the overall pre-mitigation financial management risk of the 
executing and implementing agency is substantial.  MOALI, as the executing agency and with 
some experience in the implementation of ongoing ADB projects, has agreed to appoint qualified 
staff  with  capacity  to  administer  advance  accounts  and  implement  statement  of  expenditure 
(SOE)  procedures.  The  executing  agency  and  implementing  agencies  have  also  agreed  to 
implement an action plan as key measures to address the deficiencies. The financial management 
action plan is provided in the following table.   
Table 12: Time-bound Financial Management Action Plan 
Weakness 
EA and IAs have limited 
experience of IFI-funded 
projects and knowledge of ADB 
requirements. 
IA’s have weak capacity for 
supporting ADB’s financial 
management, planning, 
budgeting, reporting, and 
verification requirements. 
Mitigation Action 
PMU and other EA and IA staff will be 
trained on ADB accounting, 
disbursement and auditing procedures  
Responsibility 
EA/PMU/ 
IA 
 EA/PMU/ PIC 
A project management team including a 
qualified international financial 
management specialist and a qualified 
national financial management specialist 
will be recruited to provide necessary 
support and to strengthen internal 
control of the PMU and PIU. 
Timeframe 
From one month 
of project 
effectiveness to 
3 years of 
implementation 
Within three 
months of project 
effectiveness  
Development of a financial management 
training plan and all project financial 
staff to be trained. 
PMU/PIC 
Within nine 
months of project 
effectiveness  
A financial management manual will be 
prepared incorporating both government 
and ADB’s requirements 
EA/PMU/PIC 
By six months 
from project 
start-up  
The accounting system used in 
MOALI TPS is a paper-based 
manual system which is not 
conducive to the efficient and 
effective management of the 
entity, especially with respect to 
budgeting, accountability for 
the source and application of all 
funds. 
Internal audit and control is 
weak.   
External Audit is weak 
PMU to introduce and have operational 
a computerized accounting system (e.g., 
Quickbook or similar accounting 
software)  
PMU/PIC 
Set up and 
running within six 
months of loan 
effectiveness 
31 
MOALI to allocate budget and appoint 
qualified audit specialist. 
EA/IA/PMU/ ADB 
By the 6th month 
of project 
effectiveness. 
Within 1 year of 
project 
effectiveness 
MOALI/OAG/ 
ADB 
Within 1 year of 
project 
effectiveness 
EA/IAs staff will be trained regularly on 
internal audit procedures. 
MOPF will ensure that MOALI will 
include the project to be subject to 
internal audit to ensure that the 
organization’s Internal Audit Unit carries 
out regular reviews of the internal 
control processes.  
The terms of reference for the required 
external audits to be agreed with the 
ADB for OAG or a private audit firm 
whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to 
ADB, will be recruited to audit the 
project financial statements. 
Budget to engage an external audit firm 
has been allocated under the project 
management expense category 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; DOA= Department of Agriculture; EA = executing agency; IA = implementing agency; 
IFI= international financial institution; MOALI = Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation; OAG = Office of Auditor 
General; PIC = project implementation consultants; PMU = project management unit.  
Disbursement 
21. 
The  loan  and  ADB  administered  grant  proceeds,  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with 
ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),8  and  detailed 
arrangements agreed upon between the government and ADB. Online training for project staff on 
disbursement policies and procedures is available.9 Project staff will be required to avail of this 
training  within  6  months  of  project  effectiveness  to  help  ensure  efficient  disbursement  and 
fiduciary control. 
The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  (i)  preparing  disbursement  projections  and  its  timely 
22. 
submission to MOALI; (ii) requesting budgetary allocations for counterpart funds; (iii) collecting 
and  retaining  supporting  documents  and  making  these  available  for  audit  purposes;  and  (iv) 
preparing and sending withdrawal applications to ADB. 
Compensating  balance  account.  Using  the  GAFSP  grant,  the  MOALI  Department  of 
23. 
Rural Development (DRD) will launch agricultural digital finance service (ADFS), in collaboration 
with a competitively selected financial service provider (FSP). The objective of ADFS is to provide 
8 The handbook is available electronically from the ADB website (http://www.adb.org/documents/ loan-disbursement-
handbook. 
9  Disbursement eLearning. http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning  
32 
seasonal credit to about 35,000 small farmer households to purchase quality agricultural inputs, 
access farm mechanization services or pursue off-farm livelihood opportunities.  After signing a 
legally  binding  public-private  partnership  agreement  with  DRD,  the  FSP  will  establish  a 
compensating  balance  account  (CBA)  for  ADFS,  in  which  the  project  will  make  a  one-time 
disbursement of $100 per household. The DRD and FSP will submit two supporting documents 
with the withdrawal application: (i) the list of beneficiaries identified by DRD through community-
driven  development  approach,  and  (ii)  the  underlying  public-private  partnership  agreement 
between DRD and FSP for the ADFS and administration of the CBA.  See Appendix 4 for detailed 
arrangements for ADFS. 
24. 
Advance  fund  procedure.  MOALI  will  establish  and  maintain  two  separate  advance 
accounts in US dollar for ADB loan and ADB-administered grant. The advance accounts are to 
be used exclusively for ADB’s and ADB administered financing's share of eligible expenditures. 
MOALI will be accountable and responsible for the proper use of advances, including advances 
to the subaccounts. 
Fourteen subaccounts (one each for ADB loan and GAFSP grant in the executing agency 
25. 
and each implementing agency) will be opened at the national level for MOALI, DOA, DOP, DRD, 
IWUMD, DALMS and MTPO. It is expected that majority of the expenditure will be incurred either 
through direct payments or through these subaccounts. 
26. 
The total outstanding advance to the respective advance account should not exceed the 
estimate  of  ADB’s  and  ADB  administered  financing’s  share  to  be  paid  through  the  advance 
account for the forthcoming six months. MOALI may request for initial and additional advances to 
the  respective  advance  account  based  on  an  estimate  of  expenditure  sheet  setting  out  the 
estimated  expenditures  to  be  financed  through  the  respective  account  for  the  forthcoming  six 
months.10  Supporting  documents  should  be  submitted  to  ADB  or  retained  by  MOALI  in 
accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time) 
when liquidating or replenishing the advance account. All withdrawal applications will be sent to 
ADB for processing. 
Statement  of  expenditure  (SOE)  procedure.11  Reimbursements  and  liquidations  of 
27. 
advances to the advance account will be based on full documentation for eligible expenditures 
during the first year of project implementation. Thereafter, the SOE procedure may be considered 
for reimbursement and to liquidate and replenish the advance accounts for eligible expenditures 
after one year of project implementation. Any individual payment to be reimbursed or liquidated 
under  this  procedure  shall  not  exceed  the  equivalent  of  $50,000.  Supporting  documents  and 
records  for  the  expenditures  claimed  under  the  SOE  should  be  maintained  and  made  readily 
available  for  review  by  ADB's  disbursement  and  review  missions,  upon  ADB's  request  for 
submission  of  supporting  documents  on  a  sampling  basis,  and  for  independent  audit. 
Reimbursement  and  liquidation  of  individual  payments  in  excess of the SOE  ceiling  should  be 
supported by full documentation when submitting the withdrawal application to ADB. 
28. 
Before the submission of the first withdrawal application, the borrower should submit to 
ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal applications 
on  behalf  of  the  government,  together  with  the  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of  each 
authorized person. The minimum value per withdrawal application is set in accordance with ADB’s 
Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). Individual payments below 
10  Estimate  of  Expenditure  sheet  is  available  in  Appendix  8A  of  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as 
amended from time to time). 
11 SOE forms are available in ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). 
33 
such  amount  should  be  paid  (i)  by  MOALI  and  subsequently  claimed  to  ADB  through 
reimbursement, or (ii) through the advance fund procedure, unless otherwise accepted by ADB. 
The  borrower  should  ensure  sufficient  category  and  contract  balances  before  requesting 
disbursements.  SOE  records  should  be  maintained  and  made  readily  available  for  review  of 
ADB’s  disbursement  review  mission  or  upon  ADB’s  request  for  submission  of  supporting 
documents on a sampling basis, and for independent external audit. The withdrawal applications 
must be sequentially numbered starting with number one.  
Accounting 
29. 
The EA and IAs will maintain separate account books and records by funding source for 
all  expenditures  incurred  on  the  project.  Cash  basis  accounting  will  be  followed.  The  EA  will 
prepare consolidated project financial statements in accordance with Myanmar's accounting laws 
and regulations, which are consistent with international accounting principles and practices. The 
project-hired  international  and  national  financial  management  specialists  will  train  IAs  in 
maintaining  proper  project financial records,  and  the  EA  in consolidating financial reports from 
IAs, especially during the first two years of project implementation. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
30.  MOALI will ensure the detailed project financial statements are audited in accordance with 
International  Standards  on  Auditing  by  the  Office  of  the  Auditor  General,  or  an  independent 
auditor acceptable to ADB. The audited project financial statements together with the auditor’s 
opinion will be presented in the English language to ADB within six months from the end of each 
fiscal year by the executing agency.  
31. 
The audit report for the project financial statements will include a management letter and 
auditor’s opinions, which cover (i) whether the project financial statements present an accurate 
and fair view or are presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the applicable 
financial reporting standards; (ii) whether the proceeds of the loan and grant were used only for 
the  purpose(s)  of  the  project;  and  (iii)  whether  the  borrower  or  executing  agency  was  in 
compliance with the financial covenants contained in the legal agreements (where applicable). 
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by review 
32. 
missions and during normal program supervision, and followed up regularly with all concerned, 
including the external auditor. 
The government, MOALI and the implementing agencies have been made aware of ADB’s 
33. 
approach  to  delayed  submission  of  audit  reports,  and  the  requirements  for  satisfactory  and 
acceptable quality of the audited project financial statements.12 ADB reserves the right to require 
12 ADB’s approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited project financial statements: 
(i)  When audited project financial statements are not received by the due date, ADB will write to the executing agency 
advising  that  (a) the audit  documents  are overdue;  and  (b)  if  they  are  not  received  within  the next  6  months, 
requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of advance accounts, processing 
of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
(ii)  When audited project financial statements are not received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will withhold 
processing  of  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  advance 
accounts, processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters. ADB will (a) inform the 
executing agency of ADB’s actions; and (b) advise that the loan may be suspended if the audit documents are 
not received within the next 6 months. 
(iii) When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  within  12  months  after  the  due  date,  ADB  may 
suspend the loan. 
34 
a  change  in  the  auditor  (in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  constitution  of  the  borrower),  or  for 
additional  support  to  be  provided  to  the  auditor,  if  the  audits  required  are  not  conducted  in  a 
manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits are substantially delayed. ADB reserves the right to 
verify  the  project's  financial  accounts  to  confirm  that  the  share  of  ADB’s  financing  is  used  in 
accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures.  
34. 
Public disclosure of the audited project financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion 
on the project financial statements, will be guided by ADB’s Public Communications Policy 2011.13 
After the review, ADB will disclose the audited project financial statements and the opinion of the 
auditors on the project financial statements no later than 14 days of ADB’s confirmation of their 
acceptability  by  posting  them  on  ADB’s  website.  The  management  letter,  additional  auditor’s 
opinions, and audited entity financial statements will not be disclosed.14 
13 Public Communications Policy:  http://www.adb.org/documents/pcp-2011?ref=site/disclosure/publications 
14 This type of information would generally fall under public communications policy exceptions to disclosure. ADB. 2011. 
Public Communications Policy. Paragraph 97(iv) and/or 97(v). 
35 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
Advance Contracting  
All advance contracting will be undertaken in conformity with ADB Procurement Guidelines 
35. 
(2015, as amended from time to time) and ADB’s Guidelines on the Use of Consultants (2013, as 
amended from time to time). The issuance of invitations to bid under advance contracting will be 
subject  to  ADB  approval.  The  government,  MOALI  and  the  implementing agencies  have  been 
advised that approval of advance contracting does not commit ADB to finance the project. 
Advance  contracting  will  be  undertaken  to  recruit  the  start-up  consultants  and  Project 
36. 
Implementation Consultants (PIC). 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
All  procurement  of  goods,  and  works  will  be  undertaken  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
37. 
Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time).  
38. 
International  competitive  bidding  (ICB)  procedures  will  be  used  for  works  contracts 
estimated to cost from $3 million and above, and for goods contracts estimated to cost $500,001 
and  above.  Works  contracts  estimated  to  cost  below  $3  million  up  to  $100,000,  and  goods 
contract $500,000 up to $100,000 will be procured through the national competitive bidding (NCB) 
procedures.  
39.  Minor items estimated to cost below $100,000 for both works and goods will be procured 
through shopping method. 
An 18-month procurement plan indicating threshold and review procedures, goods, works, 
40. 
and consulting service packages and national competitive bidding guidelines is in Section C. 
36 
Procurement Plan 
Basic Data 
Table 13: Procurement Basic Data 
Project Name: Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project 
Project Number:   48409-003 
Country:   Republic of the Union of Myanmar 
Project Procurement Classification: A 
Project Procurement Risk: High 
Project Financing Amount:  $64,920,000 
ADB Financing: $40,500,000 
Co-financing (ADB Administered): 
$22,000,000  
Non-ADB Financing: $2,420,000 
Date of First Procurement Plan:  
16 December 2017 
Approval Number: LXXXX and GXXXX 
Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Irrigation (MOALI) 
Implementing Agency: Department of Agriculture 
(DOA) of MOALI, Department of Planning (DOP) of 
MOALI, Irrigation and Water Utilization 
Management Department (IWUMD) of MOALI, 
Department of Rural Development (DRD) of 
MOALI, Department of Agricultural Land 
Management and Statistics (DALMS) of MOALI 
and Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization 
(MyanTrade) of Ministry of Commerce 
Project Closing Date: 30 June 2026 
Date of this Procurement Plan:  
August 2018, Version 0 
1. 
Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan 
(i) 
Procurement and Consulting Methods and Thresholds 
Except  as  ADB  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following  process  thresholds  shall  apply  to 
41. 
procurement of goods and works.  
Method 
International Competitive Bidding 
(ICB) for Goods 
National Competitive Bidding 
(NCB) for Goods 
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Threshold 
Comments 
$500,001 and Above 
Prior review 
Between $100,000 and $500,000 
Shopping for Goods 
Below $100,000 
First three packages required for 
prior review regardless of amount. 
Post review will be followed if the 
process and capacity demonstrate 
adequacies. 
First three packages required for 
prior review. Post review will be 
followed if the process and capacity 
demonstrate adequacies. 
ICB for Works 
US$3,000,000 and above 
Prior review 
NCB for Works 
Between $100,000 and $2,999,999 
All NCB packages larger than $2 
million will require prior review by 
ADB. First three packages 
regardless of amount will require 
prior review. Post review will be 
followed if the process and capacity 
demonstrate adequacies. 
Shopping for Works 
Below $100,000 
Community Participation in 
Procurement for Works 
Below $10,000 
37 
First three packages required for 
prior review. Post review will be 
followed if the process and capacity 
demonstrate adequacies. 
First three packages required for 
prior review. Post review will be 
followed if the process and capacity 
demonstrate adequacies. 
Consulting Services 
Method 
Quality and Cost Based Selection for Consulting Firms (QCBS) 
Consultant's Qualification Selection for Consulting Firm (CQS) 
Individual Consultants Selection for Individual Consultant (ICS) 
Single-source selection (SSS) 
Comments 
  Prior Review 
  Prior Review 
  Prior Review 
  Prior Review 
2. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More 
The following table lists goods and works contracts for which the procurement activity is 
42. 
either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
None 
3. 
Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost $100,000 or More 
The following table lists consulting services contracts for which the recruitment activity is 
43. 
either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months. 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Recruitment 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Type of 
Proposal 
Comments 
CS-01 
Project 
Implementation 
Consultants  
Detailed design 
and 
Supervision for 
Irrigation and 
Farm Roads 
Subprojects 
Procurement 
Start-up 
Specialist 
Finance 
Management 
Specialist 
Agriculture 
Digital Finance 
Service (ADFS) 
Specialist 
Senior Project 
Advisor 
CS-02 
CS-03 
CS-04 
CS-05 
CS-06 
3,460,000 
QCBS  
Prior 
Q4 2018 
FTP 
1,050,000 
QCBS 
Prior 
Q3 2019 
FTP 
170,000 
ICS 
Prior 
Q4 2018 
100,000 
ICS 
Prior 
Q4 2018 
170,000 
ICS 
Prior 
Q1 2019 
110,000 
ICS 
Prior 
Q4 2018 
Advance Contracting 
Assignment: 
International and 
National 
Quality Cost Ratio: 
90:10 
Assignment: 
International and 
National 
Quality Cost Ratio: 
90:10 
Assignment: 
International 
Assignment: 
International 
Assignment: 
International 
Assignment: 
National 
CS = consulting services; FTP = full technical proposal; ICS = individual consultants selection for individual consultants; Q = quarter;  
QCBS = quality- and cost- based selection for consulting firms 
38 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost Less than $1 Million and Consulting 
Services Contracts Less than $100,000 (Smaller Value Contracts) 
The following table groups smaller-value goods, works and consulting services contracts 
44. 
for which the activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.  
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
Works contract packages 
CW-01 
Representative 
Irrigation Subproject 
& Chepa Seed Farm 
Irrigation 
Goods contract packages 
330,000 
1 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E  
Q1 2020 
Bidding 
Document: Small 
Works 
Office Equipment 
and Furniture 
Vehicles  
GD–01 
GD-02 
1S1E = single stage, 1 envelope; CW = civil works; GD = goods; NCB = national competitive bidding; RFQ = request for quotations; Q = quarter 
Q3 2019 
Q3 2019 
Shopping 
350,000 
130,000 
1S1E 
Prior 
Prior 
RFQ 
NCB 
4 
1 
6. 
Indicative List of Packages Required Under the Project 
45. 
The  following  table  provides  an  indicative  list  of  goods,  works  and  consulting  services 
contracts over the life of the project, other than those mentioned in previous sections (i.e., those 
expected beyond the current period). 
Goods and Works  
Package 
Number 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
Procure
ment 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure  
CW-02 
Farm Irrigation (Minor Canals) and 
Community Reservoirs  
11,740,000 
CW-03 
Tubewell Installation 
9,850,000 
CW-04 
Farm Roads  
CW-05 
DOA seed farms (buildings, fence, 
storage, roads, canals and post-
harvest facilities) 
6,080,000 
3,320,000 
GD-03 
DOA seed farms –Equipment 
1,350,000 
GD-04 
Laboratory Upgrade and 
Equipment 
2,360,000 
GD-05 
Maximum Residue Level Testing 
930,000 
6 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
NCB 
Post 
1S1E 
ICB 
Prior 
1S1E 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Comments 
Bidding Document: Small 
Works 
Bidding Document: Small 
Works 
Bidding Document: Small 
Works 
Bidding Document: Small 
Works 
ADB-SBD for goods to be 
used 
ADB-SBD for goods to be 
used 
ADB-SBD for goods to be 
used 
1S1E = single stage, 1 envelope; ADB-SBD = Asian Development Bank standard bidding documents; CW = civil works; DOA = Department of Agriculture; 
GD = goods; ICB = international competitive bidding; NCB = national competitive bidding 
39 
  Consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
CS-07 
CS-08 
CS-09 
CS-10 
CS-11 
CS-12 
CS-13 
General Description 
External Monitoring 
Agency 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Capacity Building and 
CSA Training 
Climate-resilient 
Variety Development 
and Dissemination 
Package 
Land Management 
Senior Adviser 
Community-based 
Support for ADFS 
Qualified Private 
Auditor 
Estimated 
Value 
(cumulative) 
240,000 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
1 
Recruitment 
Method  
CQS 
Review 
(Prior/Post) 
Prior 
Type of 
Proposal 
BTP 
Comments 
Assignment: National 
240,000 
2,440,000 
1,970,000 
130,000 
180,000 
140,000 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
CQS 
Prior 
BTP 
Assignment: International 
and National 
QCBS 
Prior 
FTP 
Quality Cost Ratio: 90:10 
SSS 
Prior 
ICS 
Prior 
CV 
Assignment: International 
Assignment: National 
CQS 
CQS 
Prior 
Prior 
BTP 
BTP 
ADFS  =  Agriculture  Digital  Finance  Service;  BTP  =  biodata  technical  proposal;  CS  =  consulting  services;  CSA  =  climate  smart  agriculture;  CQS  = 
consultant's qualification selection for consulting firms; CV = curriculum vitae; FTP = full technical proposal; ICS = individual consultants selection for 
individual consultants; Q = quarter; QCBS = quality- and cost- based selection for consulting firms; SSS = single source selection 
4. 
National Competitive Bidding 
a. 
Regulation and Reference Documents 
46. 
The procedures to be followed for national competitive bidding shall be those set forth in 
ADB's  standard  bidding  documents,  with  the  clarifications  and  modifications  described  in  the 
following  paragraphs  required  for  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  ADB's  Procurement 
Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time). 
b. 
Procurement Procedures 
(i) 
Application 
47. 
Contract  packages  subject  to  national  competitive  bidding  procedures  will  be  those 
identified as such in the project procurement plan. Any changes to the method of procurement 
from those provided in the procurement plan shall be made through updating of the procurement 
plan, and only with prior approval of ADB. 
(ii) 
Eligibility 
48. 
The eligibility of bidders shall be as defined under section I of the Procurement Guidelines; 
accordingly,  no  bidder  or  potential  bidder  should  be  declared  ineligible  for  reasons  other  than 
those provided in section I of the Guidelines, as amended from time to time. 
(iii) 
Sanctioning 
49. 
Bidders shall not be declared ineligible or prohibited from bidding on the basis of barring 
procedures  or  sanction  lists,  except  individuals  and  firms  sanctioned  by  ADB,  without  prior 
approval of ADB. 
40 
(iv) 
Advertising 
The posting of NCB specific notices for contracts valued at less than $1 million on ADB's 
50. 
website is not required but is highly recommended. 
(v) 
Rejection of all Bids and Rebidding 
51. 
Bids shall not be rejected and new bids solicited without ADB's prior concurrence. 
c. 
Bidding Documents 
(i) 
ADB Policy Clauses 
A  provision  shall  be  included  in  all  NCB  works  and  goods  contracts  financed  by  ADB 
52. 
requiring suppliers and contractors to permit ADB to inspect their accounts and records and other 
documents relating to the bid submission and the performance of the contract, and to have them 
audited by auditors appointed by ADB. 
53. 
A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods contracts 
financed by ADB stating that the Borrower shall reject a proposal for award if it determines that 
the  bidder  recommended  for  award  has,  directly  or  through  an  agent,  engaged  in  corrupt, 
fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in question. 
54. 
A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods contracts 
financed by ADB stating that ADB will declare a firm or individual ineligible, either indefinitely or 
for a stated period, to be awarded a contract financed by ADB, if it at any time determines that 
the firm or individual has, directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, 
coercive or obstructive practices or any integrity violation in competing for, or in executing, ADB-
financed contract. 
Consultant’s Terms of Reference 
55. 
All  consulting  services  will  be  recruited  according  to  ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of 
Consultants  (2013,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).15  Summarized  person  months  for  all 
consulting services are given below and detailed terms of references are in Appendix 5. 
Table 14: Individual Consultants 
Key Expert 
Procurement Specialist (start-up) 
Financial Management Specialist (start-up) 
Land Management Senior Adviser 
Agricultural Digital Finance Service Specialist 
Senior Project Advisor (start-up) 
International 
(person-months) 
5 
3 
8 
5 
21 
National 
(person-months) 
5 
5 
15  Steps 
required 
to  contract  consultants  available 
in  e-Handbook  on  Project 
Implementation  at 
http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/ 
Table 15: Project Implementation Consultants 
Key Expert 
Value Chain Specialist/Team Leader 
Irrigation Supervision Engineer 
Road Supervision Engineer 
Financial Management Specialist 
Procurement Specialist 
Value Chain Gender Specialist / Specialized Support Services in 
Gender  
Social Safeguards Specialist 
Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Supervision Engineer for DOA Seed Farms 
International  
(person-months) 
22 
6 
5 
8 
9 
3 
2 
6 
6 
67 
41 
National 
(person-months) 
70 
26 
19 
46 
37 
30 
10 
20 
20 
24 
302 
Table 16: Capacity Building and Climate Smart Agriculture Training Consultants 
Key Expert 
Laboratory, Quality and Safety Training Specialist 
Farm Mechanization Specialist 
Agribusiness Policy and Public Private Partnerships Specialist 
Agricultural Quality, Safety and Standards Specialist 
Geographic Indication, Branding & Marketing Specialist 
Green Finance Capacity Building Specialist 
Market and Credit Information Specialist 
Land Use, GIS and Agro-Ecological Zoning Specialist 
Rural Land Planning and Administration Specialist 
Land Administration Services Specialist 
Capacity Building Coordinator 
Seed Production and Certification Specialist 
Irrigation and Water Management Specialist 
Post-harvest Handling and Storage Specialist 
Farm Mechanization Business Development Specialist 
Climate Smart Agriculture and Agribusiness Specialist 
International 
(person-months) 
4 
3 
9 
6 
4 
5 
6 
6 
6 
3 
52 
National 
(person-months) 
6 
35 
12 
9 
9 
18 
18 
8 
8 
60 
7 
36 
11 
6 
30 
273 
Table 17: Feasibility Studies and Detailed Design Consultants 
Key Expert 
Team Leader/Irrigation Design Engineer 
Road Design Engineer 
Hydrologist 
Procurement Specialist 
Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Social Safeguards Specialist 
Agricultural Economist 
Agronomist 
AutoCAD Specialist 
International 
(person-months) 
5 
2 
2 
3 
2 
2 
5 
21 
National 
(person-months) 
10 
8 
4 
6 
4 
5 
5 
12 
54 
56. 
Individual Consultants. Three individual consultants will be recruited to assist PMU with 
start-up  activities.  A  land  management  senior  adviser  will  assist  the  PMU  with  DALMS  in 
developing  a  more  efficient,  digitalized  and  client  friendly  land  administration  service.  The 
42 
Agricultural Digital Finance Specialist will be recruited to support MOALI and DRD in contracting 
a qualified financial service provider for the development and implementation of the ADFS. 
57. 
Project  Implementation  Consultants  (PIC).  PIC  consulting  firm  will  be  recruited  to 
(i) provide management and technical assistance to the EA and IAs in the  implementation of the 
project and meet the reporting and procedural requirements of ADB; (ii) carry out supervision of  
subproject activities; (iii) assist in project performance monitoring and evaluation; (iv) develop and 
implement  the  capacity  building  master  plan;  (v)  implement  policy  research  studies  and  pilot 
activities;  and  (vi)  ensure  adequate  provision  for  compliance  with  social  and  environmental 
safeguards, including monitoring and review during the construction and post-construction period. 
58. 
Capacity Building and Climate Smart Agriculture Consultants. The consulting entity 
will  provide  technical  capacity  building  and  advisory  services  to  the  EA  and  IA  in  the 
implementation  of  the  project.  The  capacity  building/CSA  consultants  will  work  in  close  co-
ordination  with  the  project  implementation  consultants  (PIC),  contracted  under  a  separate 
package,  who  will  concentrate  principally  on  support  to  project  management,  procurement, 
safeguard compliance, and monitoring and evaluation. 
59. 
Feasibility  Studies  and  Detailed  Design  Consultants.  The  consulting  agency  will 
prepare designs for the rehabilitation/upgrading of infrastructure on ten DOA seed farms, 130 kms 
of tertiary canals, 15 community-owned reservoirs, and 300 kms single-track farm feeder roads. 
60. 
External Monitoring Agency (EMA). To monitor all safeguard activities under the project. 
EMA will focus on assessing progress and compliance with the environmental management plans 
(EMPs), the ethnic group development plans (EGDP), the GAPs, and the land acquisition and 
compensation  plans  (LACPs),  identifying  constraints  and  developing  remedial  actions  to 
effectively  address  these.  The  EMA  will  be  a  national  entity  and  will  have  experience  in 
resettlement, environment and ethnic groups.  
Climate-resilient  Variety  Development  and  Dissemination  Package  (single  source 
61. 
selection). An international research institution of high repute will be recruited using single source 
selection  to  deploy  climate-resilient  varieties  and  disseminate  climate  smart  agriculture  (CSA) 
practices, including improved land-water-nutrient management and crop establishment practices. 
The work includes dissemination of mechanized cultivation practices that have reduced risk and 
drudgery and generate avenues for employment for youth and women farmers. The project will 
work  closely  with  MOALI  and  other  key  institutions  as  well  as  private-sector  partners  for  the 
deployment of the climate-resilient varieties and technology of different crops. The work includes 
efforts to reduce postharvest losses during harvesting, drying, storage, and processing through 
implementation  of  modernized  post-harvest  practices,  capacity  development  and  training  on 
postharvest technology, and the development of linkages between the public and private sector.  
Based on assessment of various institutions in the region focusing on development and 
62. 
deployment  of  climate-resilient  varieties,  and  substantial  contributions  made  so  far  on  climate 
smart agriculture in various countries including Myanmar, it is proposed to select the International 
Rice Research Institute (IRRI) to deliver the above services.  The detailed terms of reference will 
be developed by MOALI with cooperation from project implementation consultants during the first 
year  of  project  implementation  after  assessing  needs  of  target  crops  in  target  provinces.  
Additional details on description on justification are provided in Appendix 5. 
43 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
Resettlement and Land Acquisition 
The  project  is  category  B  for  involuntary  resettlement  impacts,  as  there  will  be  no 
63. 
significant  involuntary  physical  or  economic  displacement,  relocation  or  loss  of  livelihood. 
Subproject  screening 
followed  during  project  preparation  will  be  used  during  project 
implementation  in  identifying  additional  subprojects.  Acceptable  subprojects  will  either  be 
category B or C; with insignificant or no resettlement impacts. Projects requiring any significant 
involuntary resettlement or land acquisition will be rejected.  
64. 
During  project  preparation,  feasibility  studies  were  conducted  for  three  representative 
subprojects: (i) rehabilitation  of  infrastructure  in DOA  Chepa  seed farm; (ii)  improved  irrigation 
with minor  canal  renovation;  and (iii)  installation of  shallow  tube well. The project  design  team 
conducted meaningful consultations for safeguards planning and such consultations will continue 
during project implementation.  Land acquisition under the project is only envisaged under output 
1, and mainly for the rehabilitation of irrigation systems, installation of tube wells and distribution 
systems, and limited feeder road rehabilitation. For example, the due diligence conducted for the 
Kyi Wa Irrigation system showed that the subproject will have minimal impacts wherein 4 m2 of 
land  for  tube  wells  of  land  donation  is  envisaged.  These  activities  will  not  lead  to  significant 
resettlement impacts because majority of works will be done on-farm, or between farmers’ fields, 
or right of way alignments and will only require, if any, the acquisition of thin strips of land. Any 
access track improvement associated with any subproject must follow existing footprints and not 
involve further acquisition of land. Alternative designs will be explored to minimize the need for 
land acquisition. 
65. 
The small strips of land for the rehabilitation of irrigation systems, installation of tube wells 
and distribution systems, and limited feeder road rehabilitation may be acquired through voluntary 
donation, in the case of non-productive land, or through negotiated settlement for productive land 
based upon market values. A combination of voluntary land donation and negotiated settlement 
may be used to gain access to land for project needs. Voluntary donations are subject to stringent 
conditions  and  due  diligence  to  verify  legitimacy.  A  rigorous  due  diligence  procedure  to  verify 
voluntary  donation  bona  fides  has  been  included  in  the  Land  Acquisition  and  Resettlement 
Framework  (LARF)  that  will  be  used  to  further  screen  and  select  subprojects  during 
implementation.  If  negotiation  fails  and  expropriation  will  be  used,  land  acquisition  and 
resettlement  plan  (LARP)  shall  be  drafted  in  accordance  with  the  LARF  and  sent  to  ADB  for 
concurrence and disclosure prior to the issuance of the bidding documents. 
66. 
The  government  has  prepared  LARF  to  (i)  guide  the  preparation  of  LARPs  where 
subprojects  require  land  acquisition  and  (ii)  conduct  and  report  the  due  diligence  required  to 
establish voluntary land donation bona fides. The LARP will record details of any land acquired 
and/or donated by affected households and calculate the amount of compensation payable to the 
affected household that can be audited later. The LARP will also guide the due diligence process 
following completion of the detailed engineering design to justify the subproject's category, in case 
it does not have any impact. The draft resettlement due diligence reports for the representative 
subproject will be updated and finalized, and due diligence report for all subsequent subprojects 
prepared  based  on  detailed  engineering  design.  The  PMU,  with  support  from  project 
implementation consultants, will prepare LARP in accordance with LARF, ADB's SPS and submit 
to  ADB  for  review  before  any  contracts  are  awarded.  The  LARP  should  be  implemented  first 
before civil works start. This LARP must clearly outline the community consultation process and 
detail  the  benefits  to  be received  by  the  affected  households.  LARPs  will  be  subject to a  10% 
44 
case audit by an independent agent selected through a transparent bidding process conducted 
by the PMU. 
67.  MOALI  shall  ensure  that  all  the  safeguards  documents  including  due  diligence  and 
monitoring reports are disclosed by: (i) uploading the draft and ADB approved final safeguards 
documents  on  MOALI  and  ADB  websites,  (ii)  information  pamphlet  containing  summary  of the 
projects impacts, if required in local language is distributed among the displaced persons.  The 
international  and  national  safeguards  specialists  will  work  closely  with  the  project  engineer  to 
ensure that the detailed design closely accords with the preliminary design already accepted by 
the EA and will ensure that the final design is presented and passed at subsequent community 
meetings and specifically by those affected households donating land. The specialists will ensure 
that the donation forms are completed, one per household, duly signed by husband and wife, and 
witnessed  by  village  and  commune  officials.  These  completed  forms  must  be  retained  in  the 
project office and made available for case audit by an independent agent. 
68. 
The  specialists  will  then  screen  all  additional  subprojects  identified  during  project 
implementation and rigidly apply both the involuntary and voluntary screening checklists. Where 
involuntary acquisition or voluntary land donation will take place, the PMU and specialists must 
prepare a LARP or DDR in accordance with LARF. This LARP must clearly outline the community 
consultation process and detail the benefits to be received by the affected households. Where 
market rates for land might be largely absent, the Replacement Cost Study for the Project will 
consult  with  affected  landowners/users  to  determine  compensation  amounts  for  land  to  be 
purchased  and  assets  on  such  land.  This  will  be  based  on  (i)  information  about  recent  land 
transactions - if any; (ii) land types; (iii) cropping patterns and crop production; and (iv) availability 
of  land  in  pilot  areas.  The  project  will  ensure  that  compensation  amounts  are  based  on  the 
replacement cost principle in accordance with ADB SPS (2009). 
69.  MOALI  shall  ensure:  (i)  efficient  project-specific  grievance  redress  mechanisms  are  in 
place and functional to assist the affected persons resolve queries and complaints, if any, in a 
timely manner; (ii) all complaints are registered, investigated and resolved in a manner consistent 
with the  provisions  of  the grievance redress  mechanism  described in the LARF/LARP;  (iii) the 
complainants are kept informed about status of their grievances and remedies available to them; 
and  (iv)  adequate  staff  and  resources  are  available  for  supervising  and  monitoring  the 
mechanism. Semi-annual monitoring  reports will be prepared and submitted to ADB for approval 
and disclosure at ADB website. 
Indigenous People and Ethnic Groups 
70. 
The  project  is  category  B  for  indigenous  people  or  ethnic  groups,  as  there  are  ethnic 
communities  in  target  townships.  Although  there  are  ethnic  minorities  living  in  the  target 
townships,  no  such  communities  or  households  were  encountered  in  the  three  representative 
subproject feasibility studies. However, it is possible that additional subprojects identified during 
project implementation may affect ethnic group households. 
71. 
An  ethnic  group  development  framework  (EGDF)  has  been  prepared.  The  underlying 
feature of the EGDF is inclusion and participation, although there are some constraints beyond 
the parameters of influence of the project that could affect the degree of benefit available. The 
EGDF  recommends  action  to  maximize  participation  and  consultation  with  any  ethnic  minority 
households should they be encountered. 
72. 
If during detailed engineering design or implementation, any change to the scope, location 
with prior approval of ADB, causes to have any impact on indigenous peoples or ethnic groups, 
45 
EA and IAs shall take all steps required to ensure that the project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of Myanmar and ADB’s SPS 2009. The national social safeguards specialist 
will undertake subproject screening to ascertain the presence of any ethnic groups and where 
they are present, will include actions from the EGDF as appropriate. 
Environment 
73. 
The project is expected to achieve significant environmental benefits including improved 
resilience and increased crop diversity in the project areas. Environmental due diligence has been 
conducted  for  three  representative  subprojects.  An  environmental  assessment  was  conducted 
during project preparation. Based on ADB’s rapid environment assessment checklist, the project 
is classified as category B as there may be some adverse environmental impacts which can be 
largely  mitigated.  For  projects  in  this  category,  the  Environmental  Assessment  and  Review 
Framework  (EARF)  must  be  prepared.  EARF  describes  the  measures required  to  ensure  that 
potential  environmental  impacts  are  identified,  avoided,  reduced,  and  mitigated  in  accordance 
with ADB SPS (2009) and the laws and regulations of the government. All subprojects under the 
project  will  follow  the  environmental  assessment  procedures  stipulated  in  EARF.  The  EARF 
covers  subproject  screening,  categorization,  and  preparation  of 
Initial  Environmental 
Examinations (IEEs) for each category B subproject. Each IEE will include impact assessment 
and  mitigation,  public  consultation,  information  disclosure,  and  an  environmental  management 
plan  (EMP).  EMPs  consist  of  plans  for  mitigation,  monitoring,  reporting,  and  stakeholder 
communication during pre-construction, construction, and operation phases.  The EARF has been 
disclosed  on  the  ADB  website  in  March  2018  after  government's  concurrence.  Subprojects 
classified as category A will not be financed. Subprojects will be screened for climate risks and 
incorporate risk reduction measures. Semi-annual environmental safeguards monitoring reports 
will be submitted by the executing agency to ADB for disclosure on ADB and project websites. 
74. 
Pre-screening of subprojects against environmental criteria is required to minimize the risk 
for  negative  environmental  impacts.  Three  representative  subprojects  were  assessed  during 
project preparation. One of the subprojects -  minor canal rehabilitation and irrigation subproject 
in Pakokku – was assessed as category B. Therefore, an IEE along with an EMP was prepared 
for  the  subproject.  The  IEE  confirmed  that  the  proposed  investment  is  not  likely  to  cause 
significant  adverse  environmental  impacts.  The other two subprojects  – Chepa  seed farm  and 
tubewell based irrigation subproject – were assessed as category C. 
75. 
Irrigation  and  water  management  subprojects  will  include  the  rehabilitation  of  existing 
irrigation systems and may comprise the rehabilitation of tertiary irrigation canals and construction 
of  water  management  structures.  The  tube  wells  will  provide  farmers  with  an  environmentally-
friendly method of pumping water for irrigation purposes.  
For subprojects that are category C, the EARF requires an environmental code of practice 
76. 
(ECOP) to be prepared. An outline of the ECOP is provided in the EARF. Like EMP, the ECOP 
covers  all  phases  of  subproject  implementation  from  preparation  through  construction  and 
operation  and  sets  out  potential  environmental  impacts  and  corresponding  environmental 
protection  measures  to:  (i)  avoid,  (ii)  where  avoidance  is  not  possible,  mitigate  environmental 
impacts, and (iii) achieve compliance with national environmental regulations and ADB Safeguard 
Policy Statement (SPS) (2009).  
77.  Within six months of the date of project effectiveness and prior to commencement of civil 
works,  the  project  will  establish  a  safeguards  grievance  redress  mechanism.  Building  on 
experience with past ADB projects, the government is committed to and has capacity to manage 
social  and  environmental  risks,  including  various  safeguard  frameworks  and  plans.  Adequate 
46 
resources were allocated to the screening, preparation, implementation, monitoring, and reporting 
of social and environmental safeguards, and associated capacity development. 
78. 
Prohibited investment activities. Pursuant to ADB’s SPS 2009, ADB funds may not be 
applied  to the  activities described  on the  ADB  Prohibited  Investment  Activities List  set forth at 
Appendix 5 of the Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). 
79. 
Disclosure.  The executing and implementing agencies will be responsible for disclosing 
all safeguard reports at the level of township and/or regional and on the project website. During 
the project implementation period, all IEEs and semi-annual environmental safeguard monitoring 
reports will be submitted to ADB every July, which will cover the reporting period of January to 
June, and every January, which covers the reporting period of July to December for disclosure on 
ADB website. 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
Gender Dimensions of the Project  
80. 
According to the 2014 Myanmar Population and Housing Census, agriculture continues to 
be a key pillar of Myanmar’s economy, largely consisting of farming, livestock production, forestry, 
and  fisheries.  Most  of  the  rural  population  is  engaged  in  subsistence  farming,  which  is  largely 
unmeasured. Women continue to play a key role in the agriculture sector. The gender division of 
agricultural labor is quite fluid with many tasks interchangeable between women and men, and 
only land preparation and the feeding of large animals being principally men’s responsibility. The 
Myanmar Census of Agriculture recorded that women perform most of the tasks related to crop 
cultivation,  including  planting,  caring,  weeding,  transplanting,  harvesting,  threshing,  care  of 
livestock, post-harvest operations and marketing (FAO, 2016). These tasks are in addition to their 
responsibilities  for  domestic  and  care  work,  such  as  gathering  fuel  for  cooking  and  water  for 
domestic use, meal preparation and caring for children and other household members. Men are 
responsible for making the majority  of decisions concerning farm  activities,  business  activities, 
and purchasing of inputs and livestock. Women's participation in agriculture varies throughout the 
country, and in the CDZ (Magway, Mandalay, and Sagaing), more farm laborers are women due 
to  the  high  rate  of  male  labor  outmigration  from  this  region.  While  attention  to  women's 
participation in agriculture is improving with enhanced data and information, their specific needs 
as  farmers  are  not  always  acknowledged  and  they  continue  to  face  significant  barriers  in 
accessing  government  extension  services,  training  opportunities,  market  information,  and 
finance. Lack of access, control, and ownership of land (with land titles solely on men/husbands’ 
name in the majority of cases) are also major constraints for female farmers. In 2010, 9 out of 10 
agricultural households had access to agricultural land at the national level, of which 90% were 
male-headed  and  10%  were  female-headed  agricultural  households.  Of  the  male-headed 
households,  98%  had  access  to  agricultural  land,  while  only  61%  of  the  female-headed 
households had access to land (female headed households have smaller size of landholdings). 
Climate  change  is  predicted  to  place  an  additional  burden  on  all  farmers,  particularly  women. 
Women farmers are vulnerable due to their limited access to productive agriculture assets as well 
as existing inequalities, responsibilities and roles. Improving women’s resilience to climate change 
by supporting women's leadership is set out as a priority in the Myanmar Climate Change Strategy 
and Action Plan 2016–2030 (MCCSAP).  
81.  Myanmar  has  institutional  mechanisms  in  place  to  support  implementation  of  its 
commitments to gender equality and women’s empowerment. The government’s commitment to 
gender  equality  is  reflected  in  the  National  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Advancement  of  Women 
(NSPAW, 2013-2022), which covers the 12 priority areas of the Beijing Platform for Action. Under 
47 
the overall leadership of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement, the Department 
of Social Welfare (DSW) serves as the government focal point on gender equality and women’s 
rights. The  Myanmar  National  Committee for Women  is  an  important gender  stakeholder,  with 
women’s organizations and representation at local levels.  
82. 
Gender  Action  Plan.  A gender  action  plan  (GAP)  in Table  18  has  been  prepared  and 
includes gender actions and numerical targets to promote women’s voice and active participation 
in  project  activities.  Implementation  of  all  the  GAP  activities  is  aligned  and  meant  to  support 
implementation of Myanmar Agricultural Development Strategy, MCCSAP and the NSPAW. 
83. 
GAP  Implementation.  Overall  responsibility  for  GAP  implementation,  monitoring  and 
reporting rests with the EA. MOALI will appoint a full-time gender focal point (preferably from the 
existing DSW gender focals network) who will work closely with key government and development 
partners. The DSW will ensure that implementation of GAP activities is aligned and supports the 
NSPAW. The MNCW will be involved as key partner in the GAP implementation and monitoring. 
In lieu of a national gender consultant, it is proposed to hire a local organization or firm 
84. 
with strong experience in gender at the community level/engaging women in rural development 
that  can  provide  specialized  support  services  in  gender  such  as  the  Gender  Equality  Network 
(GEN) or SEGRI (Socio-Economic & Gender Resource Institute). This local organization/firm will 
be responsible for undertaking the regular tasks and responsibilities involved to support the PMU 
in  the  implementation,  monitoring  and  reporting  of  the  gender  action  plan  (detailed  terms  of 
reference  is  in  Appendix  5).  This  would  be  the  preferred  approach  for  long-term  capacity  and 
sustainability reasons. A provisional amount of $112,000 (inclusive of contingencies) is allocated 
as  part  of  the  project  implementation  consulting  firm  for  procuring  such  specialized  support 
services in gender, which is the equivalent of 30 person-months of a national gender consultant.  
85. 
The GAP activities will be integrated in the work plans and budget prepared annually. The 
project monitoring and evaluation framework will integrate gender sensitive indicators included in 
the design and monitoring framework (DMF) and the GAP. During project implementation, regular 
meetings will be conducted with women farmers organized by gender focal points and DSW with 
the support from the local firm/organization to identify their concerns and specific training needs, 
and to ensure that they are included as demonstration and targeted farmers for the adoption of 
climate-friendly techniques.  
86. 
Budget for GAP Implementation. Adequate financial resources have been allocated to 
implement the GAP. Implementation of its activities are covered by the budget allocated under 
the corresponding outputs, including costs to (i) facilitate and increase women’s participation in 
the  project  activities  (e.g.  such  as  series  of  shorter  training  sessions  at  venue  closer  to  their 
communities); (ii) implement, monitor and report GAP; and (iii) carry out the gender analysis of 
the targeted value chains (international consultant for 3 person-months; TOR in Appendix 5). 
48 
Project Outputs 
Gender activities/actions 
Performance indicators/targets 
Process oriented suggestions 
Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate-resilient 
Table 18: Gender Action Plan 
Gender 
Objectives 
1.1 Ensure critical 
agribusiness VC 
infrastructure is 
responsive to the 
needs of women 
and men 
1.1.1 Involve women, voluntary 
gender focals and women’s 
organization representatives actively 
and meaningfully in each individual 
event for consultations and planning 
activities related to improvement and 
climate resiliency of critical 
infrastructure and procurement of 
new machinery and equipment 
supported by the project. 
1.1.2 As part of consultation/planning 
activities, raise awareness about 
possibility to obtain grant (90% with 
10% beneficiaries’ co-financing rate) 
for irrigation. 
1.1.1 (i) Women are at least 50% of 
participants in most consultation/planning 
events (in at least 80% of such events) 
organized at community level16; (ii) 
Consultation reports/minutes include 
information on infrastructure related 
needs expressed by female participants  
1.1.2 Number of households and 
proportion of female-headed households 
benefiting from irrigation grant. 
1.1.3 Integrate physical design 
features that are addressing 
women’s needs into improved 
climate-resilient VC infrastructure 
where relevant - including 
procurement of time and labor saving 
equipment, machinery and 
technology. 
1.1.3 Number and types (concrete 
examples) of physical design features 
that are addressing women’s needs 
integrated into improved climate-resilient 
VC infrastructure, equipment and 
machinery.  
1.2 Enhance 
income 
generating 
1.2.1 Ensure women benefit from 
jobs created through the project: (i) 
Infrastructure 
1.2.1 (i) For civil works: (a) At least 40% 
of paid works are allocated for 
- This would mean paying attention to the following 
aspects:  meetings are held at a convenient time for 
women taking into account their workloads and 
domestic responsibilities, adequate venue (i.e. 
centrally located, in place where women may feel 
comfortable attending such as a community center), 
and information is shared with visual 
aids/illustrations, sessions are led by female 
facilitators, informal child care during meetings is 
provided, etc. 
- This may also mean that brainstorming sessions to 
identify needs in terms of infrastructure and physical 
design features to be integrated in infrastructure are 
organized first with separate groups of female and 
male participants before sharing and decision being 
made in plenary with female and male participants 
mixed.  
- Ensure decision-making process is participatory and 
takes into account the needs that were expressed by 
female participants. 
- Gender responsive physical designs in improved 
infrastructure related to irrigation, drainage, buildings, 
farm roads, farm and post-harvest machinery and 
equipment, seed testing equipment, etc.; height, 
location and design of facility/equipment; sanitation 
facilities in buildings.  
- Gender-responsive is defined here as: (i) based on 
needs and interest of female farmers; (ii) that reduce 
time and labor especially for women farmers; (iii) and, 
give women more choices in their productive and 
reproductive spheres.  
- This would mean that information about such 
employment opportunities will be communicated 
through adequate channels (radio, print, 
16 Point of reference: 52% to 54% female population in 3 targeted regions as per 2014 Myanmar Population and Housing Census. 
Project Outputs 
Gender activities/actions 
Performance indicators/targets 
Process oriented suggestions 
49 
opportunities for 
women 
construction/rehabilitation/renovation 
of farm roads, minor canals, 
community reservoirs, installation of 
tube wells (skilled/unskilled jobs); (ii) 
Operation and maintenance (O&M) 
of improved infrastructure, and 
procured machinery and equipment 
e.g. community farming machinery 
and buildings  
landless/poor women;17 (b) Equal pay for 
work of equal value for both women and 
men (daily wage).18 
(ii) For O& M jobs: (a) At least 30% of 
O&M jobs are for women;19 (b) Equal pay 
for work of equal value for both women 
and men (daily wage).  
announcements at community centers) to reach out 
women in the targeted areas, and that special efforts 
(i.e. outreach to women’s groups, ads that 
specifically state that women are encouraged to 
apply) are made to attract potentially interested 
women in skilled and unskilled construction work and 
in operation and maintenance, and competent 
women in management positions. 
- As Contractors are key to the achievement of these 
indicators, discussions about labor selection should 
be conducted with them to ensure women benefit 
from jobs. They will also be responsible for hiring 
women as per the conditions set out in bidding 
documents, which should include the targets for 
hiring women. Core labor standards will be complied 
with, especially equal pay for work of equal value 
(verified through policies, employment records). 
Other measures that are needed will be taken (e.g. 
child care arrangements even if informal) so that 
interested women can grasp such opportunities. 
Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted 
2.1.1 Number and proportion of female 
‘contact’ farmers. 
Gender 
Objectives 
2.1 Strengthen 
women farmers’ 
involvement along 
climate-friendly 
agribusiness VCs 
2.1.1   Encourage women to become 
‘contact farmers’ and train them 
through farmer field schools and on-
farm demonstrations for adopting 
good agricultural practices and CSA 
techniques including for farming of 
nutrition rich crops, dissemination of 
improved inputs (seeds, fertilizers 
and pesticides) and promoting farm 
mechanization  
17 Point of reference: women’s current involvement is about 40% in similar infrastructure-related work in rural areas under the Community-Driven Development 
(CDD) national wide project. 
18 2017 baseline: Differences in wages paid to women and men in agriculture: women between $1 and 2.5/day, men between $1.5 and 3/day (Livelihoods and 
Food Security Trust Fund. 2012. Baseline Survey Results. Yangon). Daily wage for unskilled labor in Pakokku industrial zone: women $3.5 to 4, and men $5. 
TRTA detailed gender analysis 2017.  
19 CDD project assigned 20% to 40% of women in O&M. 
50 
Project Outputs 
Gender activities/actions 
Performance indicators/targets 
Process oriented suggestions 
2.1.2 Involve women farmers/seed 
growers/ collectors/processors/agro-
dealers/exporters actively and 
meaningfully in each individual event 
for capacity building activities in 
agribusiness, GMP, GHP, HACCP 
and business plan development. 
2.1.2 (i) At least 40% of participants are 
women in the majority of events for 
capacity building activities targeted at 
farmers;20 (ii) At least 50,000 farmers 
(40% women) trained in CSA, GAP and 
agribusiness skills;21 (iii) At least 35,000 
farmers (40% women) adopt good 
agricultural practice standards for bean, 
pulse and oilseed production.  
This would mean paying special attention to the 
following aspects: adequate venue, timing, duration, 
the way that invitation communicated (e.g. not 
exclusively to head of household), methodology, use 
of visual aids and other illustrated materials, use of 
female and male facilitators/demonstrators and 
extension agents who are trained in gender and 
CSA, arrangements for informal child care offered, 
etc. 
For O&M: (iv) At least 50,000 farmers (of 
which 30% women) adopt water use 
efficient technologies and develop 
capacity to operate and maintain small 
scale irrigation schemes; (v) At least 500 
farmers (at least 30% women) trained in 
farm machinery operation and 
maintenance. 
2.1.3 (i) At least 35,000 households  
(156,000 persons, 80,000 female) benefit 
from agricultural digital finance to access 
improved agricultural inputs, farm 
mechanization services and off-farm 
livelihood options; (ii) 40% of direct 
beneficiaries of the seasonal credit facility 
(debit card holders) are women (footnote 
17).  
2.1.3 Ensure women access the 
Agriculture Digital Finance Service 
through their participation and 
decision making in the credit 
package for supporting purchase of 
good agricultural practices-based 
farm inputs.  
2.1.4 In order to raise awareness on 
nutrition, conduct cooking 
demonstration sessions with the 
involvement of health workers, DOA 
extension staffs and teachers for 
2.1.4 (i) At least two villages of each 
township in project areas conduct cooking 
demonstration sessions and hold a 
cooking competition annually; (ii) Village 
administration staff, village key 
- This would mean that women should be provided 
with adequate information about the seasonal credit 
facility, their rights and procedures, and encouraged 
to register either in their name (instead of the head of 
household when they access finance), or in the 
names of both spouses.  
- The community-driven development processes 
used for the identification of beneficiaries/selection 
criteria will need to take into account the special 
needs and constraints of women farmers and female-
headed households for accessing finance. 
- It will also be important to ensure a fair proportion of 
women are involved as part of the service suppliers 
network. 
- This would mean that project nutrition focal, health 
workers, teachers, DOA extension staffs will lead the 
selection of nutrient-dense foods from local market or 
backyard vegetable garden and villagers (women 
and men; can be separate groups) will cook for 
20 Point of reference: Women’s share of the population aged 15-64 employed in agriculture, forestry and fishery is 36.5% (vs. 63.5% of men) as per 2014 Myanmar 
Population and Housing Census. 66% of employed women work in agriculture and 51% of employed men work in agriculture (DFAT Investing in Women Design 
Phase-Aide Memoires-2015). 
21 2017 baseline: 0. 
51 
Project Outputs 
Gender activities/actions 
Performance indicators/targets 
Process oriented suggestions 
utilization of nutrient-dense foods, 
and organize cooking competitions. 
influencers, women, children and at least 
40% of men participate in annual 
nutritious cooking competition session. 
competition of most nutritious dishes. Special 
attention will be given to involve men in these 
activities. 
- This would also mean paying attention to the 
following aspects: convenient time and adequate 
venue for male and female farmers. 
- Explore synergies with nutrition behavioral project 
of NWAF.  
2.2 Ensure female 
staff benefit from 
capacity-building 
activities related 
to climate-friendly 
agribusiness VCs 
2.2 Ensure relevant female staff 
participate in capacity-building 
activities that are targeted at 
government officials at regional and 
local levels with regard to climate-
friendly agribusiness VCs such as 
CSA, certified seed production and 
testing, quality and safety testing, 
farm mechanization. 
2.2 Participation of female and male staff 
in trainings at national and local levels in 
same proportions as share of women and 
men in target groups.22 
Output 3: Enabling environment for climate-friendly agribusiness enhanced 
Gender 
Objectives 
3.1 Institutionalize 
gender 
mainstreaming in 
the climate-
friendly 
agribusiness VCs 
sector 
3.1.1 At project inception, conduct a 
gender analysis of the value chains 
to understand different roles of 
women and men and women’s 
preferences and constraints 
(including for female headed 
households) for each of the targeted 
VCs and develop a set of clear 
recommendations to strengthen 
women’s involvement along the 
different VCs.  
3.1.1 One report prepared with clear 
recommendations based on gender 
analysis of the targeted value chains.  
Separate meetings and discussions will be held with 
women for land use survey, off-farm livelihood 
survey, agribusiness policy research, and the gender 
analysis of the targeted VCs (with at least 50% 
women interviewed/participating in the 
surveys/research).  
This would also mean that gender stakeholders 
(gender network, DSW, and women’s organizations) 
participate in policy committees and meetings. 
3.1.2 Integrate key recommendations 
from gender analysis of VCs into 
agribusiness policies and other 
related documents prepared under 
the project. 
3.1.3   Integrate a session on gender 
equality in climate-friendly 
3.1.2 At least three climate-friendly and 
gender-responsive agribusiness policies 
formulated that integrate key 
recommendations from the gender 
analysis.  
3.1.3 (i) Number of sessions provided on 
gender equality in climate-friendly 
This is meant to inform relevant policy-makers and 
the formulation process of the agribusiness policies. 
22 Point of reference: Proportion of female staff employed in the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation is 35% (Ministry of Planning and Finance. 2016. 
Myanmar Statistical Yearbook). Within the Department of Agriculture (DOA), women account for about approximately one third of total extension officers. TRTA 
detailed gender analysis 2017.  
52 
Project Outputs 
Gender activities/actions 
Performance indicators/targets 
Process oriented suggestions 
agribusiness VCs (based on gender 
analysis report mentioned above) 
into the training program and 
awareness raising activities for 
project stakeholders (i.e. relevant 
departments in MOALI, agricultural 
extension officers, local 
administrations and leaders, 
MNCW’s voluntary gender focal).    
3.1.4 Raise awareness about 
existing affordable credit facilities 
including agricultural digital finance 
service among women farmers, 
women-led and/or owned 
enterprises*, and staff in financial 
institutions. 
As part of the activities targeted at 
staff from financial institutions: raise 
awareness about specific constraints 
faced by women in accessing credit 
and the need for developing women 
friendly financing products and 
services. 
3.1.5 Strengthen linkages between 
women-led and/or owned 
farms/enterprises and agribusiness 
industry through supporting their 
participation in project activities such 
as provision of weather, market and 
financial services information to 
increase their access to market 
information, and development of 
farm standards and codes of 
practice, including for export 
standards.  
agribusiness value chains; target groups; 
number of people trained disaggregated 
by gender; (ii) At least 3 sessions 
conducted for policy-makers to inform the 
formulation process of the climate-friendly 
and gender-responsive agribusiness 
policies. 
Nevertheless, sessions on gender equality in climate-
friendly agribusiness VCs are also expected to be 
conducted at local levels as part of other training 
activities to ensure extension agents and local 
agriculture officers understand the importance of 
reaching out to women farmers with inputs and 
promoting gender equality. 
3.1.4 (i) Number and type of activities 
conducted; types of communication 
channels and materials used, and, 
number and proportion of women 
participants (target for farmers: 50% 
women); (ii) 30% of staff from financial 
institutions trained in green finance are 
women.23 
3.1.5 (i) Number and type of activities 
conducted; number and proportion of 
women participants; (ii) Weather, market 
and credit information systems at DOP 
upgraded to provide timely information to 
at least 50,000 community-level supply 
chain stakeholders, including 25,000 
women;24 (iii) At least 100 rice millers, 
and 50 pulses/beans/sesame processors 
and exporters, including 30% women-led 
and/or owned,* adopt GMP and HACCP 
standards.25 
This would mean ensuring access to market 
information for both women and men farmers and 
enterprises and find out what are the most 
appropriate channels to reach women farmers and 
enterprises including use of ICT. ‘May Doe Kabar’ 
could be one of the stakeholders. 
3.1.6 Raise awareness (for local 
administrations and communities) 
3.1.6 At least 1 awareness raising 
campaign per year on land use and land 
This would mean paying special attention to the 
following aspects: adequate venue, timing, and 
23 2017 baseline: 0. 
24 2017 baseline: not applicable. 
25 2017 baseline: 0. 
53 
Project Outputs 
Gender activities/actions 
Performance indicators/targets 
Process oriented suggestions 
about land law reforms and National 
Land Use Policy, land rights and 
promote joint titling for land allocation 
to the poor and landless women and 
men. 
3.1.7 Ensure women’s active 
participation in participatory land 
use/management planning at 
township and village levels. 
3.1.8 Actively involve MNCW and 
voluntary gender focals at 
community level as key partners in 
project implementation and 
monitoring, especially for the GAP 
activities.  
rights, with 50% women participants in 
sessions organized at community level. 
3.1.7 50% of women participants in land 
use/management planning meetings in 
townships and villages. 
3.1.8 MNCW and its voluntary gender 
focals are well aware of the GAP 
activities. 
duration of sessions/meetings. For land 
use/management planning meetings: this would 
mean providing adequate information to participants 
so that they clearly understand the objectives of the 
meetings.  
There may be a need to revise the format for land 
registration to allow sufficient space for registration 
on both husband and wife’s names. 
- In places where MNCW does not have voluntary 
gender focals yet, select one active woman in 
targeted community to act as voluntary gender focal. 
Young female graduates in the villages may be 
interested to take up the role of voluntary gender 
focal. 
- Implementation of the GAP activities is meant to 
support implementation of the National Strategic Plan 
for the Advancement of Women 2013-2022. 
Project management gender related activities: 
•  Appoint a project gender focal in EA MOALI (preferably from the existing DSW gender focals network); and procure specialized support services in gender 
to support IAs in GAP implementation, monitoring and reporting.  
Translate the GAP in local language 
• 
•  Ensure GAP activities are integrated into annual project work plans and budgets. 
•  Work closely with support services that will be recommended by MNCW as specialized in gender and rural development to build capacity of EA/IAs staff in 
gender analysis and mainstreaming, and support GAP implementation, monitoring and reporting. 
•  Collect and analyze data disaggregated by sex where relevant and integrate gender sensitive indicators (from the DMF and GAP) in the Project 
Performance Monitoring System. 
•  Ensure regular monitoring and reporting (on quarterly basis to ADB) on the progress of GAP implementation. 
CSA=climate smart agriculture; DOA = Department of Agriculture; EA = executing agency; IA = implementing agency; ICT = information and communications 
technology; GAP= Good Agriculture Practice; GHP =good hygienic practices; GMP = good manufacturing practice; HACCP= Hazard Analysis and Critical Control 
Points; MNCW = Myanmar National Committee for Women; VC = value chain. 
* Women-led and/or owned enterprises are those with at least one of the following: (i) at least 50% of senior managers are women, (ii) at least 50% of enterprise 
ownership is controlled by women, (iii) at least 50% of the staff are women. 
54 
87. 
will:  
Social Dimensions of the Project 
Consultation and Participation Plan. The project’s consultation and participation plan 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
fully disclose information on the proposed project and subprojects, its components, 
and its activities with the beneficiary communities and stakeholders;   
obtain  information  about  the  opinions,  needs  and  priorities  of  beneficiary 
communities and stakeholders;  
solicit input and feedback on beneficial and mitigating measures;   
encourage  the  participation  of  beneficiary  communities  and  stakeholders  in 
activities  that  affect  them,  such  as  civil  works  construction,  enterprise  support 
actions, awareness raising activities, and monitoring;  
obtain the consent and cooperation of beneficiary communities and stakeholders 
for activities required to be undertaken for project planning and implementation;  
establish a clear, easily accessible and effective grievance redress mechanism; 
and  
ensure transparency in all project activities.   
88. 
The  various  stakeholders,  mechanisms  for  participation,  entities  responsible,  indicative 
schedules and resources are set out in the Consultation and Participation Plan which is presented 
separately. 
89. 
Labor, HIV/AIDs, and other social risks. The relevance of the project for the country’s 
labor market is low and not significant. Core labor standards by contractors will be adhered to for 
all  infrastructure  works  during  the  project  lifetime.  Employment  opportunities  for  ID-Poor 
households  and  women  will  be  available.  The  impact  of  risk  from  communicable  diseases 
(HIV/AIDS) is low and the impact of other social risks such as human trafficking is not applicable. 
55 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
90. 
The  implementing  agencies  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  project  progress  and 
evaluating project outputs. Monitoring and evaluation will be in accordance with the design and 
monitoring  framework  (DMF)  and  each  implementing  agency  will  be  responsible  for  regular 
reporting, with the PMU producing a consolidated report for the Ministry of Planning and Finance 
(MOPF) and ADB. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework  
Impact the Project is Aligned with:   
Agricultural competitiveness improved (Agriculture Development Strategy; Agriculture Sector’s Second Five-
Year Plan; and National Export Strategy).a 
Results Chain 
Risks 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Outcome 
Productive and 
resource 
efficient 
agribusiness 
value chains in 
project areas 
developed 
By 2027: 
a. Annual income of targeted households 
increased by at least 20% (2017 baseline: 
MMK900,000) 
a-b. MOALI 
agricultural 
census 
b. Crop yields increased by at least 25% (2017 
baseline: monsoon Paw San rice seed yield: 2.6 
tons/ha and HYV rice seed 3.4 tons/ha; chickpea: 
1.6 tons/ha; green gram 1.1 tons/ha; and sesame 
0.8 tons/ha)  
c. At least 50 agribusinesses became resource 
efficient in terms of water savings (5%-10%) and 
reduction in post-harvest losses (10%) through 
adoption of GMP (2017 water savings baseline = 
0%; post-harvest losses baseline = 25%)  
d. Household Food Insecurity Experience Scale 
declined by 5% (2017 baseline = 17.8%)b 
c.-d.  Annual 
PPMS and 
M&E reports 
Outputs 
By 2025: 
1. Critical 
agribusiness 
value chain 
infrastructure 
improved and 
made climate-
resilient 
1a. 10 DOA seed farms produced at least 
3,000 tons of HYV rice seed, 130 tons of 
chickpea, 180 tons of green gram, and 70 tons of 
sesame annually (2017 baseline: 378 tons HYV 
rice, 25 tons of chickpea, 36 tons of green gram, 
and 20 tons of sesame) to benefit at least 156,000 
persons (80,000 female members) in 35,000 
households (2017 baseline: 0) 
1a. DOA 
Annual reports 
1a-d. PPMS 
reports 
1b. About 13,000 ha of additional area brought 
under climate smart water management through 
rehabilitating 130 km of tertiary canals (6,000 ha), 
15 community reservoirs (1,000 ha) and installing 
8,000 shallow tube wells (6000 ha) to benefit at 
least 156,000 persons (80,000 female members) 
in 35,000 households (2017 baseline: 0) 
Failure of the 
government to 
sustain policy 
reforms for 
agribusiness 
promotion  
Reduced budget 
allocations for 
O&M leading to 
premature 
infrastructure 
deterioration  
Catastrophic 
climate events 
damage 
infrastructure or 
interrupt 
implementation 
56 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Risks 
1c. At least 300 km of farm roads rehabilitated to 
climate-resilient condition (2017 baseline: 0) 
1d. Crop product quality and safety testing 
infrastructure in pesticide testing laboratory, 
FSTLAB and CTQM upgraded leading to 
ISO 17025 certification to test at least 2,500 
samples per year (2017 baseline: 1,100)   
1d. MOALI and 
MOC annual 
reports 
2a. At least four (1 rice, 1 chickpea, and 2 
sesame) climate-resilient varieties released (2017 
baseline: 0) 
2a-f. PPMS 
reports  
2. Climate-smart 
agriculture and 
agribusiness 
promoted 
2b. Skills and knowledge of at least 300 lead seed 
growers in certified seed production, and 50,000 
farmers (40% women) in CSA, GAP and 
agribusiness improved (2017 baseline: 0) 
2c. At least 35,000 farmers (40% women) adopted 
GAP standards for bean, pulse and oilseed 
production (2017 baseline = 0) 
2d. At least 50,000 farmers (30% women) adopt 
water use efficient technologies and develop 
capacity to operate and maintain small scale 
irrigation schemes (2017 baseline: 0) 
2e. At least 50 agribusiness dealers and service 
providers, and 500 farmers (30% women) trained in 
farm machinery operation and maintenance (2017 
baseline: 0) 
2f. At least 35,000 households (156,000 persons, 
80,000 females) benefitted from agricultural digital 
finance to access improved agricultural inputs, 
farm mechanization services and off-farm 
livelihood options (2017 baseline: 0) 
2f. Participating 
financial 
institution 
service 
provider 
records 
3a-f. PPMS 
reports  
3. Enabling 
environment for 
climate-friendly 
agribusiness 
enhanced 
3a. Agribusiness policy unit established in DOP  
3b. At least three climate-friendly and gender-
responsive agribusiness policies,c including a PPP 
framework focusing on agribusinesses formulated 
(2017 baseline: 0) 
3c. At least 100 rice millers, and 50 pulses, beans 
or sesame processors and exporters, including 
30% women-led or owned,d adopted GMP and 
HACCP standards (2017 baseline: 0) 
3d. Green finance skills and knowledge of at least 
50 staff, including 30% women, from participating 
financial institutions  improved (2017 baseline: 0) 
3e. Weather, market and credit information 
systems at DOP upgraded to provide timely 
information to at least 50,000 community-level 
57 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
Data Sources 
and Reporting 
Risks 
supply chain stakeholders, including 25,000 
women (2017 baseline: Not available) 
3f. Land administration systems and services skills 
and knowledge of at least 50 staff, including 30% 
women, improvede  (2017 baseline: 0) 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1. Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate-resilient 
1.1 Upgrade infrastructure in ten DOA seed farms for production of improved and climate-resilient seed (Q3 
2019–Q4 2023).  
1.2 Rehabilitate irrigation and water management infrastructure (tertiary canals, community reservoirs, and 
shallow tube wells) to climate-resilient condition (Q2 2019–Q2 2025).  
1.3 Improve connectivity and farm mechanization through climate-resilient farm road networks (Q1 2020–Q3 
2022). 
1.4 Strengthen infrastructure for agricultural quality and safety testing (Q3 2019–Q4 2022).  
2. Climate-smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted  
2.1 Deploy climate-resilient varieties (Q3 2019–Q2 2025) [G/CD]. 
2.2 Conduct training for farmers, SMEs and private sector on CSA (Q3 2019–Q1 2025) [G/CD, GE]. 
2.3 Implement agricultural digital finance service for agricultural inputs, farm mechanization services and off-
farm livelihood opportunities (Q1 2020–Q4 2024). 
3. Enabling environment for climate-friendly agribusiness enhanced  
3.1 Formulate climate-friendly agribusiness policies and standards, including public-private partnerships, 
contract farming, GAP and organic certification, and gender aspects (Q2 2019–Q4 2023) [G/CD]. 
3.2 Improve skills of financial institutions on green finance, including integration of climate risk screening in 
lending activities (Q2 2020–Q4 2024) [G/CD, GE]. 
3.3 Promote multimedia-based weather, market and credit information networks in target townships (Q1 
2020–Q4 2023) [G/CD, GE]. 
3.4 Improve the delivery of land administration services through capacity building of regional and township 
administrations (Q1 2020–Q2 2025) [G/CD,GE].  
Project Management Activities  
Mobilize project implementation consultants and procure equipment, furniture and vehicles (Q1-Q2 2019). 
Establish PPMS, and conduct needs assessment for specific project management skills (Q1-Q2 2019). 
Customize learning modules to fit participant needs (Q3 2019) [G/CD, GE]. 
Deliver and evaluate training courses for 200 staff (35% female) from various levels (national, provincial and 
district) in project management, procurement, financial management, gender, social and environmental 
safeguards (Q2 2020–Q4 2024) [G/CD, GE]. 
Inputs 
ADB: $40,500,000 (loan) 
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program: $22,000,000 (grant) 
Government: $1,430,000 (in-kind)  
Beneficiaries: $990,000  
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
GAFSP: $5,000,000 (parallel financing as capacity building technical assistance) 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; CSA = climate smart agriculture;  CTQM = commodity testing and quality management; 
DOA = Department of Agriculture; DOP = Department of Planning; FAO = Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations; FSTLAB = food safety testing laboratory;  G/CD = governance and capacity development; GAP = good agricultural 
practices; GE = gender equity; GMP = good manufacturing practices; HACCP = hazard analysis critical control points; HYV 
= high yielding variety;  M&E = monitoring and evaluation;  MMK = Myanmar Kyat; MOALI = Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock 
and Irrigation; MOC = Ministry of Commerce; NA = not applicable; PPMS = project performance monitoring system; PPP = 
public-private partnership; SME = small and medium enterprises; Q = quarter. 
58 
a Government of Myanmar. Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation. 2018. Myanmar Agriculture Development Strategy 
and Investment Plan (2018-2023). Nay Pyi Taw; Government of Myanmar. 2016. Agriculture Sector Second Five-Year Plan 
(2016/2017–2020/2021). Nay Pyi Taw; and Government of Myanmar. 2014. National Export Strategy (2015-2019). Nay Pyi 
Taw. 
b     Developed by Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Food Insecurity Experience Scale is a measure 
of access to food at the level of individuals or households.  It is based on a well-grounded construct of the experience of 
food insecurity composed of three domains: uncertainty/anxiety, changes in food quality, and changes in food quantity. 
c   As women are more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, any policies developed for public-private-community 
partnerships or  contract  farming  arrangements  for  promoting  agribusinesses under  output  3  will  be responsive  to  the 
needs, constraints and vulnerabilities of women. The detailed gender analysis of the value chains proposed in the gender 
action plan is expected to inform this process. 
c   Women-led  or  owned  enterprises are those  with  at least one of  the following:  (i)  at  least  50% of senior  managers are 
women, (ii) at least 50% of enterprise ownership is controlled by women, (iii) at least 50% of employees are women. 
s Land administration systems and services, inter alia, include (i) updating cadastral map coverage, (ii) re-establishing land 
records; (iii) registering land transactions; (iv) confirming land tenure, and (v) issuing land use certificates or titles. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Monitoring  
Project performance monitoring: A project performance monitoring system (PPMS) has 
91. 
been developed (Appendix 2) based on key indicators and targets outlined in the project design 
and monitoring framework (DMF). The PPMS will (i) assess the progress in achieving each project 
output and project outcome according to the performance targets and indicators indicated in DMF 
including planned activities, and (ii) highlight any identified risks that are detrimental to achieving 
the outputs. It shall be implemented by the project management unit (PMU) in conjunction with 
the  implementing  agencies  and  support  from  the  project  implementation  consultants  (PIC)  in 
accordance with ADB's Project Performance Monitoring System Handbook within six months of 
loan  effectiveness.26  The  PPMS  procedures,  performance  indicators,  and  their  targets  will  be 
reviewed and approved by ADB. Benchmark review mainly focusing on secondary data will be 
conducted. With the help of PIC, the PMU will then undertake every six months quantitative and 
qualitative  project-performance  monitoring  for  each  project  activity  to  evaluate  the  delivery  of 
planned facilities and the project benefits that accrued.   
92. 
Compliance monitoring: A number of assurances have been given by the government 
to  ensure  smooth  implementation  of  the  project.  ADB  will  monitor  compliance  with  covenants 
during  the  project  implementation  through  regular  review  missions,  quarterly  progress  reports 
submitted  by the  PMU, and  review  of  project  accounts  and procurement  procedures.  ADB  will 
also monitor the achievements of each output and outcome based on the performance indicators 
with  targets,  and  each  activity  based  on  milestones  indicated  in  the  DMF  through  a  project 
management information system (i.e. eOps).   
93. 
Safeguards  monitoring.  The  supervision  and  monitoring  of  environmental  activities 
during the pre-construction, construction and operation phases are the functions of the PMU. To 
support the EA and IA in preparing environmental safeguards documents and implementing the 
environmental  management  and  monitoring  plans  of  subprojects,  a  safeguards  officer  will  be 
assigned  to  the  PMU.  Safeguards  officer  will  be  assisted  and  trained  by  the  international  and 
national environment specialists from the PIC.  
94. 
The  PMU  and  the  provincial  implementers  will  ensure  that  IEE  findings  are  locally 
disclosed; IEEs are submitted to ADB for prior review and clearance; no objections to implement 
will  be  sought  from  the  PSC;  EMP  measures  are  incorporated  into  civil  works  designs  and 
26 ADB's project performance reporting system is available at  
http://www.adb.org/Documents/Slideshows/PPMS/default.asp?p=evaltool 
59 
contracts, and that their IAs will undertake the required environmental monitoring and reporting 
and perform their assigned roles in the grievance redress mechanism. 
95. 
The  implementing  agencies,  assisted  by  PIC,  will  prepare  and  submit  to  the  executing 
agency  semi-annual  reports  on  the  environmental  identified  during  implementation. The report 
will cover environment performance based on implementation of the environmental management 
plans.  The  executing  agency,  through  PIC,  will  be  responsible  for  the  consolidation  and 
submission of the reports to ADB in accordance to the format and process described in the IEEs 
and EARF. 
96. 
LARF  details  on  monitoring  and  reporting  requirements  for  involuntary  resettlement.  In 
essence,  both  internal  and  external  monitoring  will  be  conducted.  PMU  will  be  responsible for 
internal  monitoring  while  an  external  monitoring  agency  will  be  hired  to  conduct  external 
monitoring  and  evaluation  for  involuntary  resettlement.  Internal  and  external  monitoring  will 
produce bi-annual monitoring reports. 
97. 
Climate Change (Risk Category Medium): The assessment of climate change risk for 
the overall project, as per the AWARE process, gives a category of medium risk. It is therefore 
important  that  the  PIC  that  have  responsibilities  for  infrastructure  development  and  capacity 
building  have  sufficient  climate  change  experience  and  capability  to  ensure  and  maximize 
adaptation possibilities, promote climate smart agricultural practices, and ensure that the project 
satisfactorily ensures that farmers are aware of the risks and the steps they can take to adapt. 
98. 
Gender and social dimensions monitoring: Regular (semi-annual) monitoring of GAP 
implementation  will  be  done  during  project  implementation.  The  PPMS  will  monitor  women’s 
participation in all project capacity building, training events and meetings, for both female staff 
and  women  farmers.  Sex-disaggregated  data  will  be  collected  regularly  wherever  relevant 
(particularly  in  relation  to  project  activities  that  are  linked  to  specific  gender  actions,  for  which 
verifiable sources of data for monitoring will be available at community/village level), and gender 
specific and sensitive indicators from the DMF and the GAP will be integrated as part of the PPMS. 
The PMU will ensure regular monitoring and reporting (on quarterly basis to ADB) on the progress 
of GAP implementation; the ADB template to be used for GAP monitoring and reporting is included 
as Appendix 3. 
99. 
Participatory  monitoring  of  project  impact  will  be  implemented  during  mid-term  of  the 
project and this will include women’s focus group discussion and interviews with women farmers 
and staff, to obtain quantitative and qualitative data. Household interviews will include adequate 
representation of female-headed households. 
Evaluation  
to  assess  project  readiness  and 
Inception  mission.  An  inception  mission  will  be  conducted  within  three  months  of  the 
100. 
loan  signing 
including 
establishment  of  PMU,  IAs,  opening  of  an  advance  account,  status  of  the  development  of  the 
PPMS, and progress of advance procurement actions including recruitment of the PIC firm and 
the contractor for the first three representative subprojects.  
implementation  arrangements 
101.  Review mission: ADB will conduct regular (i.e. at least twice per year) reviews throughout 
project  implementation  to  (i)  assess  the  progress  of  project  activities  and  outputs  and 
effectiveness  of  implementation  arrangements,  (ii)  monitor  safeguard  compliance  with  ADB 
Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009),  (iii)  review  compliance  with  loan  agreements  and  related 
60 
matters,  (iv)  follow  up  on  decisions  and  actions  agreed  during  previous  review  missions,  and 
(v) resolve any project implementation issues that may arise.  
102.  Midterm review mission: A midterm review will be undertaken within 30 months of loan 
effectiveness  or  as  when  deemed  necessary  by  the  project  team.  This  review  will  include  a 
comprehensive evaluation of project implementation arrangements, impact from the pro-poor and 
gender  initiatives  linked  to  infrastructure  development,  detailed  evaluation  of  the  scope  and 
implementation process and progress of subprojects, allocation by local administrations for the 
maintenance of the infrastructure developed under the project, feedback from the stakeholders, 
performance  of  consultants,  capacity  building  progress,  and  possible  reallocation  of  loan 
proceeds.  Particular  attention  will  be  paid  to  the  (i)  assessment  of  project  performance  and 
achievement against targets and indicators in the DMF; (ii) review the initial outcomes, benefits, 
and impact of the project, and (iii) identify gaps, if any, and recommend necessary changes to 
strengthen implementation arrangements or modify project design.    
103.  Project  completion  review  mission:  Within  six  months  of  physical  completion  of  the 
project,  ADB  will  field  a  project  completion  review  mission  to  commence  preparation  of  the 
government project completion report (PCR). The mission will (i) assess the project performance 
against  all  targets,  indicators,  and  benchmarks  (including  any  revised  at  the  midterm  review); 
(ii) evaluate  initial  benefits  and  outcome  of  the  project  across  outputs,  and  (iii)  identify  any 
incomplete activities and agree on the necessary actions, as well as to review compliance with 
ADB requirements and loan covenants. 
Reporting  
104.  The PMU will provide ADB with (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with 
ADB's project performance reporting system (an outline of the progress report is in Appendix 2); 
(ii) consolidated annual reports including (a) progress achieved by output as measured through 
the  indicator's  performance  targets,  (b)  key  implementation  issues  and  solutions,  (c)  updated 
procurement plan, and (d) updated implementation plan for the next 12 months; and (iii) a project 
completion report within six months of physical completion of the project. To ensure that projects 
will continue to be both viable and sustainable, project accounts and the executing agency audited 
financial statement together with the associated auditor's report should be adequately reviewed. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy  
105.  A stakeholder communication strategy was prepared (Table 19), drawing on best practices 
outlined  in  ADB’s  Public  Communication  Policy.27  It  is  based  on  principles  of  transparency, 
timeliness, meaningful participation, and inclusiveness. It will ensure that vulnerable groups, such 
as  the  poor  and  female-headed  households,  who  risk  marginalization,  are  provided  with 
opportunities  for  receiving  timely  information,  and  can  provide  feedback  during  project 
implementation. Stakeholders include: (i) project direct and indirect beneficiaries with a focus on 
micro-  and  small-enterprises  and  small  agri-businesses;  (ii)  civil  society  organizations; 
(iii) community groups and individuals living in the project area; (iv) private agencies and service 
providers who share an interest in the outcomes and/or impacts of the project; and (v) government 
agencies  with  a  role  in  implementation.  The  strategy  serves  to  inform  and  support  community 
development, enhance government capacity to deliver a positive project outcome, and enhance 
project benefits while mitigating any potential negative impacts. 
27 ADB. 2011. Public Communication Policy 2011. Disclosure and Exchange of Information. Manila.   
Table 19: Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
61 
Objective  
1 Ensure a 
good 2-way 
flow of 
information, 
and promote 
ownership 
over 
subproject 
activities and 
climate-
friendly 
agribusiness 
value chains 
sector 
development  
Stakeholder 
Group  
Beneficiary 
communities 
including 
farmer 
production 
groups, 
women and 
men farmers, 
cooperatives 
collectors, rice 
millers, village 
heads and 
village 
committees, 
local micro-
credit 
institutions.   
Function/Interest 
in Project  
Direct 
beneficiaries of 
project; local 
authorities 
participating in 
implementation 
and follow-up of 
subprojects; 
beneficiaries of 
infrastructure; 
participants in 
agribusiness 
enterprise 
development; 
participants in 
technical and 
agriculture 
training, in 
workshops, study 
tours and skills 
and employment 
training.  
Messages  
Means of Communication  
Timeline  
Responsibility   Resources 
Refer to Output 
2, sub-
component 2.2 
(Capacity 
Enhancement) 
for source of 
funding for 
production of 
all 
communication 
materials and 
recruiting local 
communication 
consultant to 
design 
materials 
where 
necessary 
EA, IAs, Gender 
Focal Points and 
other related 
ministries and 
departments, 
local 
government 
including village 
head and village 
committee 
Responsibility 
for producing 
information 
materials will be 
with IA. 
Responsibility 
for identifying 
best publicly 
accessible 
places is with 
village head. 
Local collaboration 
and support is 
fundamental to 
project 
effectiveness; 
information is to be 
shared openly and 
transparently; 
inputs into design 
and 
recommendations 
for improvements 
are welcome.   
Clear information 
on implementation 
arrangements and 
schedule of 
construction and 
civil works.  
Update on 
subproject 
progress and roles 
for any operation 
and maintenance 
after completion.   
Planned mitigation 
measures 
(including 
compensation 
rates, entitlements, 
grievance redress 
mechanism, road 
safety and 
noise/pollution 
control measures 
The project will produce user-
friendly posters at local level 
giving information about when 
consultation meetings are to 
be held, and also showing 
subproject plans and activities. 
Details of how and where to 
register feedback (e.g. with 
village head) is to be provided.  
Regular ongoing 
information 
exchange 
between IA 
(Implementing 
Agency) and 
beneficiaries prior 
to initiation of 
activities.  
During initial 
phase of 
subproject 
preparation.   
During detailed 
project design 
phase.   
At kick-off 
workshop/meetin
g when project is 
launched 
Ongoing during 
implementation of 
activities and any 
construction and 
civil works.  
At  completion  in 
closing  workshop 
at local level 
Regular meetings between 
implementing agency & 
beneficiaries will be held every 
month for two-way flow of 
information about project 
activities, priorities and 
progress. Feedback from 
meetings will be logged, and 
feedback on follow-up actions 
will be reported at the following 
meeting.  Village head, district 
Gender Focal Point and village 
committee will receive 
orientation from project staff 
regarding what to do when 
local community members give 
them feedback on subproject. 
Standard reporting formats to 
be used by local authorities, 
district Gender Focal Point and 
IA for providing project updates 
to beneficiaries on a regular 
basis so that information can 
be systematically transmitted 
to communities.   
Public information meetings, 
including regular updates by 
village head, district Gender 
62 
Objective  
Stakeholder 
Group  
Function/Interest 
in Project  
Messages  
Means of Communication  
Timeline  
Responsibility   Resources 
before and after 
construction).  
Focal Point and village 
committee at village level 
following any visits and 
meeting with IA and project 
consultants.  
Printed information about 
subproject in local language 
posted in accessible public 
areas, including information on 
how to provide comments or 
register grievances.  
Posters on information boards 
on upcoming training programs 
for agribusiness, technical 
training, skills training for 
employment, and small and 
micro-enterprise development.  
As above plus 
disseminate 
contents of GAP 
and EMDP (where 
applicable), and  
opportunities to 
participate in 
training in income 
generating 
activities.  
Separate meetings organized 
by district Gender Focal Point 
with women and with ethnic 
groups in local language, 
where applicable.  
Printed information about the 
project posted in local and 
accessible language (or visual 
depictions) posted in 
accessible public areas.  
Designation and provision of 
materials/toolkit to district 
Gender Focal Points for 
promotion/coaching in micro- 
and small enterprise 
development and 
disseminating information 
about agribusiness 
As above  
As above  
As above  
Women, poor 
and vulnerable 
households, 
ethnic minority 
groups (where 
applicable 
2 Ensure an 
effective 2-
way flow of 
project 
information to 
women 
beneficiaries 
and ethnic 
minority 
beneficiaries 
(where 
applicable).  
Objective  
Stakeholder 
Group  
Function/Interest 
in Project  
Messages  
Means of Communication  
Timeline  
Responsibility   Resources 
63 
3. Raise 
visibility and 
awareness of 
benefits of 
agribusiness 
development 
for inclusive 
growth and for 
building 
ownership 
over ongoing 
infrastructure 
development 
(e.g. 
infrastructure 
improvements) 
and also 
farmer 
production 
groups and 
cooperative 
development.  
4. Ensure an 
effective 2-
way flow of 
project 
information to 
promote 
public-private 
partnerships 
for inclusive 
agribusiness 
growth and 
value chain 
development 
 Beneficiary 
communities.  
and 
Direct 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
of project.  
Project investments 
and agribusiness 
promotion is  
beneficial to local 
economy, culture 
and gender equity.  
opportunities from IA / project 
consultants  
Media press releases and 
coverage about the project by 
local media –print, radio, and 
TV features (if possible).  
At project launch 
and midway 
through as 
tangible results 
are realized.  
IA, EA, district 
Gender Focal 
Points and 
village 
authorities 
Signboards promoting visibility 
of  
MOALI (EA), ADB and local 
government  
collaboration for climate-
friendly agribusiness and value 
chain development and 
improvements.  
Signboards at 
appropriate 
locations at the  
start of 
construction and 
through project 
implementation.  
Private sector 
agribusinesses 
and small and 
medium 
enterprises 
Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries of 
project; partners 
in development 
activities.   
Inaugurations of completed 
construction and civil works 
with promotional events at 
subproject sites.  
MOALI Website about project 
activities, progress and 
documents.  
Partnership in workshops / 
meetings / surveys on 
agribusiness development and 
marketing / promotion 
programs.  
Local Communications 
consultant will develop a 
unique 
dissemination/engagement 
plan as part of his/her core 
activities, including design and 
production of a full suite of 
marketing materials.  
Promote 
participation in 
agribusiness 
initiatives which will 
increase available 
supply of improved 
quality of crops, 
employment 
creation and 
initiatives to 
promote climate-
friendly 
agribusiness value 
chain development  
Ongoing during 
implementation of 
project activities 
 EA / project 
implementation 
consultants 
Refer to Output 
2 sub-
component 2.2 
–  
Capacity 
Enhancement 
Stakeholder 
Group  
MOALI 
Gender Unit / 
Gender Focal 
Point 
64 
Objective  
5 Ensure a 
good 2-way 
flow of project 
information 
and promote 
women’s 
ownership 
over 
subproject 
activities and 
agribusiness 
development.  
EA (MOALI) 
staff; 
Government 
officials, 
contractors, 
and 
communities 
in the project 
areas.  
6 Ensure a 
regular flow of 
project 
information 
and promote 
collaboration 
to complete 
constructed 
infrastructure 
and civil 
works.   
Function/Interest 
in Project  
Responsible for 
promoting gender 
equality and 
mainstreaming 
gender in 
agriculture sector 
Plays a role in 
overseeing 
gender 
inclusiveness in 
agricultural 
development in 
Myanmar  
Promote women’s 
involvement and 
participation in 
micro and small 
enterprise 
development and 
employment 
training in the 
agriculture sector.  
Responsible for 
implementation 
and O&M of 
constructed 
infrastructure 
subprojects and 
civil works.   
Messages  
Means of Communication  
Timeline  
Responsibility   Resources 
National Steering Committee 
meetings.  
Regular coordination meetings 
between IA, gender 
consultants and MOALI 
Gender Unit for implementing 
project GAP and 
recommending any 
improvements 
From outset of 
project and 
regularly 
throughout 
project lifetime.  
Project Gender 
Consultants and 
MOALI Gender 
Unit and Sub-
national Gender 
Focal Points  
Key benefits, and 
gender equity of 
subproject activities 
and climate-friendly 
agribusiness and 
value chain 
development 
Specific benefits 
targeted to women   
Disseminate 
information on 
progress on gender 
equity   
EA and IA 
From outset of 
project and 
throughout 
implementation.  
Project design, key 
project benefits, 
implementation 
arrangements and  
schedule of 
construction and 
civil works  
Main project 
impacts (positive 
and negative).  
Planned operation 
and maintenance 
measures.   
Project  Steering  Committee 
Meetings.  
Regular coordination meeting 
for detail design of 
construction and civil works, 
and implementation of project 
activities.   
Regular flow and sharing of 
documentation.  
Project website.  
65 
Responsibility   Resources 
EA and IA 
Function/Interest 
in Project  
Responsible for 
project 
implementation   
Objective  
7. Ensure 
understanding 
of project 
impacts, 
outcomes and 
outputs and 
importance of 
theme of 
inclusive 
growth.   
Stakeholder 
Group  
Beneficiaries; 
MOALI; local 
authorities 
such as village 
heads, village 
committee, 
district Gender 
Focal Points, 
(village 
authorities and 
Gender Focal 
Points will 
receive 
orientation to 
develop their 
understanding 
of project 
impacts) 
Messages  
Means of Communication  
Timeline  
Effective execution 
of their tasks, 
regular follow-up, 
monitoring and 
reporting progress 
and constraints is 
important for 
project success.  
Community 
collaboration and 
inclusive approach 
is essential to 
effective project 
delivery.   
Dissemination of Project 
Steering Committee decisions 
and strategic documents.  
From outset of 
project and 
throughout 
implementation.  
Training in project 
management and other 
institutional strengthening 
activities.  
Formats and simple chart (s) 
showing responsibilities for 
project implementation, flow of 
funds, flow of activities, 
monitoring and follow-up.  
Project website (managed 
under MOALI website) 
Regular email updates on 
project activities and relevant 
developments in agribusiness.   
Sharing of information on 
project budget allocations; 
transparent process for 
selection for study tours, 
regional visits and other 
benefits and institutional 
strengthening activities.   
Gender and EMDP 
implementation training.    
EA = executing agency; EMDP = ethnic minority development plan; GAP = gender action plan; IA = implementing agency; MOALI = Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Irrigation; O&M = operation and maintenance.  
66 
X.  ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
106.  ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  project.28  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  shall  include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
executing agency and all project contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers. 
Individuals and/or entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible to participate in 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project.29  
107.  To support these efforts, relevant provisions are included in the loan agreement and grant 
agreements and the bidding documents for the project. The project design and implementation 
arrangements  provide  for  mitigation  of  corruption  risks.  Risks  associated  with  project 
management, including procurement and disbursement, will be mitigated by the engagement of 
PIC to advise and assist in the procurement of goods and services, and the engagement of other 
consultants.  The  project  will  also  establish  a  website  in  which  it  will  disclose  implementation 
progress, bid notifications and their results, and provide grievance mechanism against any corrupt 
practice. References on ADB’s Anticorruption Policy can be accessed through the following link: 
http://www.adb.org/integrity/. Guidelines on governance and anticorruption action plan are also 
available.30 
XI.  ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
108.  Parties  who  are,  or may  in the future  be,  adversely  affected  by the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects can 
voice,  and  seek  a  resolution  of  their  problems,  as  well  as  report  alleged  violations  of  ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make an effort in good faith to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.    Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, they then approach the Accountability Mechanism.31  
XII.  RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
109.  All revisions and/or updates during the course of implementation should be retained in this 
section to provide a chronological history of changes to implemented arrangements recorded in 
the PAM, including revision to contract awards and disbursement s-curves. 
28 Anticorruption Policy: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf 
29 ADB's Integrity Office web site: http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp 
30  Governance  and  Anticorruption  Action  Plan  II  Guidelines.  http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/GACAP-II-
Guidelines.pdf.  See  also  Sourcebook:  Diagnostics  to  Assist  Preparation  of  Governance  Risk  Assessments. 
http://www.adb.org/documents/books/Diagnostics-to-Assist-Preparation-of-GRAs/default.asp. 
31 Accountability Mechanism. http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp. 
Appendix 1 
67 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES 
A. 
Output  1:  Critical  agribusiness  value  chain  infrastructure  improved  and  made 
climate-resilient 
1. 
This output involves infrastructure improvements to increase farm productivity and crop 
diversification,  enhance  quality  of  agricultural  products,  and  increase  incomes  for  value  chain 
stakeholders. By incorporating climate smart agriculture (CSA) technologies, including irrigation 
and water management investments and supporting seed farms to provide quality climate-resilient 
seeds, the crop intensity is expected to increase. Investments in enhanced capacity for testing 
product  quality  and  incorporating  food  safety  measures  will  protect  consumers  and  increase 
potential for accessing new markets and increasing exports within and beyond Greater Mekong 
Subregion (GMS), which will create a premium incentivising investment further up the value chain.  
farm  and  post-harvest  machinery  and  equipment,  seed 
Key  activities  include  (i)  upgrading  infrastructure  (water  management,  farm  roads, 
2. 
buildings, 
testing  equipment, 
agrometeorological  stations,  etc.)  in  ten  Department  of  Agriculture  (DOA)  seed  farms32  for 
production of registered seeds of improved and/or climate-resilient varieties, for sale to private 
producers of certified seeds and eventually benefitting 156,000 farmers; (ii) renovating at least 
130 km of tertiary canals, rehabilitating 15 community ponds and reservoirs, constructing at least 
8000 shallow tube wells with some of them linked to drip and sprinkler technologies, and small-
scale  pumping  to  bring  an  additional  13,000  ha  under  irrigation  benefitting  at  least  35,000 
households; (iii) rehabilitating at least 300 km of farm feeder roads to climate-resilient condition 
to provide improved farm connectivity to markets and enable enhanced farm mechanization; and 
(iv)  upgrading  the  safety  and  quality  testing  equipment  and  instrumentation  in  MOALI  Plant 
Protection Division’s Pesticide Testing Laboratory and Food Safety Testing Laboratory, and the 
Ministry of Commerce (MOC) Commodity Testing and Quality Management Laboratory to meet 
ISO  17025  standards,  and  providing  food  safety  testing  kits  to  DOA  and  the  private  sector. 
Appropriate  adaptation  measures  will  be  included  in  the  design  of  infrastructure  to  withstand 
impacts of climate change. 
3. 
The  project  will  support  seed  farms  in  promoting  strong  links  with  the  private  sector, 
marketing,  and  business  development  services.  In  addition,  the  lead  seed  growers  and  seed 
producer associations near seed farms will be encouraged to be integrated under a public-private 
partnership for  seed multiplication  being  launched  by  the  Livelihoods  and  Food  Security  Trust 
Fund (LIFT) to ensure a guaranteed market for lead seed growers. The project will also support 
the formation of, and train water user groups to operate and maintain tertiary canals, community 
reservoirs and other water management infrastructure. 
4. 
The infrastructure investments will support the value chains of not only target commodities 
but also other crops and commodities in target areas. Interventions will incentivise investment in 
primary  and  secondary  processing,  leading  to  greater  employment  generation  in  the  CDZ, 
including for youth and women, and helping to decrease rural-urban migration. The interventions 
will  also  promote  public-private-community  partnerships  to  enhance  sustainability  and  equity. 
Women  and  other  vulnerable  groups  will  be  proactively  involved  in  the  identification  and 
implementation of gender- and nutrition-sensitive investments. 
1. 
Activity 1.1: Upgrading infrastructure in ten Department of Agriculture (DOA) 
seed farms for production of improved and climate-resilient seed 
32 Seed farms of the Department of Agricultural Research, including the Oilseed Crops Research Center in Magway, 
may be supported, subject to availability of funds. 
68  
Appendix 1 
This activity will support increased production of registered seeds at ten DOA seed farms 
5. 
by  at  least  20%  during  the  monsoon  season  and  at  least  40%  during  the  winter  and  summer 
seasons. This will be achieved through a package of infrastructure and equipment improvements. 
From the increased yield, the added registered climate-resilient seed is projected to total about 
390 more tons of rice seed, 65 tons of sesame, and 122 tons of pulses and beans produced over 
the project period. At least 375 private seed growers, who will purchase and grow these registered 
seeds and benefit from improved irrigation infrastructure and farm feeder roads (see below), are 
projected to produce about an additional 500 tons of certified Paw San rice seed, 3000 tons of 
certified  HYV  rice  seed,  130  tons  of  certified  chickpea  seed,  180  tons  of  certified  green  gram 
seed, and 70 tons of certified sesame seed each year. Approximately 156,000 farmers purchasing 
the certified seed will produce Paw San rice on about 6,715 hectares, HYV rice on about 38,278 
hectares, chickpea on about 1,689 hectares, green gram on about 4,556 hectares, and sesame 
on about 4,759 hectares. To ensure efficient distribution networks for the sale of certified seed at 
scale  to  these  farmers,  seed  farmers  will  be  encouraged  to  sell  through  a  public-private 
partnership for seed multiplication being launched by LIFT. 
Myanmar’s existing seed system lacks funds, technology, equipment, training, and other 
6. 
resources to meet seed market needs, especially for pulses and oilseeds.  This has resulted in 
less  than  1%  of  total  fam-level  seed  demand  being  met—0.12%  for  sesame,  0.13%  for  green 
gram, and 0.2% for chickpea, and 0.6% for sunflower. Recently, LIFT signed a grant agreement 
with  the  Awba  Group  to  establish  a  private  seed  company—Myanmar  Allied  Farmers  Seed 
Company (MAFSCO)—to produce, process, and market seed of priority crops, particularly beans/ 
pulses and oilseeds, with a focus to serve smallholder farmers in the Central Dry Zone (CDZ), 
where  improved/quality  seed  is  in  high  demand.  MAFSCO  will  be  a  locally-owned,  legally 
registered company that combines the organizational and governance principles of a cooperative 
with the legal structure and operating principles of a private company.  MAFSCO will be structured 
as a joint venture partnership of Awba Group and a cooperative owned and controlled by farmers.  
Total investment of the public-private partnership launched by LIFT-Awba group is about 
7. 
$10.72  million  including:  (i)  LIFT  CAPEX  of  $3.0  million;  (ii)  LIFT  OPEX  of  $3.75  million  ($2.5 
million for project implementation and $1.25 million for operational costs); and (iii) Awba Capital—
$3.97  million  (including  $0.85  million  in  operational  costs).    LIFT  CAPEX  translates  into  $3.0 
million in farmer share capital while Awba share capital is $3.12 million. The lead seed growers 
around seed farms will be encouraged to be integrated under this initiative. 
8. 
The  implementing  agency  for  this  intervention  will  be  the  DOA-Seed  Division  (SD)  of 
MOALI which will prepare specifications for upgrades at the seed farms, with assistance from the 
project implementation consultants (PIC). Procurement documents will be prepared by the project 
management  unit  (PMU)  and  tendered.  DOA  will  oversee,  with  assistance  from  the  PIC,  the 
installation of equipment and civil  works from the contractors. This  activity will closely link with 
Activity 2.3 – access to inputs.  
2. 
Activity  1.2:  Rehabilitating irrigation  and water  management infrastructure 
(tertiary  canals,  community  reservoirs,  and  shallow tube wells) to  climate-
resilient condition 
9. 
This  activity  involves  three  types  of  irrigation  infrastructure  improvement:  (i)  the 
rehabilitation of at least 130 km of tertiary canals that can irrigate approximately 6,000 hectares, 
(ii) the rehabilitation of 15 community-owned reservoirs used for irrigating approximately 1,000 
hectares  of  land  of  the  lead  seed  growers  and  their  associated  farmers’  groups,  and  (iii)  the 
installation of 8,000 shallow tube wells with some of them linked to sprinkler and drip irrigation 
technologies irrigating approximately 6,000 hectares.  
Appendix 1 
69 
a. 
Rehabilitation of Minor Canals and Community Reservoirs 
10. 
The impact of the improved irrigation infrastructure and improved water use efficiency is 
expected  to  increase  productivity  of  20%  of  monsoon  crops  and  40%  of  pulses,  beans,  and 
sesame crops in winter and summer. Farmers with better access and control of water resources 
will  grow  crops  with  higher  value.  With  the  improved  cropping  intensity  through  more  reliable 
irrigation,  the  supply  of  agricultural  commodities  will  be  increased,  and  the  value  chains 
strengthened.  
11. 
The  locations  identified  for  tertiary  irrigation  and  small  reservoir  improvements  were 
selected based on multiple criteria. First, all three CDZ regions (Magway, Mandalay, and Sagaing) 
needed  to  be  well  represented  with  project-supported  irrigation  subprojects.  Second,  all  three 
types of irrigation infrastructure are in demand in all regions and, necessarily, should be included 
in  each  region.  Third,  recipients  of  the  improved  irrigation  infrastructure,  especially  lead  seed 
growers  associated  with  farmer  groups,  agricultural  cooperatives  or  small-scale  industries 
organizations, should be linked or in a position to cost-effectively link with the value chains in their 
respective  area.  Fourth,  there  needs  to  be  opportunities  for  improving  water  management 
techniques and water use efficiencies, integrating CSA practices, growing climate-resilient crop 
varieties, increasing the cropping intensity, and enhancing the crop diversification. Fifth, where 
irrigation schemes are involved, the main and secondary canals need to be functioning without 
any  water  constraints  since  the  project  is  not  rehabilitating  main  and  secondary  canals.  This 
includes  locations,  such  as,  in  Shwebo  (Sagaing),  Chaungmagyi  (Mandalay)  and  Natmauk 
(Magway)  townships,  where  the  main  and  secondary  irrigation  schemes  will  be  renovated  by 
international projects funded by Japan International Cooperation Agency and ADB.  
12. 
The implementing agency for this intervention will be the Irrigation and Water Utilization 
Management  Department  (IWUMD)  of  MOALI  which  will  make  the  final  selection  of  schemes 
based on the selection criteria. Feasibility studies and detailed design consultants will be engaged 
by  the  PMU  in  consultation  with  IWUMD  to  undertake  designs  for  the  preparation  of  tender 
documents.  Civil  works contractors  will  be  engaged  by  IWUMD.  IWUMD  staff at township and 
regional  level  (to  include  seconded  staff)  will  undertake  construction  supervision,  with  support 
from the PIC.   
13.  With assistance from a feasibility study and detailed design (FSDD) contractor, IWUMD 
will identify schemes for rehabilitation against the following selection criteria:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
New  or  existing  (in  need  of  renovation)  minor  (tertiary)  canal  that  links  the 
distribution  canal  (of  a  dam  irrigation  scheme  or  pumping  irrigation  canal)  to 
existing or would-be on-farm ditches of a farmers group or agricultural cooperative 
(AC),  led  by  a lead  seed  grower  of  the  project or  a farmer  getting  registered or 
certified seed from the DOA seed farm. The farmers group or AC (registered with 
the  MOALI)  is  a  group  of  farmers  that  are  led  by  a  lead  seed  grower  that  are 
practicing  CSA  using  climate-resilient  seed  varieties  of  rice,  pulses,  beans,  or 
sesame; or new or renovated old pond or small reservoir that can be or is built on 
the above mentioned farmland; 
The command area of the subproject should be sufficient to demonstrate climate 
change  adaptation  measures  (improved  technical  design,  enhanced  water  use 
efficiency, good agricultural practices, and improved water use governance), and 
to ensure that the subproject would be more climate-resilient than current; 
The subproject should not be covered by other ongoing or proposed development 
projects financed by ADB or development partners;  
70  
Appendix 1 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
The subproject should not cause involuntary resettlement and should require as 
little land acquisition as possible;   
There  is  potential  for  cluster  (cooperative)  development  and  beneficiaries  to 
include vulnerable communities, poor and women farmers; 
Should be category B or C for involuntary resettlement;  
Should yield economic internal rate of return of at least 9% or more; and 
Should  enhance  capacity  of  the  beneficiaries  to  operate  and  maintain  irrigation 
schemes sustainably with little or no external intervention other than the normal 
extension services. 
14. 
In case of further need for prioritization, then the following criteria will also be added: 
(i) 
(ii) 
The subproject identified should have strong political and community ownership in 
terms  of  commitment  to  implement  climate  change  adaptation  measures  and 
ensure effective operations and maintenance (O&M);  
A  farmer  water  user  group  (FWUG)  or  farmer  water  user  community  (FWUC) 
already exists or there is evidence of high potential to establish a FWUG or FWUC; 
15. 
A number of schemes have already been selected. The FSDD firm will then undertake 
design (assessing technical, economic, social and environmental feasibility), and assist the PMU 
in preparing procurement documents, if deemed feasible. The PMU will tender the works to be 
undertaken by a civil works contractor; IWUMD will supervise construction with the assistance of 
the PIC. 
b. 
Installation of Tube wells with Sprinkler and Drip Irrigation 
16. 
For construction of shallow tube wells, townships will need to meet the following criteria: 
(i)  poverty  incidence;  (ii)  complementarity  with  other  food  security  and  rural  development 
interventions; (iii) potential for groundwater irrigation, (iv) geographic contiguity of townships to 
the  extent  possible,  and  (v)  non-overlap  with  other  similar  initiatives  by  the  government  and 
development  partners.  Based  on  these  criteria,  nine  townships  have  been  selected  as  having 
potential for increased groundwater extraction: Pakkoku, Magway, Aunglan, Natmauk, Pwintbyu 
in Magway region; Monywa, Shwebo, Yin Mar Bin, and Sarlangyi in Sagaing region. A final list of 
six will be determined at project start up through groundwater surveys to be conducted. Small-
scale  irrigation  for  bean,  pulses,  oilseed  and  crop  diversification  (mostly  vegetables)  will  be 
promoted  under  the  project.  Shallow  tube  wells  with  sprinkler  and  drip  systems  will  be  the 
preferred technology and solar pumps will be piloted on an innovation basis.  
17. 
Once townships have been selected, selection of beneficiaries will be done by the DRD 
(with  support  from  IWUMD),  following  community  driven  development  (CDD)  based  on 
identification of beneficiaries in accordance with the following selection criteria: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Have access to under-utilized aquifers (with good quality groundwater); 
Own <5 acres (2ha) of unirrigated crop land; 
In  the  lowest  income  quartile  of  land  owning  households  in  the  village  (using 
community-based wealth ranking); 
Be engaged in oilseed, beans, pulses and oilseeds production; 
Have participated in the project GAP and financial literacy training and willing to 
participate in ADFS); 
Must have a land title, or equivalent; and 
Beneficiaries can be individuals or groups. 
Appendix 1 
71 
Grants of up to 90% will be used to subsidize these investments. The beneficiaries will 
18. 
cover the remaining 10% tubewell installation cost plus the related operation and maintenance 
costs. Indicatively,  the  project  will  support  the  installation of  8,000  -  10,000  shallow  tube wells 
depending  on  groundwater  irrigation  potential,  subsidy  rates  and  beneficiaries  cofinancing 
capacity. 
19. 
Training on the use of sprinklers, drip and solar pumps will be provided as a package with 
the equipment provision under output 2. This will include training on appropriate irrigation volumes 
to prevent over-irrigation resulting in depletion of the water table and problems of salinity. 
20. 
As the implementing agency for this intervention (with support from the PMU and PIC), 
IWUMD  select  the  final  beneficiaries  based  on  the  prescribed  selection  criteria.  Drilling  and 
equipment  will  then  be  procured  by  the  farmers/farmers  groups  themselves.  Support  from 
International Water Management Institute (IWMI) may be sought during project implementation, 
especially about groundwater surveys. 
3. 
Activity 1.3: Improving connectivity and farm mechanization through 
climate-resilient farm road networks 
21. 
This activity will upgrade 300 km of farm feeder roads into all-weather roads, principally 
supporting  farm-access  to  enable  farm  mechanization  and  improve  farm-to-market  access  in 
selected townships.  
22. 
The  implementing  agency  for  this  intervention  will  be  the  Department  of  Rural 
Development  (DRD)  of  MOALI  which  will  oversee,  through  regional  and  township  offices,  the 
feasibility  and  detailed  design  undertaken  by  a  private  contractor,  with  support  from  the  PIC. 
Procurement documents for civil works will be prepared and tendered by PMU.  DRD will then 
undertake construction supervision of the contractor(s), with PIC support.  DRD will collaborate 
with the Department of Rural Road Development (DRRD) of the Ministry of Construction in this 
activity. Selection criteria include the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Should  be  an  existing  road  connecting  farms  to  the  existing  agricultural 
cooperative or other agricultural market center; 
Should complement ADB’s past, ongoing and future interventions and provide 
the  potential  for  higher  economic  growth  by  reducing  transport  costs  for  the 
movement of farm produce to agricultural markets; 
Should  have  a  strong  political  and  community  commitment  to  implement 
adaptation measures and support a realistic and technically viable O&M plan; 
Should be consistent with DRD priorities for rural development; 
Should be Category B or C for involuntary resettlement; 
Should be Category B or C for ethnic minority / indigenous people; 
Should be Category B or C for environment;  
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii)  Should yield economic internal rate of return of at least 9% or more; and 
(ix)  Must have at least 40% female beneficiaries. 
4. 
Activity 1.4: Strengthening infrastructure for agricultural quality and safety 
testing at the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MOALI) and 
Ministry of Commerce (MOC) laboratories 
This  activity  involves  upgrading  the  pesticide,  food  safety,  and  commodity  testing 
23. 
infrastructure  (equipment  and  instrumentation)  of  three  national  government  laboratories,  the 
MOALI – Plant Protection Division (PPD) Pesticide Testing Laboratory (PTL), the MOALI - PPD 
72  
Appendix 1 
Food  Safety  Testing  Lab  (FSTLAB),  and  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  (MOC)  –  Department  of 
Consumer Affairs (CA) Commodity Testing & Quality  Management Laboratory (CTQM). These 
three laboratories currently charge fees, albeit minimal, for the testing. Once the increased testing 
capability is in place, each laboratory will need to adjust its fees to be commensurate with the 
value of the test run.  In addition, this activity covers the provision of rapid reaction test kits to test 
the quality of produce being stored in private farms.  
a. 
Upgrading the MOALI – Plant Protection Division (PPD) Pesticide 
Testing Laboratory (PTL) 
24. 
The existing equipment at the Pesticide Testing Laboratory (PTL) has limited scope for 
testing  for  the  wide-ranging  content  of  pesticides  that  need  to  be  registered.  The  upgraded 
equipment will address this deficiency. 
25. 
The DOA Plant Protection Division (PPD) will be responsible for reviewing and approving 
the list of laboratory equipment to be purchased for the PTL (with assistance from the PIC). The 
PMU will then organise procurement.  
b. 
Upgrading the MOALI - PPD Food Safety Testing Laboratory (FSTLAB) 
26. 
The  Food  Safety  Testing  Laboratory  (FSTLAB)  is  well  facilitated  with  modern  testing 
equipment for testing agricultural produce and processed products. However, the lab lacks the 
necessary LC-MS/MS equipment for trace analysis of pesticide residue from agricultural produce. 
27. 
The DOA Plant Protection Division (PPD) will be responsible for reviewing and approving 
the list of laboratory equipment to be purchased for the FSTLAB (with assistance from the PIC). 
The PMU will then organize procurement.  
c. 
Upgrading the MOC – Consumer Affairs (CA) Commodity Testing & 
Quality Management Laboratory (CTQM) 
28. 
The laboratory equipment at the CTQM will be upgraded to be capable of efficiently and 
effectively  test  processed  commodities  for  all  types  of  contaminants,  including  mycotoxins, 
maximum residue limits, heavy metals, bacteria, and other contaminants. 
29. 
Specifications have already been prepared by CTQM professional staff which will need to 
be reviewed by the PMU (with PIC support) before bidding documents are finalized by the PMU.   
d. 
Rapid Reaction Test Kits 
is 
in 
Also 
included 
this  activity 
the  equipping  of 
the  public,  especially 
30. 
the 
MOALI/DOA/Extension, and private value chain stakeholders, farmer groups storing agricultural 
commodities, commodity collectors and processors, with the capability to rapidly test the quality 
of  the  commodity  being  stored  at  strategic  field  locations.  The  testing  of  the  product  quality, 
including testing for moisture, pH, mycotoxins, and various potential contaminants or impurities, 
at the post-harvest and primary processing stages, will provide the value chain stakeholders the 
information needed to identify food safety problems early on in the value chain, thus, ensuring a 
high-quality  agricultural  end  product.  The  project  will  supply  affordable  rapid  reaction  kits  that 
have good detection levels (20-100 ppb depending on the test). However, these tests (i) require 
robust sampling procedures (cleaning, grading, and sorting should be done before testing), if the 
results are to be representative of the lot and (ii) may include toxic reagents (except for the Aqua 
Afla-Test) that could accumulate in the environment unless properly disposed of or recycled.     
Appendix 1 
73 
The list of recipients and required equipment will be identified by the DOA and Myanmar 
31. 
Trade Promotion Organization (MyanTrade) of MOC based on transparent criteria (with support 
from the PIC), building on the specifications prepared at PPTA stage, and then sent to the PMU 
for procurement. DOA, and MyanTrade for processors will be responsible for disbursement and 
training on use, with assistance from the PIC.  
B. 
Output 2: Climate-Smart Agriculture33 and Agribusiness Promoted34 
This output will  enhance technical and institutional capacity to integrate climate change 
32. 
concerns  into  agriculture,  and  help  farmers  and  agribusinesses  to  enhance  productivity  while 
addressing climate change impacts. Key activities include: (i) deploying climate-resilient varieties 
of rice, beans, pulses and oilseeds; (ii) strengthening the capacity of seed growers, agro-dealers, 
and  regional  government  staff  on  appropriate  CSA  technologies  and  production  practices, 
certified seed production, farm mechanization and GAP, and of agribusinesses on business plan 
development, good manufacturing practices (GMP) and HACCP standards, value addition and 
food  quality  and  safety  improvement;  and  (iii) facilitating  access  to  inputs  (seeds  of  climate-
resilient  varieties,  quality  agrochemicals),  farm  mechanization  services  and  off-farm  rural 
livelihood opportunities, principally through establishing an agricultural digital finance service to 
benefit at least 35,000 smallholders.  
33. 
A new debit card-based agricultural digital financial service, secured against a $100 cash 
transfer  to  targeted  smallholder  farmers  held  in  a  compensating  balance  account  by  a  bank 
service provider, will finance seasonal credit for GAP-based farm inputs. Targeted farmers will 
have access to up to $300 annually to finance the purchase of improved seed, agrochemicals 
and  mechanization,  and  technical  services  from  registered  suppliers.  The  project  will  identify 
smallholder  beneficiaries 
interest  groups  utilizing  community-driven 
development processes. The project will also help stakeholders in activities covering post-harvest 
crop handling to improve quality and market access, value addition and joint contract harvesting 
operations. The project will train farmer groups, laboratory staff, and agribusinesses in operations 
and maintenance (O&M) of infrastructure built under output 1. 
through  common 
34. 
As  part  of  this  output,  farmers  will  be  introduced  to  new  technologies  related  to  (i) 
mechanization  equipment  for  land  preparation,  planting,  harvesting,  threshing  and  drying;  (ii) 
small  scale  on-farm  micro-irrigation;  (iii)  water  conservation;  and  (iv)  application  of  agricultural 
inputs. The project will also help stakeholders in activities covering (i) post-harvest crop handling 
to  improve  quality  and  market  access,  (ii)  value  addition,  and  (iii)  joint  contract  harvesting 
operations. The project will train farmer groups, cooperatives and  agribusinesses in operations 
and maintenance (O&M) of infrastructure. 
(i) 
Activity 2.1: Deploying climate-resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and 
oilseeds  
35. 
DOA will implement this activity, in cooperation with DAR. Yields of rice, beans, pulses 
and  oilseeds  grown  in  the  target  areas  are  adversely  impacted  by  climate  change.  Under  this 
33  FAO defines climate smart agriculture (CSA) as agriculture that sustainably increases productivity, enhances climate 
resilience (adaptation),  reduces/removes  greenhouse  gas  emissions  (mitigation),  and  promotes  achievement  of 
national food security and development goals. 
34  The  FAO  administered  technical  assistance  (TA)  funded  by  the  Global  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  Program 
(GAFSP)  will  complement  activities  under  this  output  by  (i)  disseminating  CSA  and  good  agricultural  practices 
through public and private extension and ICT-based technologies, (ii) building capacity of smallholder seed growers 
for seed multiplication and (iii) promoting farm mechanization through information campaigns and demonstrations.   
74  
Appendix 1 
activity,  the  project  will  support  the  government  to  develop,  trial,  and  release  climate-resilient 
varieties.35  This  could  include  the  development  of  a  non-shattering  variety  of  sesame.36  An 
agreement with the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) or similar organizations will be 
initiated to develop new varieties and improve land management and crop establishment, which 
are resource use (labor, water, energy) efficient, with reduced risk and drudgery, able to generate 
avenues for employment and economically attractive to youth and women. IRRI can also help in 
adoption of CSA practices such as alternate wetting and drying in rice-based cropping systems 
and seed storage in hermetic bags. 
36. 
The varietal characteristics will include tolerance to higher temperatures, drought, as well 
as  varieties  with  shorter  cropping  cycles.  Support  will  be  provided  to  MOALI  to  develop  a 
commercialization program with recommendations on the legal framework to develop intellectual 
property  rights  and  partial  cost  recovery  for  the  institution  in  the  long  run.  The  project 
implementation  consultants  will  provide  coordination  support  including  the  preparation  of  the 
terms of the agreement with IRRI or other organizations. 
(ii) 
Activity  2.2:  Conducting  training  for  farmers,  SMEs,  and  private  sector  on 
CSA 
Capacity building for farmers. The PIC will support the DOA-Extension Division (ED)  in 
37. 
providing capacity building to farmers and seed growers on appropriate CSA and GAP – such as  
(i)  promoting  more  diversified  and  nutrition-sensitive  farming  systems  through  appropriate  and 
efficient  use  of  fertilizer,  pesticide  and  water;  (ii)  strengthening  capacity  of  seed  growers  and 
farmer  groups,  agro-dealers,  and  regional  government  staff  on  CSA  and  GAP,  certified  seed 
production and testing; and (iii) promoting farm mechanization through information campaigns, 
farmer field schools (FFSs) and demonstrations. In total, 156,000 individuals are expected to have 
benefitted  from  the  capacity  building  activities.  Collaboration  with  other  departments  and/or 
divisions  will  be  needed  for  certain  activities,  such  as support  from  Department  of  Agricultural 
Cooperatives for organizational development of existing or establishing of new groups; IWUMD 
for water user groups; and DOA-SD, AMD, and DOA-LUD for specific technical training.   
38. 
Capacity  building  will  be  provided  through  several  mechanisms  including:  farmer  field 
school  (FFS)  approach  (especially  targeting  integrated  pest  management  (IPM)  and  seed 
producers); 
farmer-to-farmer  extension  approach;  enterprise-to-farmer 
extension;  increased  use  of  information  and  communication  technology;  participatory  on-farm 
trials and demonstrations implemented by lead farmers. 
lead-farmer  and 
Initial  activities  will  concentrate  on  the  design  of  suitable  guidelines  and  training 
39. 
methodologies as follows: 
(i) 
identify existing documentation of best practices or GAP for the targeted crops in 
the CDZ including their nutritional information. The agribusiness policy unit will be 
consulted which will be working on upgrading various standards (see Output 3); 
35  The National Agricultural and Forestry Research Institute (MOALI) is the government research agency responsible 
for increasing agricultural productivity, improving crop diversification and ensuring environmental sustainability and 
stability of rural livelihoods through agricultural research and technology utilization.  
36  DAR has had the introduction of non-shattering sesame seed as a priority for some time – however, no action has 
been taken.   
Appendix 1 
75 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii) 
upgrade of GAP guidelines by identifying suitable resource institutions or experts 
to review and improve the GAP guidelines and ensuring feedback sessions with 
farmers during the process; 
identify  trained  FFS  Facilitators,  either  from  DOA  or  from  NGOs,  who  could 
potentially be engaged as facilitators and trainers in modified FFS programs (e.g. 
for  seed  producer  groups  in  certified/good  quality  seed  production)  and  then 
implement FFS; 
identify  possible  trainers  on  specific  agronomic  topics  concerning  (i) GAP  for 
production, harvest, cleaning, drying and storage, and (ii) integrated nutrient and 
pest management, etc; 
in collaboration with target farmers, identify possible lead farmers per target village 
or by village tract and then design and implement a certifiable training program for 
the selected lead farmers with various modules such as (i) the role of lead farmers, 
(ii) responsibilities and their benefits, (iii) communication with fellow farmers in the 
village,  (iv)  technical  modules  depending  on  crop  or  other  agronomic  practices, 
and (v) facilitation of screening of extension videos. Such lead farmers (target of 
375) will include private seed growers who in turn will train approximately 5,625 
seed producers; 
identify  if  there  is  already  a  functioning  mobile  phone-based  extension  platform 
existing  in  Myanmar  (e.g.  DOA  Call  Center,  AWBA  smartphone  application; 
Golden Paddy, etc.) and if so, develop upgrading options or supply content; 
hold  discussions  with  DOA-ED  and  the  Farmer  Channel  on  adopting  IT-based 
extension  and knowledge  dissemination technologies to introduce the  approach 
being used for distributing GAP as well as nutritional information; 
organize  an  exposure  visit  for  DOA-ED  and  Farmers  Channel  to  neighboring 
countries  to  observe  the  IT-based  technologies  in  action,  and  learn  about  the 
advantage  of  combining  agricultural  extension  messages  with  messages  on 
improved nutrition; 
identify potential water user groups that could be trained on irrigation management 
and  maintenance.  The  IWUMD  will  be  involved  as  implementing  agency  in  this 
aspect.  Training  will  be  linked  to  those  areas  which  have  received  water 
infrastructure support under output 1. Approximately 5,625 farmers will be trained 
in improved water management and water use efficiency technologies, including 
training up to 5,000 poor farmers accessing water for irrigation from the project-
supported tube wells and rehabilitated community reservoirs. Training on the use 
of  sprinklers,  drip  and  solar  pumps  would  be  provided  as  a  package  with  the 
provision of the equipment from equipment dealers (as well as IWUMD). This will 
include  training  on  appropriate  irrigation  volumes  to  prevent  over-irrigation 
resulting in rise of the water-table and problems of salinity;   
establish a training program for agro-input dealers and farmers in the target areas 
and implement accordingly; 
facilitate  soil  testing  and  optimized  fertilizer  application  on  lead  farmers  fields 
following a participatory approach; 
develop or improve existing guidelines on fertilizer use in selected crops;  
develop or improve existing guidelines on integrated pest management in selected 
crops; and 
76  
Appendix 1 
(xiv)  produce  short  extension  videos  on  fertilizer  and  agrochemical  usage  and  train 
extension agents and lead farmers on the use of those videos in farmer meetings. 
40. 
Once packages are designed and training channels are identified, the project investment 
will  support  their  roll-out.  Feedback  loops  will  ensure  that  training  packages,  guidelines  and 
channels are continually improved. 
41. 
Capacity building for agribusinesses. Supported by the PIC and PMU, the Myanmar 
Trade  Promotion  Organization  (MyanTrade)  of  MOC  will  provide  capacity  building  for  climate 
smart  agribusinesses  including  training  on  business  plan  development,  GMP,  and  HACCP 
standards,  value  added  processing  (including  use  and  troubleshooting  of  primary  and  value 
processing machinery and equipment) and quality and safety improvement. Collaboration will be 
needed with other departments for certain activities, such as SME Division of the Department of 
Consumer Affairs of the MOC. Training will be provided on standards developed under Output 3.  
Activities will concentrate on the design of suitable guidelines and training methodologies 
42. 
as follows: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
identify  existing  documentation  of  best  practices  for  improving  product  quality 
along the downstream value chain (after the farm gate). This includes food safety, 
product  quality  assurance,  GMP,  GHP,  HACCP,  product  branding  and  market 
promotion. This will be done in parallel with standards development activities under 
Output 3; 
upgrade guidelines in a participatory manner; 
identify  external  training  providers  for  implementing  a  training  of  trainers  (ToT) 
approach; 
elaborate contract farming models (with the agribusiness policy unit in MOALI; and 
prepare capacity building modules. 
43. 
Once packages are designed and training channels are identified, the project investment 
will  support  their  roll-out.  Feedback  loops  will  ensure  that  training  packages,  guidelines  and 
channels  are  continually  improved.  As  a  result  of  this  activity,  (i)  at  least  50  value-added 
agribusinesses of rice, pulse, beans, and sesame will be trained in food safety, product quality 
assurance,  GMP,  GHP,  and  HACCP;  (ii)  at  least  10  value-added  agribusinesses  receive 
certificates  of  achievement  in  meeting  the  requirements  of  GMP  and  HACCP;    (iii)  over  5,625 
farmers, 20 primary agribusinesses, and six value added agribusinesses will be integrated into 
the  value  chains to  enable  their  products    reach  market-driven,  exportable  standards;  and  (iv) 
over  300  rice  millers,  100  pulses/beans  processors/exporters,  and  100  sesame  seed 
processors/exporters  participated  in  the  one-day  annual  workshops  for  promoting  the  export 
quality standards. Agribusinesses will also be supported to improve their marketing and branding 
in order to compete with imported products and to tap export markets. 
(iii) 
Activity 2.3: Implementing agricultural digital finance service for agricultural 
inputs, farm mechanization services and off-farm livelihood opportunities 
a. 
Seeds 
44. 
The DOA-SD will help facilitate an increase in the production and use of certified seeds. 
Considering other ongoing development activities in the sector, these activities will be coordinated 
in  collaboration  with  LIFT,  ISSD,  Agricultural  Development  Support  Project,  and  Korean 
Government supported activities concerning seed laboratories, and the Myanmar Fertilizer, Seed 
Appendix 1 
77 
and  Pesticide  Entrepreneur  Association.  Support  will  be  provided  by  the  PIC  to  the  DOA-SD 
undertake the following activities: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
facilitate  an  improved  collaboration  with  the  private  sector  to  assess  the  most 
demanded varieties of pulses and oil seeds with good qualities in terms of climate 
change resilience, pest and disease resistance, nutritional qualities, good market 
demand;  
liaise  with  DAR  to  plan  availability  and  production  of  breeder,  foundation  and 
registered seeds, and undertake field inspections; 
identify  farmers  in  the  targeted  townships  to  be  engaged  in  commercial  seed 
production  –  such  farmers  can  then  be  supported  to  access  fertilizer  and  
machinery  through the  Agriculture  Digital  Finance  Service  (ADFS)  and  capacity 
building; 
identify  seed  companies  interested  in  partnering  with  seed  producer  groups 
through  out-grower  scheme  arrangements  (with  embedded  training  included). 
Special attention should be given to the public-private partnership being launched 
by LIFT; and  
support business plan development for each DOA seed farm so that they become 
financially sustainable.  
b. 
Agrochemicals 
45. 
The DOA-PPD and DOA-Land Use Division (LUD) will help facilitate an increase in the 
production and use of registered agrochemicals. Support will be provided by the PIC to the DOA-
SD undertake the following activities: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
identify  preferred  retailers  and  agrochemical  testing  arrangements  with  the 
Myanmar Fertilizer, Seed and Pesticide Entrepreneurs Association; 
establish  a  list  of  interested  agro-input  dealers  in  the  targeted  townships  and 
village tracts who qualify to participate in the ADFS, training, and voluntary testing 
of inputs; and 
introduce  and  upscale  the  use  of  leaf  color  charts,  if  applicable,  for  some  rice 
growing farmers in the target area.  
46. 
Fertilizer-related activities will be implemented by DOA-LUD. Interventions will integrate 
with the ongoing LIFT and /IFCD project and will collaborate with representatives of the private 
sector  through  the  Myanmar  Fertilizer,  Seed  and  Pesticide  Entrepreneurs  Association.  In 
partnership  with  the  Association,  possible  partners  will  be  identified  to  implement  the  training 
programme  on  the  importance  of  soil  analysis  and  on  the  safe  and  appropriate  use  of  quality 
fertilizers for agro-dealers, public and private extension agents and farmers.  
47. 
Agrochemicals (other than fertilizers) related activities will be implemented by DOA-PPD. 
Interventions  will  engage  representatives  of  the  private  sector  through  the  Myanmar  Fertilizer, 
Seed  and  Pesticide  Entrepreneurs  Association.  In  partnership  with  the  Association,  possible 
partners will be identified to implement the training program on pesticide risk reduction, including 
training on the safe and appropriate use and safe disposal of pesticides for agro-dealers, public 
and private extension agents and farmers. MOALI has expressed interest in engaging the Centre 
for  Agriculture  and  Bioscience  International  (CABI)  in  promoting  plant  health  management 
practices in CDZ.  
78  
Appendix 1 
c. 
Farm Mechanization 
48. 
Promotion  of farm  mechanization  will  be  coordinated  by  the  Agricultural  Mechanization 
Department  (AMD)  and  the  DOA  -  Extension  Division  (ED)  in  cooperation  with  private  sector 
companies  and  cooperatives,  if  applicable.  Support  will  be  provided  by  the  PIC.  Means  of 
promotion  will  include  workshops  and  demonstrations  on  mechanization  and  training  on 
machinery  operation  and repair. Workshops  and  demonstrations  are  intended to  sensitize and 
inform  potential  clients  about  existing  and  innovative  mechanization  options  and  their  related 
advantages and disadvantages, as well as their costs. Participants will include private dealers, 
service providers, mechanics, repair workshops, MOALI staff, and farmers. Special emphasis will 
be put on machinery suitable for smallholder farmers, machinery suitable for the pulses based 
farming systems, and machinery supportive of climate smart interventions (direct seeding, deep 
placement of fertilizer, laser levelling, water saving irrigation technologies, etc.) 
49. 
Dissemination of information on existing mechanization options will be complemented by 
information on suitable financial products for machinery acquisition. Mechanization options should 
also be accompanied by financial analysis in order to assess the benefit of mechanization in real 
terms.  Training  on  machinery  operation  and  maintenance  for  dealers,  service  providers, 
mechanics,  and  farmers  will  complement  the  mechanization  support.  Training  events  can  be 
implemented in collaboration with private sector suppliers or through the training institutions of 
AMD. For example, the AMD Meikthila Training Centre’s equipment and curriculum is currently 
being improved and updated through the World Bank-funded Agricultural Development Support 
Project,  and  offers  suitable  training  courses  such  as  small  repairs  and  maintenance  of  power 
tillers. Increased demand for farm mechanization services can be supported through ADFS for 
eligible project beneficiaries.  
50. 
In terms of specific activities, the PIC will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
identify  the  leading  suppliers  of  mechanization  equipment  with  the  capability  of 
offering spare parts and after sales service; 
identify suitable and most needed mechanization options for farm and post-harvest 
operations with focus on pulses and oil seed crops; 
identify  the  most  needed  mechanization  requirements  and  options  for  female 
headed households to decrease their labor burden;  
identify  innovative  technologies  (no-tillage  or  minimum  tillage  options,  IRRI 
hermetic bags for seed storage, etc.) to be piloted for increased adoption;  
organize with private sector and DOA-ED and AMD mechanization demonstrations 
on lead farmers’ fields; 
assess  the  demand  for  machinery  operation  and  repair  skills  in  the  target  area 
(probably  focused  on  power  tiller  and  water  pump  maintenance)  and  organize 
training with private sector and/or AMD Meikthila Training Centre; 
support private sector agriculture mechanization contractors with applications for 
machinery procurement under the Hire Purchase Financing Program supported by 
the LIFT; and 
(viii)  work with selected AMD Agriculture Mechanization Stations to develop business 
plans  with  a  view  to  their  sustainable,  profitable  operation  and  eventual 
privatization. 
d. 
Agricultural Digital Finance Service (ADFS) 
51. 
Access to agricultural inputs and services will be facilitated through ADFS in collaboration 
with financial institutions. The scheme will target 35,000 beneficiaries (individuals, households, or 
Appendix 1 
79 
small farmer groups) with less than two hectares of land holding. The beneficiaries are required 
to participate in financial literacy trainings provided by the project. For each beneficiary, the project 
will deposit a non-withdrawable amount of $100 in a partnering bank(s) as financial collateral. The 
collateral is expected to encourage bank lending to rural households at a more affordable interest 
rate  (as  compared  with  30%  interest  rate  from  microfinance  institutions),  with  an  expected 
leverage of 2-3 times. Loan proceeds will be utilized using PIN-protected debit cards, which can 
be  redeemed  at  accredited  suppliers  and  service  providers.  Similar  mobile  phone  based 
electronic  cash  transfer  schemes  are  already  in  operation  in  Myanmar,  although  since  mobile 
phone  usage  among  the  rural  poor  is  not  widespread  in  Myanmar,  a  debit  card  is  proposed 
instead. The debit card will be connected to the private firms involved in seed production, agro-
dealers, private providers of agricultural services and soil and food safety testing laboratories. The 
technologies and services to be included in the ADFS could include certified seeds, agricultural 
inputs, mechanization and technical services, and soil testing, as well as specific equipment and 
materials necessary for off-farm rural employment. E-transfers will be carefully targeted, include 
contribution by beneficiaries and be implemented through mechanisms that ensure financial and 
technical sustainability will be achieved after this initial support.37 
52. 
Eligible beneficiaries will be mostly poor, climate-vulnerable crop producers owning less 
than  two  hectares  of  unirrigated  land,  or  farmer  groups,  who  are  interested  to  intensify  their 
oilseed and/or pulse crop production in adherence with established GAP standards. They will be 
selected based on specific criteria. Identification of beneficiaries should be done through common 
interest group of community-driven development (CDD) processes. 
53. 
Producers in the project area that would not qualify would have access to improved inputs 
on a commercial basis. Access to E-transfers for beneficiaries will be subject to attendance to 
capacity building and training events provided by the project on the proposed technologies (e.g., 
training  on  GAP,  on  use  and  maintenance  of  small-scale  irrigation  equipment  or  agricultural 
machinery, etc.).  
54. 
The  ADFS  (Appendix  4)  will  be  implemented  by  private  bank(s)  selected  through  a 
competitive tender process, with set up and coordination from DRD in collaboration with DOA and 
support from a specialized consulting firm contracted by the PMU. 
C. 
Output 3: Enabling Environment for Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Enhanced38 
55. 
This output will promote an enabling policy and regulatory environment for agribusinesses, 
identify opportunities for more effective private sector engagement in value chains, and provide 
improved weather, market and credit information services. Key activities include: (i) establishing 
an agribusiness policy cell within MOALI’s Department of Planning (DOP) for agribusiness policy 
and  standards  formulation  (including  farm-gate  standards  and  codes  of  practice),  research, 
analysis and advocacy, in collaboration with MOC; (ii) raising awareness and capacity of financial 
institutions to support climate-friendly agribusinesses and enhance access to financial services; 
and  (iii)  enhancing  weather,  market  and  credit  information  networks,  and  the  delivery  of  land 
through  building  capacity  of  Department  of  Agricultural  Land 
administration  services, 
Management  and  Statistics  (DALMS),  regional  and 
land 
management planning, and creating demand for such services at village level. 
township  administrations 
for 
37 Financial analysis will be used to assess the sustainability of the proposed voucher packages.  
38 The FAO administered GAFSP TA will complement activities under this output through: (i) the implementation of an 
off-farm skill development and entrepreneurship program; (ii) capacity building for nutrition planning at township and 
village  levels  and  the  promotion  of  nutrition  behavioral  change  at  household  level;  (iii) capacity  of  township 
administration for land management planning; and (vi) capacity of MOALI on monitoring and evaluation. 
80  
Appendix 1 
The DOP agribusiness policy unit will conduct studies on competitiveness and profitability 
56. 
of key value chains and on how to penetrate and expand access to high-end markets such as 
Japan. The DALMS will procure and use 5-meter resolution satellite imagery and develop land 
use mapping, land management plans, a GIS database and crop suitability maps. 
1. 
Activity  3.1:  Formulating  climate-friendly  agribusiness  policies  and 
standards, including PPPs, contract farming, GAP and organic certification, 
and gender aspects  
57. 
The project will support in setting up an agribusiness policy unit, with a Director and two 
research  officers  within  the  DOP  of  MOALI,  for  conducting  systematic  climate-friendly 
agribusiness  policy  formulation,  research,  analysis,  and  advocacy.  Policies  and  associated 
standards to be advanced include, but are not limited to: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
formulating  an  agribusiness  PPP  framework,  and  regulatory  frameworks  for 
contract farming; 
developing  farm-gate  product  standards,  that  encapsulate  the  current  empirical 
know-how of traders, and include the crucial parameters for the industry;  
developing a code of practice to prevent insect infestation and prevent and reduce 
mycotoxins in drying and storage facilities in line with the ASEAN initiative;  
developing  product  standards  higher  than  CODEX39    for  exporters  required  by 
international buyers in developed countries. It includes work on developing an ‘All-
industry’ Myanmar brand for pulses, based on agreed standards, for example, on 
the  MOC  ‘value  added’  specifications,  and  on  a  subset  of  the  CODEX 
requirements.  Assistance  may  also  include  identification  of  foreign  markets 
requirements and standards, prototyping, identification of labelling requirements, 
and  possibly  assistance  to  marketing  and  promotion  (post-border  access  to 
markets).  Processors  and  exporters  will  utilize  the  product  quality  standards  to 
improve their competitiveness; 
developing a system for certifying seeds; 
promoting the Shwebo Paw San rice registered as a GI rice; and 
undertaking  workshops,  as  well  as  public-private  forums,  meeting  annually  for 
inviting private sector involvement in the development of policy and standards, and 
for  building  public  awareness  on  newly  adopted  standards.  To  make  sure  that 
target value chain stakeholders understand the standards, training programs on 
standards application in the value chain activities will be conducted under Output 
2.   
58. 
The above activities will be carried out in association with MyanTrade and the Department 
of Consumer Affairs (CAD) in MOC, as well as other MOALI departments. The policy unit may at 
times simply be involved as a coordinator or facilitator. Value chain stakeholders will be invited to 
participate in the policy and standard formulation. The National Standards Committee will have a 
key  role  and  members  of  its  Technical  Committee  will  be  trained  by  the  PIC  in  standards 
development. The project will develop, communicate and institute the various standards to the 
value chain stakeholders through workshops. 
59. 
These reforms will create a more enabling environment for farmers and/or agribusinesses 
in doing business to be more cost effective and efficient at carrying out the value chain activities. 
The  targets  for  the  policy  work  include  (i)  establishing  an  agribusiness  framework  policy  and 
39 Codex Alimentarius is a series of international standards for food and agricultural products. They help ensure fair 
trade and consumer protection internationally. 
Appendix 1 
81 
contract  farming  policy  or  regulation;  (ii)  implementing  and  enforcing  regulations  of  the 
amendments to the fertilizer and pesticide policies; (iii) registering Shwebo Paw San rice as a GI 
rice  with  over  1,000  farmers  producing  the  GI  Paw  San  rice  once  it  has  a  trademark;  (iv) 
developing and implementing farm-gate product standards; (v) officially adopting the ASEAN code 
of  practices  for  commodity  drying  and  storage  in  Myanmar;  and  (vi)    developing  agribusiness 
public-private forum. 
2. 
Activity  3.2:  Improving  skills  of  financial  institutions  on  green  finance, 
including integration of climate risk screening in lending activities  
60. 
This  activity  will  be  implemented  directly  by  the  PIC  in  cooperation  with  the  financial 
institution(s) managing ADFS. This activity involves support for (i) training of private banks in the 
potential risk and return opportunities in agribusiness and the targeted value chains of the project, 
(ii)  and  innovative  financing  arrangements,  including  green  financing40,  that  these  financial 
institutions  can  employ  to  lower  risk  while  achieving  a  reasonable  return  to  both  the  financial 
institution and the agribusiness. The following targets are envisaged as a result of the training of 
financial institutions in climate-friendly agribusiness investments:  
(i) 
(ii) 
environmental  and  climate  screening  criteria  and  tools  to  guide  the  institutions’ 
lending activities will be developed; 
capacity  for  evaluating  loans  against  environmental  and  climate  risk  screening 
criteria will be built, so that financial institutions s can better judge if an investment 
is risky; 
(iii)  mitigation  and  adaptation  opportunities  will  be  integrated  into  the  institutions’ 
(iv) 
lending activities, as a condition for agribusinesses to follow; and 
linkages, trust, and shared understanding between lenders, borrowers, and input 
and  services  providers  regarding  climate-friendly  agribusiness 
investment 
opportunities will be strengthened.  
3. 
Activity  3.3:  Promoting  multimedia-based  weather,  market,  and  credit 
information networks in target townships 
DOP manages the activity with support from the PIC and DOA to facilitate the linkage of 
61. 
existing market price and credit information networks between local markets and traders with the 
target beneficiaries. Multiple relationships between market intermediaries (traders) operating  in 
local and regional markets and farmer groups to transmit crop specific market prices on a regular 
basis using SMS text messaging already exists and can be expanded. The project will work with 
a number of information systems, e.g. Greenway and Shwe Thee Nha, and can build on DOA’s 
call center which may also be used to provide such information to farmers and agribusinesses. 
The project anticipates 100% of the beneficiaries using the market information network to help 
40 "Green finance is a broad term that can refer to financial investments flowing into sustainable development projects 
and initiatives, environmental products, and policies that encourage the development of a more sustainable economy. 
Green finance includes climate finance but is not limited to it. It also refers to a wider range of „other environmental 
objectives,  for  example  industrial  pollution  control,  water  sanitation,  or  biodiversity  protection.  Mitigation  and 
adaptation  finance  is  specifically  related  to  climate  change  related  activities:  mitigation  financial  flows  refer  to 
investments  in  projects  and  programs  that contribute  to  reducing  or  avoiding greenhouse  gas  emissions  (GHGs) 
whereas  adaptation  financial  flows  refer  to  investments  that  contribute  to  reducing  the  vulnerability  of  goods  and 
persons  to  the  effects  of  climate  change."  (Höhne  /  Khosla  /  Fekete  /  Gilbert  (2012)).  “A  key  element  of  GF  is 
sustainable investment and banking, where investment and lending decisions are taken on the basis of environmental 
screening and risk assessment to meet environmental sustainability standards.” (Böhnke / Eidt / Knierim / Richert / 
Röber  /  Volz  (forthcoming):  How  to  Make  Green  Finance  Work  -  Empirical  Evidence  from  Bank  and  Company 
Surveys, German Development Institute / Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (DIE)) 
82  
Appendix 1 
negotiate  markets  and  market  prices  for  their  crops  and  products.  In  addition,  Food  and 
Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations  (FAO)  will  complement  this  output  by  providing 
capacity for establishing and operating early warning systems.  
4. 
Activity 3.4: Improving the delivery of land administration services through 
capacity building of regional and township administrations 
a. 
Capacity Building of DALMS, Regional and Township Administrations 
for Land Management Planning 
62. 
This  land  administration  services  feature  will  be  implemented  by  the  Department  of 
Agricultural Land Management and Statistics (DALMS) in MOALI, with support from PIC and an 
FAO  adviser.  Based  on  guidance  from  DALMS,  Natmauk  and  Shwebo  townships  may  not  be 
prioritized for land administration services because of ongoing support from other development 
partners. 
63. 
The  PIC  will  assist  DALMS  and  the  DOA-Land  Use  Division  (LUD)  in  developing  a 
planning tool at the national level and later be ground-truthed at the township level. Coordination 
will be done with the One Map Myanmar programme. Specific activities include:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
procuring a Rapid Eye 5m resolution satellite imagery covering an estimated area 
of 24,000 km²; 
mapping present participatory land use for the selected townships;  
fitting for purpose information compilation into a GIS database. This information 
includes: identified Vacant, Fallow and Virgin (VFV) land; already allocated VFV 
land  and  its  current  use;  outstanding  caseload  of  land  use  certification;  current 
coverage and programmed extension of the permanent forest estate as included 
in available District Forest Management plans; presence of irrigation infrastructure; 
settlement  locations;  depth  and  quality  of  groundwater;  coverage  by  cadastral 
maps (kwin); land administrative classification of farmland (different categories of 
Le and Ya land);  
establishing regional/township crop suitability for on and off-season production for 
a selection of relevant crops under different inputs scenarios using the Length of 
Growing  Period  model  developed  by  FAO  and International  Institute for Applied 
Systems Analysis (IIASA) as part of the Global Agro-Ecological Zoning approach; 
a pre-feasibility study will be required to identify the availability of climate and soil 
data; and 
producing 5-6 township land management plans to: 
▪ 
Identify  and  program  land  administration  interventions  at  township  level 
(identification of available unused and suitable VFV land and state-owned land 
for  possible  reallocation;  needs  for  further  land  use  certification  and  tenure 
regularization  –  grazing  lands,  fishponds;  degazetting  of  occupied  reserved 
forests; establishment of community forests; etc.)    
▪  Select  up  to  three  village  tracts  for  each  township  for  project  specific  land 
for  village 
administrative 
development committees and Village Tract Administrative Body of Farmland, 
village planning, land tenure regularization, capacity building)    
(institutional  capacity  building 
interventions 
Appendix 1 
83 
b. 
Capacity  Building  of  Township  Administrations  to  Deliver  Land 
Administration and Management Services 
64. 
The  project  will  support  capacity  building  of  township  land  administrations,  targeting 
DALMS  and  the  General  Administrative  Department  (GAD).  There  is  demand  from  the 
government to reform land administration, including the design of a model office at the township 
level to put into place more client-friendly service delivery. Demand for services at the local level 
including the handling of land transfers and land use changes on titled land will increase among 
others through investments projects that incentivize the poor and landless to access agricultural 
land. Commercial farmers will also rely on services of land use change to better respond to market 
dynamics  and mitigate  climate  events, the  latter underpinned  by  an  improved  and longer  term 
early warning system.  
65. 
Support will be provided by the PIC to DALMS to implement the following activities:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
capacity building to validate, strategize and implement participatory township land 
management plans produced at the national level;  
training in the use of modern, but cost effective and simple techniques to handle 
routine and new land administration tasks (land use titling, crop statistics, securing 
tenure over communal village lands and woodlots; reclaiming allocated but unused 
VFV land for reallocation to the poor) and land use planning;  
training  in  land  administration  systems,  participatory  land  use  planning,  work 
ethics,  and  relationship  with  clients,  land  dispute  management;  work  planning, 
report preparation, etc.; 
procuring basic equipment and possibly small infrastructural interventions with a 
focus on creating an easy accessible public counter for service delivery; 
making available digitized maps and satellite imagery to targeted village tracts; 
updating and completing kwin map coverage; and 
supporting  village  tracts  with  exercising  their  land  administration  services  and 
duties. 
66. 
The interventions will be rolled out based on proof of concept for one township in each of 
the three regions. An alternative would be to consider a two-tiered approach using a graduation 
model. In first instance, a basic package of capacity building and tools would be made available 
for 6 townships. Townships will need to respond to a basic set of deliverables up to an agreed 
standard to qualify for eligibility for a second round of support. 
c. 
Create Demand for Land Administration Services at Village Level  
67. 
Against a background of new land legislation adopted in 2012 (Farmland Law and VFV 
Land Law), a massive supply-driven land titling campaign, and issuance of up to 9 million land 
use titles over a period of two years but in the absence of any prior awareness creation, there is 
a major risk that land owners will continue managing their land in the informal sphere, rather than 
participating in formal land administration. This may have some negative consequences for poor 
households  in  case  land  legislation  is  applied  in  its  strictest  legal  spirit.  Hence,  the  need  for 
massive  awareness  raising  and  improved  demand-driven  and  accessible  land  administration 
service delivery.  
84  
Appendix 1 
The  services  of  locally  based  civil  society  organizations  (CSOs)  will  be  used  to  raise 
68. 
awareness.41  The  CSOs  should  have  experience  and  capacity  to  deliver  community-based 
facilitation and animation activities for land and natural resources management. Training of CSOs 
will be provided by the PIC to upgrade their knowledge and skills. Service delivery enters through 
the  Village  Tract  Farmland  Management  Body  (VTFMB),  and  then  through  the  village 
development  committees  (VDCs). In case  VDCs  do  not  yet  exist, they  will  need  to  be  created 
under the project. It is important to link all activities at local level to already existing initiatives and 
institutions,  such  as  village  development  planning  under  LIFT.  Thus,  there  is  a  need  for 
partnership with the DRD, and GAD. It is likely that at least part of the training will need to be 
integrated  with  ongoing GAD  capacity  building  efforts  of  local  administrations.    Activities to be 
undertaken by the CSOs include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
raising  awareness,  sensitizing  and  training  on  available  land  administration  and 
management  services  and  procedures  (acquiring  land  use  certificate  [LUC], 
transfer,  renting  and  leasing  land,  land  use  change,  land  transfers,  inheritance 
issues, co-titling, tenure securitization of village grazing lands and woodlots, etc..) 
with  a  major  theme  on  creating  an  awareness  campaign  on  the  rights  and 
obligations of holders of a LUC; 
building capacity of village-based land management institutions to deliver services; 
the VTFMB is responsible for some 13 tasks including keeping updated records 
on land use registration. Farmland Management Bodies (FMB) at the village level 
witness and record all land transfers. These institutions need to be exposed to the 
use of good practices; 
developing participatory village land management plans to strategize and demand 
services. Such plans indicate needs of interventions to secure grazing lands and 
outstanding family farmland certification; and 
delivering  services  such  as  land  certification,  recording  land  lease  contracts, 
recording land use changes, land dispute management, identification of VFV land 
for  possible  land  allocation  to  the  landless  and  poorer  households,  including 
women. 
41 For example, from the Land Core Group network (LCG) that counts some 10 organizations active in the CDZ. 
Appendix 2 
85 
PROJECT PERFORMANCE MONITORING SYSTEM 
1. 
This  document  presents  the  project  performance  monitoring  system  (PPMS)  for  the 
Myanmar:  Climate-Friendly  Agribusiness  Value  Chains  Sector  Project  funded  by  the  Asian 
Development  Bank  (ADB)  and  the  Government  of  Myanmar.  The  PPMS  is  developed  for 
monitoring the indicators and targets for outcome and outputs outlined in the project design and 
monitoring framework (DMF) and against those targets and indicators in the Gender Action Plan, 
social development and safeguards and those covenants as detailed in the loan agreement 
A. 
Impact and Outcome 
2. 
The  project  Impact  will  be:  agricultural  competitiveness  improved  (as  indicated  by 
enhanced productivity, climate resilience, quality and safety, value addition and rural household 
incomes).  The  outcome  will  be:  productive  and  resource  efficient  agribusiness  value  chains  in 
project areas developed. 
B. 
Outputs 
3. 
Output  1:  Critical  agribusiness  value  chain  infrastructure  improved  and  made 
climate-resilient. This Output involves infrastructure improvements to increase farm productivity 
and crop diversification, enhance quality of agricultural products, and increase incomes for value 
chain stakeholders. Key activities include (i) upgrading infrastructure (water management, farm 
roads,  buildings,  farm  and  post-harvest  machinery  and  equipment,  seed  testing  equipment, 
agrometeorological  stations,  etc.)  in  ten  Department  of  Agriculture  (DOA)  seed  farms42  for 
production  of  improved  and/or  climate-resilient  seed,  for  sale  to  private  producers  of  certified 
seeds and eventually benefitting 156,000 farmers; (ii) renovating at least 130 km of tertiary canals, 
rehabilitating 15 community ponds and reservoirs, constructing at least 8,000 shallow tube wells 
with some of them linked to drip and sprinkler technologies, and small-scale pumping to bring an 
additional 13,000 ha under irrigation benefitting at least 35,000 households; (iii) rehabilitating at 
least  300  km  of  farm  feeder  roads  to  climate-resilient  condition  to  provide  improved  farm 
connectivity to markets and enable enhanced farm mechanization; and (iv) upgrading the safety 
and quality testing equipment and instrumentation in MOALI Plant Protection Division’s Pesticide 
Testing Laboratory and Food Safety Testing Laboratory, and the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) 
Commodity  Testing  and  Quality  Management  Laboratory  to  meet  ISO  17025  standards,  and 
providing food safety testing kits to DOA and the private sector. Appropriate adaptation measures 
will be included in the design of infrastructure to withstand impacts of climate change. 
The  project  will  support  seed  farms  in  promoting  strong  links  with  the  private  sector, 
4. 
marketing,  and  business  development  services.    In  addition,  the  lead  seed  growers  and  seed 
producer associations near seed farms will be encouraged to be integrated under a public-private 
partnership for  seed multiplication  being  launched  by  the  Livelihoods  and  Food  Security  Trust 
Fund (LIFT) to ensure a guaranteed market for lead seed growers. The project will also support 
the formation of, and train water user groups to operate and maintain tertiary canals, community 
reservoirs and other water management infrastructure. 
Output 2:  Climate  smart  agriculture  and  agribusiness  promoted.43  This  output  will 
5. 
enhance technical and institutional capacity to integrate climate change concerns into agriculture 
42 Seed farms of the Department of Agricultural Research, including the Oilseed Crops Research Center in Magway, 
may be supported, subject to availability of funds. 
43  The  FAO  administered  technical  assistance  (TA)  funded  by  the  Global  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  Program 
(GAFSP)  will  complement  activities  under  this  output  by  (i)  disseminating  CSA  and  good  agricultural  practices 
86 
Appendix 2 
and help farmers and agribusinesses to enhance productivity while addressing climate change 
impacts. Key activities include: (i) deploying climate-resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and 
oilseeds; (ii) strengthening the capacity of seed growers, agro-dealers, and regional government 
staff on appropriate CSA technologies and production practices, certified seed production, farm 
mechanization  and  good  agricultural  practices,  and  agribusinesses  on  business  plan 
development, good manufacturing practices (GMP) and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points 
(HACCP) standards, value addition and food quality and safety improvement and (iii) facilitating 
access to inputs (seeds of climate-resilient varieties, quality agrochemicals), farm mechanization 
services and off-farm rural livelihood opportunities, principally through establishing an agricultural 
digital finance service to benefit at least 35,000 smallholders.  
6. 
A new debit card-based agricultural digital financial service, secured against a $100 cash 
transfer to targeted poor smallholder farmers held in a “compensating balance” account by a bank 
service  provider,  will  finance  seasonal  credit  for  good  agricultural  practice-based  farm  inputs. 
Targeted farmers will have access to up to $300 annually to finance the purchase of improved 
seed,  agrochemicals  and  mechanization and technical  services from registered suppliers. The 
project  will  identify  smallholder  beneficiaries  through  “common  interest  groups”  utilizing 
community-driven  development  processes.  The  project  will  also  help  stakeholders  in  activities 
covering  post-harvest  crop  handling  to  improve quality  and  market  access,  value  addition  and 
joint  contract  harvesting  operations.  The  project  will  train  farmer  groups,  laboratory  staff,  and 
agribusinesses in operations and maintenance (O&M) of infrastructure built under output 1. 
7. 
Output  3:  Enabling  environment  for  climate-friendly  agribusiness  enhanced.  This 
output  will  promote  an  enabling  policy  and  regulatory  environment  for  agribusinesses,  identify 
opportunities for more effective private sector engagement in value chains, and provide improved 
weather,  market  and  credit  information  services.  Key  activities  include:  (i)  establishing  an 
agribusiness policy cell within MOALI’s Department of Planning (DOP) for agribusiness policy and 
standards formulation (including farmgate standards and codes of practice), research, analysis 
and  advocacy,  in  collaboration  with  MOC;  (ii)  raising  awareness  and  capacity  of  financial 
institutions to support climate-friendly agribusinesses and enhance access to financial services; 
and  (iii)  enhancing  weather,  market  and  credit  information  networks,  and  the  delivery  of  land 
through  building  capacity  of  Department  of  Agricultural  Land 
administration  services, 
land 
Management  and  Statistics  (DALMS),  regional  and 
management planning, and creating demand for such services at village level. 
township  administrations 
for 
Project Area.  The project will focus on strengthening agribusiness value chains in the 
8. 
three regions of the CDZ, namely, Sagaing, Mandalay, and Magway regions.    
9. 
Project Costing. The project cost is estimated at $64.92 million, $40.5 million from the 
ADB,  $22.0  million  from  the  Global  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  Program,  $0.99  million 
contributed by project beneficiaries and $1.43 million from the Government of Myanmar.  
10. 
Project Implementation Arrangements.  The national level coordination will be provided 
by  a  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  which  will  be  chaired  by  the  Minister  of  MOALI  and 
comprising representatives (at the level of Director General or above) of the MOPF, MOC, MOI, 
and MONREC will provide oversight, coordination, and policy guidance in all aspects of Project 
implementation. Other ministries may be invited to attend as observers when specific issues are 
being  discussed.  In  order that  decisions  are made quickly,  it  is recommended that the  various 
Steering  Committee  members  will  be  at  least  the  rank  of  Director  General.  The  Steering 
through public and private extension and ICT-based technologies, (ii) building capacity of smallholder seed growers 
for seed multiplication and (iii) promoting farm mechanization through information campaigns and demonstrations.   
Appendix 2 
87 
Committee may invite persons and agencies to discuss specific agenda items, when required. 
For more effective decision making, the persons attending should not exceed 20 people.  
11. 
A Project Management Unit (PMU), headed by the Project Director, will be supported by 
the Project Manager. Finance Officer, Procurement Officer, M&E Officer, Safeguards Officer and 
Administrative Officer and each implementing agency will have Project Coordinators. DOA, DRD 
and IWUMD will assign Finance Officers and Procurement Officers to manage the financial and 
procurement activities of the project. There will be regional representatives in each of the three 
Regional  Government  Offices  in  Sagaing,  Mandalay,  and  Magway  to  coordinate  subproject 
activities with the PMU and with project-supported value chain stakeholders, assist the PMU M&E 
and Safeguard Officers in monitoring and safeguards work, respectively, in subproject activities, 
assist in organizing the venues for project training, meetings, etc., keep the regional, district, and 
township  officials  aware  of  the  project’s  progress,  and  regularly  report  on  subproject 
developments, issues, and concerns.    
12. 
The Project Implementation Consultants (PIC), other contracted technical specialists and 
government professional staff serving the project as resource persons will be responsible for a 
wide-ranging set of technical assistance, capacity building, and training. The technical areas that 
will be covered by PIC include agribusiness policy, irrigation, post-harvest handling and storage, 
contract farming, Farmer Field School operations, seed production and certification, food safety 
and  standards  development,  agro-processing,  brand  development  and  marketing,  crop 
insurance, and green/agribusiness financing. Along with the technical areas, social development 
and gender, social safeguards, and environment and climate change aspects of the project will 
be led by PIC consultants with the assistance of the PMU Safeguards Officer. An International 
Financial  Management  Expert  and  an  International  Procurement  Expert  will  train  the  PMU 
counterparts  at  the  start  of  the  project  in  the  systems  development,  work  planning,  operating 
procedures, and coordination. An Administrative Assistant will serve within the PMU to address 
all  administrative  activities  of  the  overall  PMU.  A  cell  within  the  Policy  Unit  (currently  in  the 
formation stage) of the DOP of the MOALI will be created by the project for carrying out climate 
smart  agribusiness  policy  work,  including  policy  formulation, research,  analysis,  and advocacy 
activities that serve to enhance the enabling environment for the stakeholders to operate more 
efficiently and cost effectively in the targeted commodity value chains. The cell will be staffed by 
a PIC National Agribusiness Policy Unit Director and two National Research Officers, on carrying 
out policy work in agribusiness policy and the other in Climate Smart Agricultural policy.   
Implementation Progress Startup Activities Table 
Activity 
Open advance account & 
subaccounts 
PIC recruitment 
Deadline 
Status 
88 
Appendix 2 
C. 
Key Activities and Milestones 
1. Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate-resilient 
1.1 Upgrade infrastructure in ten DOA seed farms for production of improved and climate-
resilient seed (Q3 2019–Q4 2023).  
1.2 Rehabilitate irrigation and water management infrastructure (tertiary canals, community 
reservoirs, and shallow tube wells) to climate-resilient condition (Q2 2019–Q2 2025).  
1.3 Improve connectivity and farm mechanization through climate-resilient farm road networks 
(Q1 2020–Q3 2022). 
1.4 Strengthen infrastructure for agricultural quality and safety testing (Q3 2019–Q4 2022).  
Output 2: Climate-smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted  
2.1 Deploy climate-resilient varieties (Q3 2019–Q2 2025) [G/CD]. 
2.2 Conduct training for farmers, SMEs and private sector on CSA (Q3 2019–Q1 2025) [G/CD, 
GE]. 
2.3 Implement agricultural digital finance service for agricultural inputs, farm mechanization 
services and off-farm livelihood opportunities (Q1 2020–Q4 2024). 
Output 3: Enabling environment for climate-friendly agribusiness enhanced  
3.1 Formulate climate-friendly agribusiness policies and standards, including public-private 
partnerships, contract farming, GAP and organic certification, and gender aspects (Q2 
2019–Q4 2023) [G/CD]. 
3.2 Improve skills of financial institutions on green finance, including integration of climate risk 
screening in lending activities (Q2 2020–Q4 2024) [G/CD, GE]. 
3.3 Promote multimedia-based weather, market and credit information networks in target 
townships (Q1 2020–Q4 2023) [G/CD, GE]. 
3.4 Improve the delivery of land administration services through capacity building of regional 
and township administrations (Q1 2020–Q2 2025) [G/CD,GE].  
Project Management Activities  
•  Mobilize project implementation consultants and procure equipment, furniture and vehicles 
(Q1-Q2 2019). 
•  Establish PPMS, and conduct needs assessment for specific project management skills 
(Q1-Q2 2019). 
•  Customize learning modules to fit participant needs (Q3 2019) [G/CD, GE]. 
•  Deliver and evaluate training courses for 200 staff (35% female) from various levels (national, 
provincial and district) in project management, procurement, financial management, gender, 
social and environmental safeguards (Q2 2020–Q4 2024) [G/CD, GE]. 
1. 
Safeguards  
Subproject/Contract  Social 
safeguard 
assessment 
Social 
Safeguard 
screening 
Resettlement Plan 
Environment 
assessment 
Completed  Ongoing  Completed  Ongoing 
Subproject 1 - name 
completed 
Yes 
Yes, no or 
NA 
Yes or no 
Subproject 2 - name 
Subproject 3 
completed 
Under 
review 
yes 
In progress 
Subproject 4 
2. 
Procurement  
A brief write up and review of the procurement plan. 
Appendix 2 
89 
Procurement of Goods and Equipment 
Package 
Package 1 
Package 2 
Package 3 
Estimated Amount ($)  Award Date  
Insert amount 
Insert date 
Contract Amount ($) 
Insert amount 
 Works contract progress 
Scheduled 
Completion  
Insert date 
Time elapsed  
Physical progress (%) 
Months 
Percent 
Allocation ($) 
61 million 
7 million 
Amount disbursed 
Insert amount 
Percentage  Target 
Amount allocated ($) 
Amount committed ($) 
 Paid ($) 
Subproject/contract 
Contract one 
Contract 2 
Contract 3 
Disbursements 
Loan Category  
ADB 
MYA 
Financial Progress 
Item 
Goods 
Contract 1 
Contract 2 
Consulting Services 
Works 
Contract 1 
Contract 2 
Contract 1 
Contract 2 
90 
Appendix 2 
D. 
Project Performance  
The project’s performance against the targets set out in the DMF for outcome, outputs and inputs 
is reported in the table below: 
DMF Targets Vs Achievements 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
Achievements 
Outputs 
By 2025: 
1. Critical agribusiness 
value chain infrastructure 
improved and made 
climate-resilient 
1a. 10 DOA seed farms produced at least 
3,000 tons of HYV rice seed, 130 tons of chickpea, 
180 tons of green gram, and 70 tons of sesame 
annually (2017 baseline: 378 tons HYV rice, 
25 tons of chickpea, 36 tons of green gram, and 
20 tons of sesame) to benefit at least 156,000 
persons (80,000 female members) in 35,000 
households (2017 baseline: 0) 
1b. About 13,000 ha of additional area brought 
under climate smart water management through 
rehabilitating 130 km of tertiary canals (6000 ha), 
15 community reservoirs (1000 ha) and installing 
8,000 shallow tube wells (6000 ha) to benefit at 
least 156,000 persons (80,000 female members) in 
35,000 households (2017 baseline: 0) 
1c. At least 300 km of farm roads rehabilitated to 
climate-resilient condition (2017 baseline: 0) 
1d. Crop product quality and safety testing 
infrastructure in pesticide testing laboratory, 
FSTLAB and CTQM upgraded leading to 
ISO 17025 certification to test at least 2500 
samples per year (2017 baseline: 1100)   
2. Climate-smart 
agriculture and 
agribusiness promoted 
2a. At least four (1 rice, 1 chickpea, and 2 sesame) 
climate-resilient varieties released (2017 baseline: 
0) 
2b. Skills and knowledge of at least 300 lead seed 
growers in certified seed production, and 50,000 
farmers (40% women) in CSA, GAP and 
agribusiness improved (2017 baseline: 0) 
2c. At least 35,000 farmers (40% women) adopted 
GAP standards for bean, pulse and oilseed 
production (2017 baseline = 0) 
2d. At least 50,000 farmers (30% women) adopt 
water use efficient technologies and develop 
capacity to operate and maintain small scale 
irrigation schemes (2017 baseline: 0) 
2e. At least 50 agribusiness dealers and service 
providers, and 500 farmers (30% women) trained in 
farm machinery operation and maintenance  
Appendix 2 
91 
Achievements 
Results Chain 
3. Enabling environment 
for climate-friendly 
agribusiness enhanced 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
2f. At least 35,000 households (156,000 persons, 
80,000 females) benefitted from agricultural digital 
finance to access improved agricultural inputs, farm 
mechanization services and off-farm livelihood 
options (2017 baseline: 0) 
3a. Agribusiness policy unit established in DOP  
3b. At least three climate-friendly and gender-
responsive agribusiness policies, ** including a 
PPP framework focusing on agribusinesses 
formulated (2017 baseline: 0) 
3c. At least 100 rice millers, and 50 pulses/beans 
/sesame processors and exporters, including 30% 
women-led and/or owned***, adopted GMP and 
HACCP standards (2017 baseline: 0) 
3d. Skills and knowledge of at least 50 staff, 
including 30% women, from financial institutions in 
green finance improved (2017 baseline: 0) 
3e. Weather, market and credit information 
systems at DOP upgraded to provide timely 
information to at least 50,000 community-level 
supply chain stakeholders, including 25,000 
women (2017 baseline: Not available) 
3f. Skills and knowledge of at least 50 staff, 
including 30% women, improved in land 
administration systems and services**** (2017 
baseline: 0) 
92 
Appendix 2 
3. 
Gender Action Plan   
The project’s progress against the Gender Action Plan is presented in the table below.  
Gender Action Plan Targets Vs Achievements 
Date of update:  
Project Title:  
Country:  
Project No.: 
Type of Project (Loan/Grant): 
Approval and Timeline:  
Gender Category:  
Mission Leader:   
Project Impact: 
Project Outcome: 
Gender Action Plan 
(GAP Activities, Indicators and 
Targets, Timeframe and 
Responsibility) 
Progress to date (as of ______) 
(This should include information on period of 
actual implementation, sex-disaggregated 
quantitative updated (e.g. number of participating 
women, women beneficiaries of services, etc.), 
and qualitative information. However, some 
would be on-going - so explain what has 
happened so far towards meeting the target. 
Issues and Challenges 
(Please include reasons why 
an activity was not fully 
implemented, or if targets fall 
short, or reasons for delay, 
etc., and provide 
recommendations on ways 
to address issues and 
challenges) 
Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate-resilient 
1. Ensure critical agribusiness 
VC infrastructure is responsive to 
the needs of women and men 
2. 
Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted 
1. 
2. 
Output 3: Enabling environment for climate-friendly agribusiness enhanced 
1. 
2. 
Comments/ Remarks:  
Accomplished by :      _________________________________ 
Date Accomplished:  _________________________________ 
Appendix 2 
93 
Data Management: The process of data management consists of data collection, data 
13. 
communication, analysis and reporting.   Data will be collected on all the indicators defined in the 
DMF by the PIC, the PMU, and the Implementing Agencies. The data collected will be reported 
to the M&E officer of the PMU who will be supported by the PMU Project Director and the relevant 
PIC  team  members,  particularly  those  working  in  management,  procurement,  and  subproject 
implementation. The social development, gender inclusion, social safeguards, and environmental 
management and climate change adaptation aspects of the subprojects will be monitored by the 
PIC Experts and Specialists in close collaboration with the Regional Representatives of the PMU, 
and the IAs. The Regional Representatives (MOALI and MOC) will play an important role in the 
collection of data during the subproject implementation process and capacity building activities 
14. 
The  PIC  and  the  PMU  will  compile  the  information  on  each  of  the  subprojects  and  the 
PMU will aggregate and analyze the ensuring the necessary details and data are relevant to verify 
performance  and  to  evaluate  the  outputs.  The  PMU  will  subsequently  update  the  PPMS  with 
support of PIC.  
Data on indicators related to minor canals, farm feeder roads, and storage facilities will be 
15. 
monitored by the PMU’s Regional Representatives as well as the DOA of MOALI. All concerned 
ministries  will  monitor  gender,  social  safeguards  and  development  and  the  capacity  building 
activities linked to the subprojects.  
16. 
Status of Compliance with Loan Covenants: There are a number of loan covenants, 
out of which the PPMS will indicate and report the number where compliance has been achieved, 
partly complied and are ongoing and are still not met or are not yet due. The list of covenants 
under relevant categories and their status of compliance as of a certain date is provided in the 
table below.   
Status of Compliance with Loan Covenants  
No: 
Covenant 
Loan Agreement 
Reference 
Compliance 
status 
Remarks 
Financial 
Safeguards 
Social Development 
Economic 
Others 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
Problems and Issues during Implementation.   The final section of the PPMS report 
17. 
will describe any problems caused by delayed project implementation over the last 6 months. The 
list of actions taken and the status of proposed actions are recorded. 
Reporting.  The PPMS will be updated every 6 months from the start to end of the project. 
18. 
It will be sent to ADB by 30 January and 30 July every year.  
94  
Appendix 2 
ANNEX 2.1: SAMPLE Progress Report Outline 
A. 
Introduction and Basic Data 
total estimated project cost and financing plan; 
Provide  the  following:  ADB  loan  number,  project  title,  borrower,  executing  agency(ies), 
implementing agency(ies); 
• 
•  status of project financing including availability of counterpart funds and cofinancing; 
•  dates of approval, signing, and effectiveness of ADB loan; 
•  original and revised (if applicable) ADB loan closing date and elapsed loan period based on 
original and revised (if applicable) loan closing dates; and 
•  date of last ADB review mission. 
B. 
Utilization of Funds (ADB Loan, Cofinancing, and Counterpart Funds) 
Provide the following: 
•  cumulative  contract  awards  financed  by  the  ADB  loan,  cofinancing,  and  counterpart  funds 
(commitment of funds to date), and comparison with time-bound projections (targets); 
•  cumulative  disbursements  from 
the  ADB 
(expenditure to date), and comparison with time-bound projections (targets); and 
re-estimated  costs  to  completion,  need  for  reallocation  within  ADB  loan  categories,  and 
whether an overall project cost overrun is likely. 
loan,  cofinancing,  and  counterpart  funds 
• 
C. 
Project Purpose 
Provide the following: 
•  status of project scope/implementation arrangements compared with those in the report and 
recommendation of the President (RRP), and whether major changes have occurred or will 
need to be made; 
•  an assessment of the likelihood that the immediate development objectives (project purpose) 
will be met in part or in full, and whether remedial measures are required based on the current 
project scope and implementation arrangements; 
•  an  assessment  of  changes  to  the  key  assumptions  and  risks  that  affect  attainment  of  the 
development objectives; and 
•  other project developments, including monitoring and reporting on environmental and social 
requirements that might adversely affect the project's viability or accomplishment of immediate 
objectives. 
D. 
Implementation Progress 
Provide the following: 
•  assessment  of  project  implementation  arrangements  such  as  establishment,  staffing,  and 
• 
funding of the PMO or PIU; 
information relating to other aspects of the EA’s internal operations that may impact on the 
implementation arrangements or project progress; 
•  progress or achievements in implementation since the last progress report; 
•  assessment of the progress of each project component, such as,  
• 
•  procurement  of  goods  and  works  (from  preparation  of  detailed  designs  and  bidding 
recruitment of consultants and their performance; 
documents to contract awards); and 
Appendix 2 
95 
the performance of suppliers, manufacturers, and contractors for goods and works contracts; 
• 
•  assessment  of  progress  in  implementing the  overall  project  to  date  in comparison with the 
original implementation schedule—quantifiable and monitorable target, (include simple charts 
such  as  bar  or  milestone  to  illustrate  progress,  a  chart  showing  actual  versus  planned 
expenditure,  S-curve  graph  showing  the  relationship  between  physical  and  financial 
performance, and actual progress in comparison with the original schedules and budgets; and 
•  an  assessment  of  the  validity  of  key  assumptions  and  risks  in  achieving  the  quantifiable 
implementation targets. 
Sample Implementation Schedule 
E. 
Compliance with Covenants 
Provide the following: 
• 
the borrower's compliance with policy loan covenants such as sector reform initiatives and EA 
reforms, and the reasons for any noncompliance or delay in compliance; 
the borrower’s and EA’s compliance with financial loan covenants including the EA’s financial 
management,  and  the  provision  of  audited  project  accounts  or  audited  agency  financial 
statements; and 
the  borrower’s  and  EA’s  compliance  with  project-specific  loan  covenants  associated  with 
implementation, environment, and social dimensions. 
• 
• 
F. 
Major Project Issues and Problems 
Summarize the major problems and issues affecting or likely to affect implementation progress, 
compliance with covenants, and achievement of immediate development objectives. 
Recommend actions to overcome these problems and issues (e.g., changes in scope, changes 
in implementation arrangements, and reallocation of loan proceeds). 
96 
Appendix 3 
GENDER ACTION PLAN (GAP) MONITORING TABLE 
Date of update:  
Project Title:  
Country:  
Project No.: 
Type of Project (Loan/Grant/TA): 
Approval and Timeline:  
Gender Category:  
Mission Leader:   
Project Impact: 
Project Outcome: 
Gender Action Plan 
(GAP Activities, Indicators and 
Targets, Timeframe and 
Responsibility) 
Progress to date (as of ______) 
(This should include information on period of 
actual implementation, sex-disaggregated 
quantitative updated (e.g. number of participating 
women, women beneficiaries of services, etc.), 
and qualitative information. However, some 
would be on-going - so explain what has 
happened so far towards meeting the target. 
Issues and Challenges 
(Please include reasons why 
an activity was not fully 
implemented, or if targets fall 
short, or reasons for delay, 
etc., and provide 
recommendations on ways 
to address issues and 
challenges) 
Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and made climate-resilient 
1. Ensure critical agribusiness 
VC infrastructure is responsive to 
the needs of women and men 
2. 
Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted 
1. 
2. 
Output 3: Enabling environment for climate-friendly agribusiness enhanced 
1. 
2. 
Comments/ Remarks:  
Accomplished by :      _________________________________ 
Date Accomplished:  _________________________________ 
Appendix 4 
97 
AGRICULTURAL DIGITAL FINANCE SERVICE (ADFS) 
1. 
The  Climate-Friendly  Agribusiness  Value  Chains  (CFAVC)  Sector  Project,  to  be 
implemented in Magway, Mandalay and Sagaing regions of Myanmar’s central dry zone (CDZ), 
will  improve  rice,  bean,  pulse  and  oilseed  production,  processing  and  marketing  in  the  project 
area, with a focus on irrigated smallholder production systems. At the smallholder level, this will 
be  achieved  through,  inter  alia,  improved  male  and  female  smallholder  producer  access  to 
irrigation, quality crop inputs, mechanization and technical advisory services, increased land use 
right security, the development of good agricultural practices and improved access to financial 
services.  
2. 
Male  and  female  smallholder  farmers  in  Myanmar  currently  have  limited  access  to 
financial  services.  The  Myanmar  Agricultural  Development  Bank  (MADB)  principally  finances 
paddy production — MMK 150,000 per acre (up to 10 acres) — and, only to a very limited extent, 
bean, pulse and oilseed production. MADB provides MMK 50,000 per acre for other crops (up to 
10 acres) (on paper).  MADB disbursed $1.13 billion during the 2016 monsoon season, but just 
$153 million  in  the  winter  (post-monsoon/dry  season)  when  beans,  pulses  and  oilseeds  are 
primarily  produced.  This  gap  in  access  to  financial  services  remains  one  of  Myanmar’s  most 
pressing  development  challenges.  Improving  access  to finance  for  unserved  and  underserved 
market segments is critical to expanding rural households economic opportunities and reducing 
chronic undernutrition, while generating positive gender, social and economic benefits. 
3. 
A targeted, CFAVC project Agricultural Digital Finance Service (ADFS) that will provide 
male and female smallholder producers with access to seasonal credit to purchase quality inputs 
for bean, pulse and oilseed production in the CDZ is proposed because: (i) there are known crop 
technologies  and  management  systems  that  generate  sustainable  and  profitable  productivity 
gains in the project area, but currently have low adoption among smallholder farmers; (ii) there is 
sufficient  complementary  infrastructure  and  institutions  to  support  financial,  technical  and 
mechanization  services  and  market  activities  for  these  commodities;  (iii) the  input  distribution 
network  is  dense  enough  to  support  increased  quality  crop  input  use;  and  (iv) the  proposed 
intervention  can  be  targeted  to  poor  landowners.  Seasonal  credit  for  crop  inputs  and  linked 
supporting  services  will  be  directed  at  producers  who  otherwise  would  not  use  inputs  (for 
example, due to affordability or risk aversion constraints), but who will  make productive use of 
any supporting interventions they can obtain. 
4. 
The objective of ADFS is to: (i) accelerate adoption of climate-smart technology for bean, 
pulse and oilseed production for 35,000 male and female smallholder producers; and (ii) catalyze 
commercial banks to provide sustainable short- and medium-term financial services for working 
capital and irrigation technology. The ADFS intervention, which will have credible time-bound exit 
options,  will  be  part  of  a  comprehensive  climate-smart  program  to  improve  bean,  pulse  and 
oilseed  productivity  in  the  CDZ.  It  will:  (i) help  underwrite  risks  of  early  adoption  of  new 
technologies  (new  varieties,  certified  seed,  mechanization,  good  agriculture  practice  (GAP) 
standards) to help achieve economies of scale; (ii) “thicken” associated value chains and input 
supply  markets;  (iii) raise  land  and  labor  productivity  with  overall  increases  in  on-farm  labor 
demand;  (iv) pilot  a  mechanism  for  sustainable  and  scalable  financial  service  delivery  to 
smallholder producers; and (v) promote new relationships among input providers and smallholder 
producers  through  interlocking  arrangements  linking  input  sellers,  seasonal  finance  providers, 
and produce buyers. This approach is consistent with the LIFT strategy for rural households with 
land, labor and/or commercial potential to step up the value ladder and out of poverty through 
increases  in  labor  and  land  productivity,  as  well  as  through  enhanced  capacity  to  market 
production. 
98 
Appendix 4 
5. 
The  theory  of  change  is  that  incentivized  access  to  seasonal  credit  for  crop  inputs  will 
increase smallholder farm profitability and reduce the perceived risk for producers with a limited 
knowledge of GAP and other labor and land productivity efficiency opportunities. The hypothesis 
is that access to financial services through a low cost, low risk credit delivery mechanism, when 
combined with improved access to quality crop inputs and sound technical advice, would lead to 
rapid, sustainable improvement in land and labor productivity, meeting bean/pulse/oilseed market 
demands and, overall, contribute to national agricultural growth. This would be operationalized 
by: (i) community-based identification of poor households with available land, labor and irrigation 
water access; (ii) the development of GAP standards for the targeted oilseed and pulse crops; 
(iii) the  up  skilling  of  public  and  private  extension  service  providers,  including  farmer-to-farmer 
and enterprise-to-farmer advice; and (iv) the development of a ’compensating balance’ secured 
line of credit delivered through a debit card-based financial service.  
Figure A4.1: Theory of Change: Smart subsides expand oilseed and pulse crop production 
A. 
Digital Retail Finance Package44 
The project will establish a digital retail finance program that will enable targeted male and 
6. 
female  smallholder  producers  to  access  discounted  credit45  to  purchase  seeds,  fertilizers, 
herbicides and pesticides, machinery services, and GAP-based information services in support 
of increased bean pulse and oilseed production. Under separate funding, targeted smallholder 
44 The description of the digital finance program draws on: (i) MercyCorps E-Transfer Implementation Guide, Master 
Card Centre for Inclusive Growth (https://www.mercycorps.org/sites/default/files/E-TransferGuideAllAnnexes.pdf).  
45 The digital finance package would enable smallholder farmers to access private bank finance, for which the Central 
Bank of Myanmar (CBM) has set a fixed interest rate of 13 per cent per annum. This represents a significant discount 
in an environment where inflation is averaging around 7% per annum and  the “market interest rate” is 19 per cent 
(TCX estimate), or the 30 percent per annum MFI interest rate, or informal finance of 48 percent and higher.   
Appendix 4 
99 
producers will also receive GAFSP financial support for the establishment of bore water-based 
irrigation systems on their dryland farms.  The digital retail finance program will be designed to: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
secure  sustainable  smallholder  access  to  private  bank  seasonal  input  finance 
through the interlinkage of private banks, agro-dealers and smallholder producers; 
provide farmers with freedom to select inputs of their choice, thereby promoting 
agricultural diversification (subject to GAP recommendations and a negative list of 
agrochemicals); and 
crowd  in  more  private  sector  in  agro-input  distribution,  thereby  promoting 
competitiveness and transparency in the supply and distribution of inputs. 
7. 
The  project  will  adopt  a  proven  community-driven  development  (CDD)  approach  to 
facilitate  community  identification  of  poor,  climate-vulnerable  male  and  female  crop  producers 
owning less than 3 acres of unirrigated land who are interested to intensify their oilseed and/or 
bean/pulse crop production in adherence with project-established GAP standards. Effective social 
mobilization will be carried out to make sure that all members of the community understand what 
the ADFS entails, its purpose and activities, and who will be targeted as beneficiaries or otherwise 
directly  involved,  and  why.  This  process  will  ensure  that  particular  groups  of  people  including 
women, people of lower societal perception, the disabled, the extreme poor, the less educated, 
and minority ethnic groups are empowered and included in a clear and transparent beneficiary 
selection processes. This process would be built around and awareness of sensitivities regarding 
community  level  politics  and  culture,  with  a  strong  understanding  of  existing  power  structures, 
economic relationships, social hierarchies, and entrenched practices (see Figure A4.2 for further 
details  on  community-based  targeting).  Selected  male  and  female  beneficiaries  will  be  in  the 
lowest income quartile of land owning households in their villages. The land belonging to targeted 
producers will need to be in aquifers suitable for borehole irrigation. Targeted producers, either 
individually or in groups, will be provided with a grant to install one acre each of dry season drip 
or sprinkler irrigation on their land. The successful installation of the irrigation system will trigger 
the issuance of a mobile phone-based digital finance account for the beneficiary. 
Figure A4.2: Elements of intra-community targeting using a CDD approach 
8. 
The digital retail finance package will enable beneficiaries to secure seasonal credit for 
the  purchase  of  GAP-identified  seeds  and  agrochemicals,  and  mechanization  and  technical 
100 
Appendix 4 
advisory services from certified suppliers.  Input supplier eligibility will be based on: (i) registration 
in  the  districts  in  which  producers  are  located  and  quality  of  inputs  conforming  to  national 
standards, which will be ascertained through: (a) physical checks of the agricultural inputs held 
by  the  agro-dealers  at the  beginning  of the  program;  and  (b)  additional physical  checks  of the 
agricultural inputs held by agro-dealers during the program; (ii) ability to ensure adequate stock 
of listed agricultural inputs; (iii) ability to provide invoices to farmers participating in the voucher 
program, as evidence of sale and for record keeping; (iv) willingness and availability to be trained; 
(v) experience  participating  in  similar  programs;  and  (vi) trading  history  in  agricultural  inputs. 
Mechanical  service  providers  (land  preparation,  spraying,  weeding,  harvesting,  etc.)  will  be 
evaluated for the quality and suitability of their machinery and will be required to participate in a 
project-sponsored  training  program  delivered  by  the  National  Farm  Mechanization  Training 
Centre in Meiktila (Mandalay region). Technical advice service providers will need to be registered 
through MOALI. 
B. 
Agricultural Digital Finance Service  
The  CFAVC  project  will,  through  a  competitive tender,  invite financial service providers 
9. 
(FSPs) to research and develop a new digital retail financial service customized for meeting the 
working  capital  requirements  of  smallholder  bean/pulse/oilseed  producers  —  providing,  at  the 
start, digital credit of up to MMK 136,500 ($100 dollars) per acre for up to three acres per client.  
The new financial service will be secured against a $100 conditional cash transfer by the project 
from  the  GAFSP  fund  to  each  participating  smallholder  farmer,  that  will  be  deposited  into  a 
“compensating balance” in the smallholder’s name, for a fixed term of five years. 46   
The project will, subject to beneficiary technical and financial and digital literacy training, 
10. 
provide a conditional cash transfer of $100 to targeted male and female smallholder producers.  
The  cash  transfer  will  be  deposited  in  a  commercial  bank  compensating  balance  account 
established  for  each  participating  smallholder  producer.    Collateral  is  provided  through  the 
compensating balance, being a minimum balance maintained in a client’s deposit account, and 
used to offset the cost (risk and transactional) incurred to set up the agricultural loan.  Smallholder 
producers can then leverage the compensating balance to borrow $100 per acre for up to three 
acres, secured against the compensating balance. 
11. 
In  addition  to the  business  of  incremental,  secured  lending  to  smallholder  farmers,  the 
commercial  bank  gets  the  added  benefit  of  a  five-year,  non-interest-bearing  deposit  with  an 
estimated  worth of  $0.9 million  (return  of  4.5  percent  compounded  over  five  years).    Financial 
collateral and earnings from the non-interest-bearing deposit is estimated to be nearly 65 percent 
against the total loans disbursed of $10.5 million. 
12. 
The  ADFS  will  leverage  private  sector  capital  to  create  sustainable-lending  financial 
services for male and female smallholder producers through the development and rollout of digital 
retail  loans  with  lower  transaction  costs  than  traditional  lending  mechanisms.  In  addition,  the 
market of new financial services initiated by this support will lead to scalable market development 
through injection of private capital.  Given the rapidly changing environment in Myanmar, and, in 
particular, the growth in mobile phone penetration and customer-facing cash agent channels (e.g. 
WAVE Money) the project is proposing a change in the delivery channel from a bank’s branch 
network, to a digital financial services channel.  An advantage of using a digital channel for the 
commercial bank is lowered transaction costs after the initial account registration. The commercial 
46 The use of compensating balances is a well-established microfinance practice — mandatory savings for access to 
credit. 
Appendix 4 
101 
bank does not need to meet the participating male and female to evaluate or to service each loan 
as an agent (e.g. an input supplier) performs both the disbursement of the loan and collection of 
repayments.  Furthermore, compensating balances that are non-interest bearing compensate the 
commercial  bank  for  the  costs  incurred  in  servicing  low-income  clients.    The  compensating 
balance account will reduce maintenance costs per deposit and loan account from where they 
are now - more than $6 per year. 
13. 
To achieve a rapid start up of the program, the payment system for the smallholder loans 
will  initially  be through  a  debit  card  that  can  only  be  used  with project/bank certified  suppliers, 
including farm mechanization and technical service providers and fertilizer/seed/chemical input 
suppliers.  This allows the project to monitor and evaluate at the lowest transactional costs how 
loan funds are being invested. In the medium term, the project will explore the delivery of these 
services through a personal digital wallet, accessible through a cell phone.47 
14. 
The effective subsidy under the program (in addition to the $100 conditional compensating 
balance grant) is derived from smallholder farmers access to the commercial bank lending interest 
rate,  the  subsidy’s  value  being  the  difference  between  the  Central  Bank  of  Myanmar’s  (CBM) 
maximum commercial bank loan interest rate of 13%  annually, against the market interest rate 
of 19%  per annum (TCX estimate), the 30 percent per annum MFI rate, or informal finance at 
48%  per  annum  and  higher.    The  grant  element  (compensating  balance)  in  this  agricultural 
finance  program  is  an  effective  way  of  rationalizing  and  targeting  financial  service  access  to 
maximize production, lower transaction costs, limit political patronage and build a credit history. 
15.  Majority of male, and especially female smallholder producers that will be targeted lack a 
formal financial  history.   The  use of  collected  digital  data  is key  to informing commercial  bank 
decision-making. Analytics from the data collected under this program will be used to underwrite 
risk (credit score), and, in the long term, lower transaction costs to make agricultural retail lending 
mainstream and financially feasible.     
16. 
The MOALI Department of Rural Development (DRD) will be responsible for coordinating 
the  ADFS.  DRD  will  be  responsible  for:  (i) coordinating  the  community  identification  of 
beneficiaries;  (ii) recording  their  personal  and  economic  details  (name  of  household  head,  ID 
number,  household  size,  number  of  economically  active  persons,  land  size,  cropping  pattern, 
livestock ownership, etc.), verifying that information and maintaining a register of beneficiaries; 
(iii) training  and  raising  awareness  of  the  program  among  beneficiaries;  (iv) distributing 
information, education and communication materials (posters and pamphlets) on how to use the 
ADFS; (v) facilitating beneficiary access to public and private GAP-qualified  technical advisers; 
(vi) reporting  on  the  overall  process;  and  (vii) coordinating  independent  baseline,  post-planting 
and post-harvest surveys. 
17. 
DRD  will  either  directly  manage,  or  supervise  the  contracted  delivery  of  an  ADFS 
monitoring and evaluation program that will monitor that: (i) the designated beneficiary has the 
47  Telecommunications  and  mobile  phone  penetration  have  grown  rapidly  in  Myanmar  in  a  short  time,  with  mobile 
phones and call rates becoming affordable in 2012.  Following this development, digital payment systems such as 
WAVE Money was launched in 2014.  Data collected in July 2017 in a nationwide survey of the general population 
reveals that men and women report access to a mobile phone in their households in equal numbers, and that mobile 
phone penetration is high (88.5 per cent of rural households).47  Data on phone usage is mixed.  WAVE Money’s 
data indicates that men are more likely to use phones for social media than women.  In general, although smartphone 
ownership is high, usage tends to be for only a few apps.  Importantly, although women increasingly have access to 
smartphones, their digital and financial literacy is not always on par with the requirements for accessing and utilizing 
these digital payment systems. 
102 
Appendix 4 
debit card and nobody else (checks through national ID cards and the PIN); (ii) prices of inputs 
from certified suppliers are in line with the general market; (iii) supplies of inputs and services are 
sufficient to meet the demand; (iv) types of commodities and services purchased under the E-
voucher  program  are  registered;  and  (v) beneficiaries  are  receiving  the  full  value  of  their  E-
vouchers and are not discounting them for cash with the dealers. Communities will be empowered 
to participate in monitoring the program through a participatory monitoring and evaluation system. 
All monitored information will be gender disaggregated. 
Eligible  ADFS  Financial  Service  Providers  (FSPs)  will:  (i) be  registered  in  Myanmar  to 
18. 
provide financial services; (ii) have previous experience with electronic debit cards; (iii) have the 
ability to maintain multiple client accounts that will be drawn on only when a farmer purchases 
inputs from registered suppliers through the use of the card; (iv) have the ability to restrict inputs 
on the card to the categories of agricultural inputs specified; (v) have the ability to monitor the 
types  of  purchases  in  real  time;  (vi) have  the  ability  to  manage  a  system  that  can  produce 
management reports with the required information (i.e. input type, quantity, unit price, amount per 
farmer, name of agro-dealer); (vii) be able to provide training to DRD staff, agro-dealers and other 
partners on: (a) the debit card transaction system; and (b) agricultural inputs to be redeemed; and 
(viii) have the capacity for a short set-up time in order to ensure quick implementation. 
19. 
The FSPs for the debit cards will be responsible for: (i) the production of the debit cards; 
(ii) the  management  of  the  technical  system  that  supports  the  debit  card  system  and  of 
transactions  through  an  electronic  payment  system;  (iii) the  development,  operation  and 
maintenance of a front- and back-end electronic system that secure the completion of transactions 
between  debit  card  holders  and  the  agro-dealers/service  providers;  (iv) the  provision  and 
installation of point of sale devices at agro-dealer /service provider outlets; (v) training on the debit 
card system of agro-dealers, implementing partners and DRD management and M&E teams; and 
(vi) the provision and management of an online data monitoring system that allows for on-the-
spot viewing of transactions against client accounts. Minimum specifications48 for a debit system 
are detailed in Annex 4.1. 
20. 
The system design should take account of risks associated with the compensating balance 
debit card system including: (i) lost or stolen electronic cards; (ii) bias during beneficiary selection; 
(iii) price fixing by participating agro-dealers; (iv) inability of selected agro-dealers to maintain a 
consistent supply; and (v) delay in redemption of inputs owing to network failure. The following 
mitigation measures should be put in place: (i) debit cards must be protected by a PIN number 
and, preferably photo identification - when lost or stolen, the beneficiary will inform the FSP, who 
will stop the card and issue a replacement; (ii) during beneficiary selection, bias will be minimized 
by following CDD-based community identification of beneficiaries in accordance with set criteria; 
and  (iii) price  fixing  can  be  minimized  through  monitoring  agro-dealer/service  provider  prices 
against  manufacturers  recommended  prices  and  by  prices  offered  by  other  dealers/service 
providers in the township. 
48 These minimum specifications have been developed by MercyCorps based on field experience in Haiti, Congo 
Figure A4.3. CFAVC project ADFS flow of funds and services 
Appendix 4 
103 
C. 
Service Provider Selection 
Based on the project ADFS details, including location, compensating balance and lending 
21. 
amounts, the expected project  distribution schedule and reporting formats, the project will invite 
expressions of interest (EoI) from eligible FSPs detailing: (i) the type of technology that will be 
used for the service; (ii) the FSPs agent network and liquidity management capacity; (iii) indicative 
product cost; (iv) expected time to first debit card goods/services purchase; (v) FSP data handling 
and protection systems; and (vi) reporting systems offered. All EoIs will include references from 
previous clients. Potential FSPs expressing interest in the program will be assessed against a set 
of issues detailed in Annex 4.3. Short-listed FSPs will be invited to submit detailed proposals in 
accordance  with  ADB  procurement  guidelines.  A  bid  checklist  is  provided  in  Annex 4.4.  The 
successful FSP(s) will be required to sign a “Data Protection and Security Agreement” as detailed 
in Annex 4.5.  
Selected FSPs will enter into a PPP agreement with MOALI to share the cost of developing 
22. 
and delivering the ADFS, the terms and conditions of which will be subject to negotiations guided 
by the ADFS specifications detailed in Annex 4.1. FSP contribution under the PPP will be at least 
33%  of  the  development  cost,  supplied  in  cash  and/or  kind,49  with  potential  FSPs  prepared  to 
offer higher PPP contribution levels more likely to be selected for ADFS delivery.  
D. 
Project Documentation 
In parallel with the development of the FSPs product, the project will develop Standard 
23. 
Operating Procedures for compensating balance debit card transactions covering (i) geographic 
targeting;  (ii) beneficiary  selection;  (iii) beneficiary  registration;  (iv) vendor  selection;  (v) vendor 
distribution  and  redemption  process;  (vi) vendor  reconciliation  &  repayment  process;  (vii) debit 
card  transfer;  (viii) monitoring,  reporting  and  reconciliation;  and  (ix) accounting  treatment.  The 
49 Subproject staff time, office facilities, etc. 
104 
Appendix 4 
project  will  also  develop  a  beneficiary  training  program  (e.g.  GAP  technical  training,  financial 
literacy and digital literacy) commencing with a beneficiary skill assessment, which will lead to the 
development of a hands-on training program that will be field tested before finalization. Beneficiary 
training programs will be supported by project-trained community-based peer trainers. 
Table A4.1: Assumptions and Risks 
Risk 
Commercial banks not 
interested to invest in rural 
digital financial services 
Risk 
Likelihood1 
L 
Risk 
Severity1/ 
H 
Smallholder farmers 
reluctant to borrow for crop 
input procurement 
Input suppliers unwilling to 
accept digital credit card 
finance 
M 
L 
H 
M 
Market failure leads to 
inability of farmers to repay 
crop input loans 
M 
M 
1/L = low; M = Moderate; H= High 
Assumptions/Mitigating measures 
•  Project will provide substantial 
financial incentive for bank 
participation; 
•  Commercial bank engagement in 
digital financial services existent and 
expanding 
•  Combination of credit access at 
competitive prices, appropriate GAP 
technologies, improved input quality 
and pluralistic advisory services will 
overcome farmer risk aversion 
•  The digital credit card will 
immediately credit input suppliers 
accounts; 
•  Input suppliers already engaged in 
various forms of pre-financing of crop 
input procurement; 
•  Relatively high density of input 
suppliers will ensure crop input access 
even if all suppliers don’t participate 
•  The compensating balance 
payment largely protects participating 
banks from loan default; 
•  Smallholder farm households have 
multiple sources of income which helps 
buffer price/market downturns for a 
specific crop; 
•  Holistic market failure across the 
bean. pulse and oilseed commodities 
is unlikely; 
Appendix 4 
105 
ANNEX 4.1: MINIMUM SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS50 
Summary of General Compensating Balance Debit Card Requirements 
A. 
Summary of Product Needs:  
An electronic debit card platform shall deliver functionality in a number of key areas, and 
1. 
will specifically:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Enable debit card distribution to program participants.  
Enable  transactions  between  participants  and  approved  vendors,  permitting 
payment, up to a capped limit, for locally available goods and services, according 
to program rules.  
Provide  access  to  a  centralized  management  platform  that  supports  DRD 
monitoring of the system.  
2. 
DRD  is  willing  to  accept  the  most  suitable  hardware  and  transaction  process  used  by 
participants and local vendors for debit card transactions. This could include cards with magnetic 
strips  or  chips  redeemed  at  Point  of  Sale  devices,  voucher  codes  redeemed  through  SMS  or 
USSD  messages,  or  smartphone  applications  that  scan  barcodes  or  accept  voucher  codes. 
Proposals must include a centralized management platform that is accessible online and provides 
easy and quick access to debit card transaction data.  
B. 
3. 
Minimum Specifications  
Selected electronic voucher systems will be able to meet the following requirements:  
a. 
b. 
Program Set up Requirements  
(i) 
The  system  must  support  registration  of  individual  participants  and 
vendors.  
The system will accept uploads of spreadsheets containing participant and 
vendor profile data.  
The system will allow DRD, through the FSP, to add or remove additional 
participant or vendor profiles throughout the program cycle.  
The system must allow changes and edits to participant and vendor profiles 
(e.g., add missing data, correct incorrectly entered data, etc.).  
The system must support definition of debit card purchase rights (and the 
borrowing cap and validity period of each debit card).  
All  funds  will  be  recorded  and  tracked  in  the  Commonly  Transactional 
Currency identified for each deployment.  
The management platform is available in English and Burmese. 
Communication Requirements  
(i) 
Error messaging will be provided when transactions fail to process. Error 
messaging  should  be  visible  to  the  participant  and  vendor  and  should 
include reasons for failure and suggested remedy. Errors should also be 
logged in the management platform. Specific handling of transaction errors 
and error messaging should be described in the proposal.  
Successful  transaction  messaging  should  also  be  provided,  which  will 
notify  vendors  and  participants  about  successful  transactions  and 
remaining account balances.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(ii) 
50 MercyCorps E-Transfer Implementation Guide, Master Card Centre for Inclusive Growth, Annex 1. 
106 
Appendix 4 
(iii) 
System  is  capable  of  providing  transaction  and  account  total  updates  to 
vendors and participants upon their request (for participants account total 
= currency amount or quantity of goods left, for vendors this account total 
= total amount sold in established billing cycle).  
c. 
General Transaction Requirements  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Vendors must be provided with a means to authenticate the identity of a 
participant attempting a transaction.  
The system must debit participant accounts following a transaction.  
Transactions will be identified by a unique transaction number.  
Failed transactions should also be assigned a transaction number.  
The  system  will  track  transactions  by  the  following  attributes:  unique 
transaction number, vendor, participant, date, time, amount/quantity spent 
and voucher number.  
d. 
Reporting Requirements  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
System can provide both raw, unanalyzed data, and structured reports.  
All reporting should be downloadable in an excel data format that can be 
sorted and analyzed by DRD.  
Reporting can be provided through pre-defined scheduled reports and on-
demand reports.  
Scheduled  reports  will  have  defined  formats  and  will  be  sent  to  DRD 
according  to  a  defined  timetable.  On  demand  reports  will  have  defined 
formats and will be available on request.  
Proposals should indicate the specific types of reports that are available.  
e. 
Program Management Requirements 
(i) 
(ii) 
The DRD management system must be accessible by a range of DRD staff 
members.  Staff  members  granted  access  will  be  assigned  a  user  ID, 
password  and  access  level  based  upon  their  seniority  and  approval 
authority. Ideally, the system should track and capture DRD User Profile 
information (including user ID) for all system interactions. This information 
must be able to show which DRD user completed actions within the system 
(including  both  file  uploading  and  direct  interaction  with  the  system  to 
upload and edit specific records).  
Differing levels of access and permissions is desired.  
f. 
Program Requirements to be handled outside the system  
(i) 
This  compensating  balance  debit  card  system  will  have  negative 
restrictions  forbidding  use  for  designated  products  (e.g.,  prohibited 
agrochemicals).  Negative  restrictions  will  be  handled  off-line  and  will  be 
DRD’s responsibility to enforce  
Term 
Participant 
Vendor 
Client 
Preparer 
Approver 
Viewer 
Deployment 
Voucher 
Transaction 
Confirmation 
Appendix 4 
107 
ANNEX 4.2: Definition of Terms 
Definition/Explanation 
This is a participant in the program who will receive vouchers via the 
system 
This is an individual retailer or a retail outlet selected by program staff 
that will redeem vouchers for participants. 
A business or institution that has or will use DRD’s electronic voucher 
platform 
A field-based DRD or DRD-contracted support person responsible for 
day-to-day program activities 
A higher-level DRD manager (often a Program Manager) that is 
responsible for the overall use of the electronic voucher system 
An DRD staff person or DRD-contracted support person that has 
access to the electronic voucher system for review and accountability 
purposes, but does not have “write access” 
Defines a specific implementation of an electronic voucher system in a 
designated location in a specific time period. 
An amount of money provided to a participant in a single transfer 
An exchange between a participant and a vendor involving redemption 
of a voucher for the purchase of goods 
Notification delivered to participants attempting to make a payment 
with a voucher value AND to vendors attempting to accept payment 
from a voucher. Confirmations may be affirmative: “Transaction 
succeeded” or negative: “Transaction failed”. 
Common Transactional 
Currency 
This is the currency commonly used in a location which may or may 
not be the national local currency 
Common Local 
Language 
Distribution 
This is the language commonly used in a location and designated for 
use in a particular implementation 
The activity of providing a batch of cash or commodity vouchers to a 
designated set of participants at a specific point in time 
108 
Appendix 4 
ANNEX 4.3: EVALUATING POTENTIAL FINANCIAL SERVICE PROVIDER CAPACITY (FOR 
FSP SHORTLISTING) 
The capacity of the financial service provider (FSP) will have a significant impact  – positive or 
negative – on the program. This questionnaire will help rate potential FSP as low, medium or high 
risk.  Ranking  the  FSP  will  help  the  project  to  shortlist  potential  providers  and  tailor  program 
implementation plans to accommodate their capacity.  
A. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Service Provider Capacity Quiz  
At your first meeting, your potential Service Provider: 
a. 
b. 
Asked lots of questions about your program and needs; 
Talked about the amazing quality of his/her e-transfer product, with few examples 
that are relevant to your program; 
Didn’t show up to your scheduled meeting.  
c. 
When you ask for references, the Service Provider: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Provides several references that reported positive experiences; 
Provides references that reported mixed positive and negative experiences; 
 Refuses to provide references. 
When you ask for a draft contract, the Service Provider:  
a. 
Sends you a draft that clearly explains the provider’s role and responsibility in your 
e-transfer program; 
Sends  a  draft  contract  that  is  clearly  intended  for  another  purpose  (e.g.,  salary 
payments instead of mobile money credit); 
Asks you to develop a sample contract. 
b. 
c. 
4.  When  probing  for  details  about  how  the  compensating  balance  account  will  work,  the 
Service Provider: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Provides clear answers with processes that sync well with your distribution needs; 
Cannot answer all questions, but offers to connect you to a technical expert who 
can answer your questions within a reasonable timeframe; 
Evades your questions or promises answers and never provides them. 
5. 
The Service Provider you are evaluating: 
a. 
Has recently delivered the same (or higher) volumes of credit transactions in your 
program’s targeted geographic area; 
Has delivered similar volumes of credit transactions in another geographic area; 
Has not previously delivered high volumes credit transfers. 
b. 
c. 
6. 
The Service Provider’s customer service and support systems: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Are  robust,  convenient  and  offer  clear  escalation  procedures  for  potential 
problems;  
Do not have clear customer service procedures, but are willing to develop them for 
your program; 
Do not offer clear support systems and do not seem interested in developing them. 
Appendix 4 
109 
7.  When asked about protecting participant’s personal information, the Service Provider: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Provides  assurances,  in  writing,  about  how  participant  data  is  used,  stored  and 
protected from exploitative use; 
Takes  measures  to  protect  program  participant  data,  but  does  not  have  them 
written down; 
Does not have clear data protection practices or policies. 
8.  When asked about agent networks and float management, the service provider…  
a. 
b. 
c. 
Has  agents  located  close  to  program  participants  and  has  managed  significant 
float demands in the past; 
Has  not  managed  cash  transfers  at  the  scale  you  need,  but  has  a  reasonable 
strategy for expanding agent networks and managing float to meet your needs; 
Assures you that they can meet your needs without providing details. 
B. 
Answer key:  
1.  If  your  potential  Service  Provider  answered  mostly  A’s,  you  are  headed  in  the  right 
direction. This FSP can be considered “low risk.”  
2.  If  your  Service  Provider  answered  mostly  B’s,  you  are  working  with  a  “medium  risk” 
Service  Provider.  Proceed  with  caution  and  consider  staffing  up  around  FSP 
management.  
3.  Did your Service Provider answer mostly C’s? Then you are dealing with a “high risk” FSP. 
Generally, such a Service Provider should not be shortlisted. If you decide to work with 
this FSP, you will need to take on an active capacity building role. Processes that are often 
problematic for high risk FSPs include agent network management, new client (program 
participant) registration, reporting, liquidity management and customer service. 
110 
Appendix 4 
ANNEX 4.4: Draft Service Provider Bid Evaluation Checklist 
COMPENSATING BALANCE DIGITAL CREDIT LINE BID CHECKLIST 
This tool can be used for assessing short-listed Service Provider’s bid submissions to ensure that key services 
are offered. 
Meets program 
requirements? (Y/N) 
Comments 
Product Offering & Technical Specifications 
Scope of services - what type of technology will be 
used  (SMS  based  SIM  kit?  USSD?  ATM/credit 
cards?) 
Are  offline  disbursement  options  provided  in  the 
event  of  network  outage? 
If  yes,  how  are 
disbursements managed and documented? 
Is  hardware  (e.g.  a  debit  card)  required  for  each 
beneficiary?  How  are 
these  procured  and 
distributed? 
Will the FSP provide required payment hardware? 
At what cost? 
Agent Network & Liquidity 
Does  the  FSP  have  an  established  network  of 
agents  or  pay-in  points  close  to  your  targeted 
participants?  If  not,  are  they  willing  to  mobilize 
agents for program distributions? 
  What days/times are agents available? 
Are  there  limitations  or  restrictions  to  geographic 
areas served by your FSP?  
Agent coverage: How many cash-ins can an agent 
realistically  complete  in  a  day?  Are  sufficient 
agents  available 
to  meet  the  needs  of  our 
participants?  
Program Participant Registration, Account Opening and Data Management 
Are  participants  required/allowed 
individual accounts? 
to  establish 
Can  transfers be sent  to  participants  that  already 
have mobile money accounts, in addition to those 
establishing new accounts? 
  What ID, if any, is required to open an account? 
What  alternative  forms  of  ID  are  accepted  if  no 
formal ID is available?  
What  privacy  and/or  data  protection  is offered  by 
the FSP? 
Pricing, Fees and Account Funding 
Is the fee structure clear?  
  How and when will fees be billed? 
If fees are charged upon use of the debit card, can 
these fees be paid directly by Project if required? 
(Instead of by the participant?) 
How and where does the project transfer money to 
an escrow account in preparation for establishing 
the compensating balance beneficiary accounts? 
How  does  reconciliation  occur  with  that  escrow 
account? Can the project be reimbursed if excess 
funds remain at the end of the program? 
Appendix 4 
111 
Are fees fixed for the term of the contract- ensuring 
that no changes in fees will occur?  
Customer Service and Support 
Who will be the point person for the project? Are 
they easily accessible? 
What additional support procedures/resources are 
available  to  support  the  project?  Are  preferred 
customer  service  point  people  available 
to 
participants? 
Customer  service,  beneficiaries:  How  can 
beneficiaries  access  support?  Is  there  a  toll-free 
support line? What are the hours of operation? 
Disbursement Process 
Does the FSP require a specific format to approve 
a debit card? 
What  is  the  timeline  for  sending  a  debit  card 
request? 
Input suppliers 
Has the FSP contracted sufficient input suppliers 
within reasonable proximity of program clients? 
Are all contracted input suppliers correctly 
registered for the services they provide? 
Do input suppliers have sufficient range and 
quantities of registered inputs? 
Do all contracted input suppliers have the 
hardware for accepting debit card payments? 
112 
Appendix 4 
ANNEX 4.5: Draft Data Protection and Security Agreement51 
DRAFT DATA PROTECTION AND SECURITY STATEMENT 
(This draft is based on previous MercyCorps agreements under its various E-Transfer programs) 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN:  
1 The MOALI Department for Rural Development or its Service Agent (“Data Controller”); and  
2 YYYY, having its registered office at […] (the “Data Processor”).  
PURPOSE OF THIS AGREEMENT  
A.  For  the  purpose  of  facilitating  electronic  voucher  transfers  from  the  Data  Controller  to  a 
beneficiary  receiving  the  voucher  transfer,  the  Data  Controller  collects  and  processes  the 
Personal Data of such beneficiaries.  
B. The Data Controller has engaged the Data Processor to render the Services which includes 
processing beneficiary data on the Data Controllers’ behalf.  
C.  The  Data  Controller  is  subject  to  laws,  regulations  and  codes  of  conduct,  principles  and 
operational  standards that  place  obligations  on  the  Data  Controller  to respect  the  privacy  and 
protect the Personal Data of beneficiaries in the processing of such data, whether independently 
or through appointed Data Processors.  
D. Accordingly, this agreement pertains to the protection of Personal Data accessed or otherwise 
received; and processed by the Data Processor on the Data Controller’s behalf in the course of 
rendering the Services.  
IT IS AGREED:  
1. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION  
1.1 In this agreement:  
Data Controller means the Agency being the person who determines the purposes for which and 
the manner in which any Personal Data is, or is to be, processed.  
Data Processor means the Affiliate/ Service Provider, a person or organization that processes 
Personal Data on behalf of the Data Controller during the course of rendering the Services.  
Data Subject means the beneficiaries of electronic voucher transfers facilitated by the Agency 
and persons to whom the Personal Data refers.  
Personal  Data  means  any  personal  information  including  identifying  information  such  as  the 
name,  identification  or  passport  number,  mobile  telephone  number,  email  address,  voucher 
transaction details, of whatever nature, format or media that by whatever means, is provided to 
the Data Processor by the Data Controller, is accessed by the Data Processor on the authority of 
the Data Controller or is otherwise received by the Data Processor on the Data Controller’s behalf 
and includes transactional or other information associated with the Data Subject generated by the 
Data Processor in the course of providing the Service to the Data Controller.  
51 MercyCorps E-Transfer Implementation Guide, Master Card Centre for Inclusive Growth: Annex 4 
Appendix 4 
113 
Processing in relation to Personal Data, includes the obtaining, recording or holding of such data 
or carrying out any operation or set of operations on the data, including organization, adaptation, 
or  alteration;  disclosure  by 
transmission,  dissemination,  or  otherwise;  and  alignment, 
combination, blocking, erasure, or destruction.  
Schedule means the schedules annexed to and forming part of this agreement.  
Services  means  the  specific  activities  for  which  the  Data  Controller  has  engaged  the  Data 
Processor as set out in the main/ master services agreement.  
2. DATA PROCESSING  
The Data Processor agrees to process the Personal Data to which this agreement applies, and 
in particular the Data Processor agrees that it shall:  
a.  process  the  Personal  Data  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  this 
agreement and where the standards imposed by the data protection legislation regulating 
the Data Processor processing of the Personal Data are higher than those prescribed in 
this agreement, then in accordance with such legislation;  
b. process the Personal Data strictly in accordance with the purposes relevant to the Services 
in the manner specified from time to time by the Data Controller; and for no other purpose 
or in any other manner except with the express prior written consent of the Data Controller;  
c. implement appropriate technical and organizational measures to safeguard the Personal 
Data from unauthorized or unlawful processing or accidental loss, destruction or damage, 
having regard to the state of technological development and the cost of implementing any 
measures;  such  measures  shall  ensure  a  level  of  security  appropriate  to  the  harm  that 
might  result  from  unauthorized  or  unlawful  processing  or  accidental  loss,  destruction  or 
damage and to the nature of the Personal Data to be protected;  
d. regard the Personal Data as confidential data and not disclose such data to any person 
other than to employees, agents or sub-contractors to whom disclosure is necessary for 
the performance of the Service and subject to […] below or except as may be required by 
any law or regulation affecting the Data Processor;  
e.  implement  technical  and  organizational  measures  to  ensure  the  confidentiality,  privacy, 
integrity,  availability,  accuracy  and  security  of  the  Personal  Data  including  establishing 
organizational policies for employees, agents and sub-contractors aimed at complying with 
the  Data  Processor’s  duties  to  safeguard  the  Personal  Data  in  accordance  with  this 
agreement;  
f. implement backup processes as agreed between the Data Controller and Data Processor 
to  procure  the  availability  of  the  Personal  Data  at  all  times  and  ensure  that  the  Data 
Controller will have access to such backup of the Personal Data as is reasonably required 
by the Data Controller;  
g. ensure that any disclosure to an employee, agent or sub-contractor is subject to a binding 
legal obligation to comply with the obligations of the Data Processor under this agreement 
including  compliance  with  relevant  technical  and  organizational  measures  for  the 
confidentiality, privacy, integrity, availability, accuracy and security of the Personal Data. 
For the avoidance of doubt, any agreement with an employee, agent or sub-contractor shall 
not relieve the Data Processor of its obligation to comply fully with this agreement, and the 
Data Processor shall remain fully responsible and liable for ensuring full compliance with 
this agreement;  
h. comply  with any  request from  the Data  Controller  to  amend,  transfer or  delete  Personal 
Data; provide a copy of all or specified Personal Data held by it in a format and or a media 
114 
Appendix 4 
reasonably  specified  by  the  Data  Controller  within  reasonable  timeframes  as  agreed 
between the parties [Agency to insert relevant time periods at its discretion];  
i.   should the Data Processor receive any complaint, notice or communication which relates 
directly or indirectly to the processing of the Personal Data or to either party’s compliance 
with applicable law, immediately notify the Data Controller and provide the Data Controller 
with  full  co-operation  and  assistance  in  relation  to  any  complaints,  notices  or 
communications;  
j.   promptly inform the Data Controller if any Personal Data is lost or destroyed or becomes 
damaged, corrupted or unusable and at the request of the Data Controller, restore such 
Personal Data at its own expense; 
k. in the event of the exercise by Data Subjects of any rights in relation to their Personal Data, 
inform the Data Controller as soon as possible,  
l. assist the Data Controller with all Data Subject information requests which may be received 
from any Data Subject in relation to any Personal Data;  
m. not use the Personal Data of Data Subjects to contact, communicate or otherwise engage 
with  the  Data  Subjects  including  transmission  of  any  marketing  or  other  commercial 
communications to the Data Subjects, except in accordance with the written consent of the 
Data  Controller  or  to  comply  with  a  court  order.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  Data 
Processor is not prohibited from contact, communication or engaging with the Data Subject 
in  so  far  as  this  does  not  involve  processing  of  Personal  Data  and  the  Data  Processor 
ensures that the promotion or offer of services is not in any manner associated to the Data 
Controller or the Data Controller’s services;  
n. notify the Data Controller of the country(s) in which the Personal Data will be processed 
where such country(s) is not the country of the Data Processor’s registered office;  
o.  not  process  or  transfer  the  Personal  Data  outside  of  the  country  of  its  registered  office 
except with the express prior written consent of the Data Controller pursuant to a request 
in writing from the Data Processor to the Data Controller;  
p.  permit  and  procure  that  its  data  processing  facilities,  procedures  and  documentation  be 
submitted for scrutiny by the Data Controller or its authorized representatives, on request, 
in order to audit or otherwise ascertain compliance with the terms of this agreement;  
q. advise the Data Controller of any significant change in the risk of unauthorized or unlawful 
processing or accidental loss, destruction or damage of Personal Data; and  
r.  report  [in  accordance  with  agreed  reasonable  timeframes]  to  the  Data  Controller  on  the 
steps it has taken to ensure compliance with clause 3.1.of this agreement.  
3. WARRANTIES  
The Data Processor warrants that:  
a. it will process the Personal Data in compliance with laws, enactments, regulations, orders, 
standards  and  other  similar  instruments  applicable  to  the  Data  Processor;  and  in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of this agreement;  
b. in order to observe the rights of ownership and/or other proprietary or intellectual property 
rights of the Data Controller in the Personal Data, not copy, retain or process the Personal 
Data in any manner over the course of this agreement and upon expiration or termination 
of this agreement, except as required by law or in accordance this agreement.  
4. INDEMNITY  
The  Data  Processor  agrees  to  indemnify  and  keep  indemnified  and  defend  at  its  expense  the 
Data Controller against all costs, claims, damages or expenses incurred by the Data Controller 
Appendix 4 
115 
or for which the Data Controller may become liable due to any failure by the Data Processor or 
its employees, subcontractors or agents to comply with the obligations under this agreement.  
5. APPOINTMENT OF SUB-CONTRACTORS AND AGENTS/ COMPLIANCE BY  
SUB-CONTRACTORS AND AGENTS  
The Data Processor may authorize a third party (sub-contractor or agent) to process the Data:  
a. subject to the terms of this agreement;  
b.  subject  to  the  Data  Controller’s  prior  written  consent,  the  validity  of  the  consent  will  be 
conditional  on  the  Data  Processor  supplying  the  Data  Controller  with  full  and  accurate 
details of the sub-contractors or agents; and 
c. provided the relevant sub-contractor’s or agent’s contract terminates automatically on the 
termination of this agreement for any reason.  
6. TERMINATION  
6.1  This  agreement  shall  terminate  automatically  upon  termination  or  expiry  of  the  Data 
Processor’s obligations in relation to the Services.  
6.2 The Data Controller shall be entitled to terminate this Agreement forthwith by notice in writing 
to the Data Processor if:  
a. the Data Processor is in a material or persistent breach of this Agreement which, in the 
case of a breach capable of remedy, shall not have been remedied within 10 days from the 
date of receipt by the Data Processor of a notice from the Data Controller identifying the 
breach and requiring its remedy; or  
b.  the  Data  Processor  becomes  insolvent,  has  a  receiver,  administrator,  or  administrative 
receiver appointed over the whole or any part of its assets, enters into any compound with 
creditors, or has an order made or resolution passed for it to be wound up (otherwise than 
in furtherance of a scheme for solvent amalgamation or reconstruction).  
6.3 On termination of this agreement the Data Processor shall, in accordance with the direction 
of the Data Controller:  
a.  deliver  or  destroy  all  Personal  Data  supplied  by the  Data  Controller  in  its  possession  or 
under its control;  
b.  instruct all its employees, agents and sub-contractors to facilitate and ensure the delivery 
or destruction of the Personal Data including copies of the Personal Data in accordance 
with the Data Controller’s direction.  
7. GOVERNING LAW  
This agreement will be governed by the laws of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, and the 
parties submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar 
for  all  purposes  connected  with  this  agreement,  including  the  enforcement  of  any  order  or 
judgment made under or in connection with it.  
8. WAIVER  
Failure by either party to exercise or enforce any rights available to that party or the giving of any 
forbearance, delay or indulgence shall not be construed as a waiver of that party’s rights under 
this agreement.  
116 
Appendix 4 
9. INVALIDITY  
If any term or provision of this agreement shall be held to be illegal or unenforceable in whole or 
in part under any enactment or rule of law, such term or provision or part shall to that extent be 
deemed  not  to  form  part  of  this  agreement,  but  the  enforceability  of  the  remainder  of  this 
agreement  shall  not  be affected,  provided  however  that  if  any  term  or  provision  or  part  of  this 
agreement is severed as illegal or unenforceable, the parties shall seek to agree to modify this 
agreement to the extent necessary to render it lawful and enforceable, and as nearly as possible 
to reflect the intentions of the parties embodied in this agreement, including without limitation the 
illegal or unenforceable term or provision or part. 
Appendix 5 
117 
CONSULTANTS TERMS OF REFERENCE 
I. 
INDIVIDUAL CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Start-up Procurement Specialist (international, 5 person-months) 
1. 
Scope  of  Work.  The  Procurement/Project  Start-up  Specialist  will  assist  the  EA  and 
implementing agencies (IAs) during the project start up period, prior to and overlapping with the 
mobilization of the PIC consultants (and PMU staff). He/she will work closely with other start-up 
team  members  to  initiate  procurement  activities  for  the  project  in  accordance  with  ADB 
procedures and requirements and provide training to EA/IA and PMU staff on procurement. 
Detailed  Tasks.  The  Specialist  will  assist  EA  (and  IAs)  in  procurement  activities  and 
2. 
ensure compliance with ADB requirements by providing full assistance and on-the-job training to 
EA staff on all aspects of ADB procurement procedures, in the timely recruitment of consultants 
and procurement of good and works. The responsibilities will include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Assist  the  EA  to  undertake  all  activities  related  to  the  initial  operation  and 
implementation of the project; 
Review  and  update  the  Procurement  Plan  in  the  Project  Administration  Manual 
(PAM) to reflect possible changes since project fact-finding. 
Assemble  and  provide  copies  of  all  relevant  ADB  procurement  documents, 
guidelines and procedures to the EA, including a master list of such documents for 
future reference. 
Support  and  assist  the  EA  in  various  stages  of  recruitment  of  consultants  in 
compliance  with  ADB  requirements  for  project  implementation  consultants, 
including 
technical 
revision/preparation  of  TORs,  assessment  criteria, 
assessments, conduct of consultant selection committee meetings, submission to 
financiers, etc., in collaboration with the technical advisor; 
Support  the  EA  in  the  preparation  of  procurement  documents,  including 
preparation and finalization of Bidding Documents and Invitation for Bids (IFB) for 
procurement  of  various  works  and  goods  issuance  of  IFB,  conduct  of  pre-bid 
meeting and bid-opening, preparation and finalization of Technical Bid Evaluation 
Reports  (TBER),  conducting  of  opening  of  the  financial  bids  and  evaluation  of 
financial bids, preparation and finalization of Price Bid Evaluation Reports (PBER), 
and contract negotiating with the most responsive bidder and signing the Contract; 
Assist 
interpretation,  contract  administration  and 
documentation on contractual matters, and any additional tasks as assigned time 
to time that are relevant to the assignment; 
Set up a monitoring system for procurement deadlines including monitoring (a) the 
administration  of  consulting  service  contracts,  (b)  the  payment  of  services 
rendered/goods delivered, and (c) the quality of consulting services and/or goods 
and civil works provided;  
in  contract 
the  EA/IA 
(ix) 
(viii)  Review  existing  institutional  arrangement  for  procurement  and  recommend 
improvements  including  assisting  PMU  in  establishing  institutional  mechanisms 
including the approval systems. 
Design  procurement  workflow, 
formulation  of  procurement  committees, 
procurement  procedures  including  bid  opening  and  evaluation,  record  keeping, 
complaint handling mechanisms, etc. 
Conduct  procurement  workshops/  trainings  to  EA/IAs  personnel  as  well  as  to 
prospective bidders/suppliers; and  
Undertake any other duties as may be reasonably assigned. 
(xi) 
(x) 
118 
Appendix 5 
3. 
Minimum Qualification Requirements 
(i) 
(ii) 
Bachelor's degree or equivalent with 5 years of relevant working experience. 
Familiarity with (a) internationally-funded project preparation and implementation 
issues; (b) government accounting systems; and (c) procurement procedures of 
international organizations/agencies, especially those of ADB.  
B. 
Start-up Financial Management Specialist (international, 3 person-months) 
4. 
Scope of Work. The Financial Management Specialist will assist the EA and IAs during 
project start up period, prior to and overlap with the mobilization of the PIC consultants (and PMU 
staff).  He/she  will  work  closely  with  other  start-up  team  members  to  establish  accounting 
procedures and systems for the project in accordance with ADB procedures and requirements, 
and to provide training to EA/IA and PMU staff. 
5. 
Detailed Tasks and/or Expected Output. The specialist will: 
(i) 
if  necessary, 
Assist  EA  and  IAs  in  coordinating  the  fund  flow  mechanism,  establishment  of 
advance account and sub-accounts in accordance with ADB procedures; 
Review,  and  update 
the  project  accounting  and 
management arrangements in the Project Administration Manual (PAM). 
Provide  training  to  the  EA/IA  and  PMU  accountant/consultant  on  setting  up 
financial management  systems  including fund  flow,  disbursement  mechanisms / 
plans; 
Assist in establishing financial management procedures for the PMU; 
Assess / review project cost structures; 
Assess in-kind or cash co-financing situation from counterpart agencies; 
Prepare a project budget, withdrawal request, disbursement and expenditures plan 
for the ADB financing packages; 
financial 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii)  Establish systems to implement project cost controls; 
(ix) 
(x) 
Prepare tables and spreadsheets for financial reporting (format); 
Prepare a succinct project accounts manual to document project accounting and 
financial  management  procedures  and  templates  for  ADB,  and  recommend 
updates to the PAM if needed to reflect possible changes since project fact-finding;  
Train IA staff in procedures to maintain project financial records and EA staff in 
consolidating project financial reports from IAs; and  
(xii)  Undertake any other duties as may be reasonably assigned. 
(xi) 
6. 
Minimum Qualification Requirements 
(i)  
(ii) 
Bachelor's degree or equivalent with 10 years of relevant working experience. 
Familiarity with: (a) internationally-funded project preparation and implementation 
issues;  (b)  government  accounting  systems;  and  (c)  accounting  and  financial 
management  requirements  of  international  organizations/agencies,  especially 
those of ADB. 
C. 
National Technical Advisor (national, 5 person-months) 
7. 
Scope  of  Work.  The  National  Technical  Advisor  will  assist  the  EA  and  IAs  during  the 
project start up period, prior to and overlapping with the mobilization of the PIC consultants (and 
PMU  staff).  He/she  will  work  closely  with  other  start-up  team  members  to  backstop  the 
establishment  of  the  PMU  and  other  institutional  arrangements,  procurement,  accounting  and 
financial management and project performance monitoring, evaluation and reporting activities for 
the project in accordance with ADB procedures and requirements and assist in training to EA/IA 
and PMU staff as required. 
Appendix 5 
119 
8. 
9. 
Detailed Tasks and/or Expected Output. The Specialist will: 
(i) 
Be responsible to provide support for day-to-day management and coordination of 
the project and for planning, administering and coordinating all project activities; 
Coordinate  and  supervise  activities  under  the  project  and  provide  advice  on 
technical and administrative matters and safeguard issues; 
Provide  advice  in  the  design,  planning,  and  supervision,  addressing  safeguard 
issues; 
Ensure an efficient and effective filing system is set up for the project; 
Prepare a brief end-of-assignment report to document work undertaken and make 
recommendations for ongoing management of the project; and 
Undertake any other duties as may be reasonably assigned. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Minimum Qualification Requirements 
(i) 
(ii) 
Bachelor's degree or equivalent with 7 years of relevant working experience; 
Familiarity  with  (a)  internationally-funded  project  management  issues,  including 
safeguards; (b) government project management systems and procedures; and (c) 
international  organizations/agencies, 
project  management  procedures  of 
especially those of ADB. 
D. 
Senior Land Administration Services Adviser (international, 8 person-months)  
10. 
Scope  of  Work.  The  adviser  will  lead  a  specialist  consultant  team  that  will  assist  the 
MOALI Department of Agriculture Land Management and Statistics (DALMS), in partnership with 
the  Land  Use  Division  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  (DoA)  to  develop  a  more  efficient, 
digitalized and client friendly land administration service. 
11. 
Detailed Tasks. The adviser will coordinate assistance to DALMS to: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Specify and procure 24,000 km2 of RapidEye 5m resolution satellite imagery; 
Develop participatory land use maps for the 14 project districts; 
Compile a fit for purpose GIS database; 
Develop capacity building programs for participatory township land administration, 
targeting  township  DALMS  and  the  General  Administrative  Department  (GAD) 
staff; and 
Develop  an  awareness  raising  program  for  land  owners  and  improved,  demand 
driven and accessible land administration service delivery systems. 
(v) 
12.  Minimum Qualification Requirements 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Master’s degree in land management or geography; 
At  least  10  years  of  experience  in  the  development  of  land  information  and 
cadastre systems in emerging economies; 
Experience in the development of customer relations in land administration. 
E. 
Agricultural Digital Finance Specialist (international, 5 person-months) 
Scope  of  Work.  The  specialist  will  support  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and 
13. 
Irrigation  (MOALI)  Department  of  Rural  Development  (DRD)  to  contract  a  qualified  financial 
service provider (FSP) for the development and implementation of an Agricultural Digital Finance 
120 
Appendix 5 
Service  (ADFS)  and  assist  DRD  to  establish  and  implement  a  community-based  beneficiary 
identification system and supporting monitoring program. 
14. 
Detailed Tasks. The responsibilities will include: 
(i) 
Assist MOALI to survey potential beneficiaries and input and service providers to 
evaluate the most effective technology for implementing the ADFS, including the 
use of mobile phones for financial transactions; 
The  preparation  of  an  invitation  to  qualified  FSPs  for  shortlisting  for  the 
development and delivery of an Agricultural Digital Finance Service (ADFS) and 
overseeing its implementation; 
The  preparation  of  a  detailed  bid  document  for  short-listed  FSPs  for  the 
preparation  and  implementation  of  the  ADFS  and  supporting  the  PMU  in 
overseeing the bidding process; 
The development of a contractual agreement between MOALI and the successful 
FSP(s) for the delivery of the ADFS; 
Develop an ADFS monitoring program; and 
Training  of  DRD  staff  in  (a) the  implementation  of  the  ADFS:  (b) transparent 
community  driven  processes  for  selecting  ADFS  beneficiaries;  and  (c) the 
implementation of an ADFS monitoring program; 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
15.  Minimum Qualification Requirements 
(i) 
(ii) 
Master’s degree in finance, commerce, economics or equivalent with at least 10 
years of relevant working experience in emerging economies; 
Familiarity  with  (a) rural  financial  service  delivery  in  emerging  economies; 
(b) digital financial services; and (c) financial services monitoring and evaluation. 
Appendix 5 
121 
II. 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION CONSULTANTS 
16. 
Objective of the assignment. The Project Implementation Consultants (PIC) will provide 
management  and  technical  assistance  to  the  EA  and  IA  in  the  implementation  of  the  project, 
strengthen technical and management capacities of the participating government agencies and 
project  stakeholders,  and  ensure  compliance  with  the  financing  agreement  and  government 
policies. The PIC will work in close coordination with the consultants recruited for capacity building 
and climate smart agriculture (CSA) training, contracted under a separate package.  
17. 
Scope of services. In close coordination with the project director and project manager, 
and other staff based in the PMU, the PIC as counterpart of the government staff will perform the 
following but not limited to: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Support,  strengthen,  coordinate  and  guide  PMU,  PIUs,  implementing  agencies 
and  contractors  in  the  design  and  operation  of  the  infrastructure  related 
subprojects; 
Detailed  planning  of  yearly  activities  in  all  aspects  of  the  agreed  and  foreseen 
implementation schedules including budget; 
Review  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  engineering  designs  for  subprojects 
prepared by the feasibility and detailed design consultants;  
Supervise construction of civil works in conjunction with the implementing agencies 
(notably IWUMD, DRD and DOA);  
Provide necessary capacity building training; 
Assist farmers water user groups and or cooperatives in establishing operation & 
maintenance systems; 
Assist PMU, PIU and implementing agencies in the procurement of works, goods 
and  services  including  contract  management  (oversee  procurement  activities, 
particularly bid opening, and supervise the bid evaluation process, and endorse 
bid  evaluation  reports  for  all  international  competitive  bidding  and  national 
competitive bidding procurement packages); 
(viii)  Establish  and  maintain  the  required  project  accounting  arrangement  and  other 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
implementation recording systems for the overall project; 
Coordinate financial management of the implementing agencies and consolidate 
project accounts and financial statements; 
Support 
the  PMU 
contractors/consultants/suppliers; 
Support  the  PMU  to  operate  the  imprest  account  and  prepare  and  submit 
withdrawal applications;  
Plan and develop the safeguards monitoring and evaluation systems and carry out 
environmental and social due diligence of each subproject; 
recruit  consultants  and  process  payments 
to 
to 
(xiii)  Assist in the preparation of safeguard documents in compliance with LARF, EARF, 
EMDF and Gender Action Plan; 
(xiv)  Prepare  quarterly  progress  reports;  annual  progress  reports,  PPMS,  safeguard 
monitoring reports and gender action plan monitoring reports; 
(xv)  Establish baseline data to monitor project impacts, including regular monitoring of 
physical and financial progress; 
(xvi)  Assist  the  executing  and  implementing  agencies  in  monitoring  the  project 
implementation, including periodic site inspections; 
(xvii)  Act as the secretariat for the Project Steering Committee; and 
(xviii)  Any  other  activities  for  delivering  the  envisaged  outputs  of  the  project  and 
achieving desired outcome. 
122 
Appendix 5 
Note that for combined international and national positions below, the national specialists 
18. 
will have greater responsibility for delivering training.  International experts will have at least 15 
years of experience relevant to the assignment while national experts must have minimum 7 years 
of relevant experience. 
A. 
Value  Chain  Specialist  and  Team  Leader  (international,  22  person-months  and 
national, 70 person-months (Deputy TL)) 
The  objective  of  this  position  is  to  assist  the  Project  Director  of  the  PMU  in  ensuring 
19. 
efficient  and  timely  implementation  of  the  project,  management  of  the  PIC  consultants,  and 
effectively coordinating and linking all value chain activities and, thereby, strengthening all value 
chains.   
20. 
The  team  leader  will  work  closely  with the  Project  Director  and  Project Manager  of  the 
PMU in developing the workplans and budgets and directing all aspects of implementation. The 
other PIC consultants are involved in (i) assisting the implementing agencies in specific subproject 
technical areas that strengthen the value chains and the linkages, and (ii) in assisting the PMU in 
financial management, in integrating the social development and gender action plan, and ensuring 
the social safeguards, and environmental safeguards and management plans. 
21.  Minimum qualifications. Relevant degree, e.g. in agricultural economics, agribusiness, 
business  management,  or  agricultural  marketing;  years  experience  in  leading  long-term  value 
chain development projects, preferably on ADB-funded, long-term projects; experience in project 
management of large teams with diversified professional roles and responsibilities; experience 
working in value chain development in Southeast Asian countries; excellent English speaking and 
writing skills. 
22. 
The scope of work of the TL includes: 
•  Assist the PMU Project Director and the IAs in developing a detailed workplan for project 
implementation, and in establishing an appropriate management and Project Performance 
Monitoring System; 
•  Provide value chain technical planning and implementation guidance to the PIC technical 
team,  the  EA  and  IAs  (at  the  Union,  region,  district,  and  township  levels),  and  at  the 
stakeholder level;   
•  Ensure selection criteria on project beneficiary and location on subprojects are adhered 
to by the IAs and the technical team; 
•  Ensure linkages among value chain stakeholders and the various subprojects, particularly 
centering on links with improved private seed farms; 
•  Develop contract farming models and provide training on these to IAs; 
•  With the  procurement  specialists,  work  closely  with  the  national  procurement  specialist 
within  the  PMU  and  assist  in  reviewing  and  identifying  procurement  needs  within  the 
procurement  plan  and  the  detailed technical  specifications  of  equipment,  materials  and 
civil works. The procurement will be in accordance with ADB Procurement Guidelines and 
those of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar; 
•  Ensure,  in  coordination  with  the  gender  specialists  and  the  separate  capacity  building 
team, that the gender action plan is being implemented by IAs, with support as needed 
from sector specialists; 
•  Assist  the  Project  Director  in  writing,  presenting,  and  submitting  the  required  progress 
reports as described in the PAM; and   
Appendix 5 
123 
•  Coordinating  the  team  and  liaising  closely  with  the  capacity  building  and  CSA  training 
consultancy package. 
B. 
Irrigation  Supervision  Engineer  (international,  6  person-months  and  national,  26 
person-months) 
23.  Minimum qualifications. Relevant degree, e.g., in civil engineering, with an emphasis on 
water  management  and  irrigation  systems;  experience  in  irrigation  design  and  in  particular 
construction  supervision;  experience  working  in  irrigation  engineering  in  Southeast  Asian 
countries; excellent English speaking and writing skills. 
24. 
The scope of work includes: 
•  Assist the IWUMD and PMU in 
o 
reviewing  the  bill  of  quantities  and  the  bid  preparation,  bidding,  and  bid 
evaluation  of  the  irrigation  work  on  Chepa  Seed  Farm  and  the  Kyi  Ywa 
Pumping Irrigation Subprojects  
o  employing the selection criteria to confirm the subprojects that are eligible for 
improving the irrigation infrastructure   
o  preparing a detailed workplan, technical design, management, and monitoring 
system for the improved irrigation infrastructure of all the prescribed irrigation 
and small reservoir subprojects in the PAM; 
•  Provide  technical  and  management  support  to the  IWUMD  professional  staff  at  the 
Union, region, district, and township levels (together with PIU staff) for effective project 
implementation of all irrigation projects. This includes helping to oversee the design 
process carried out by the feasibility and detailed design contractor and setting up a 
construction supervision system; 
•  Provide capacity building to the IWUMD in supervising the construction of the irrigation 
infrastructure as per the supervision system, and to the Water Users Groups in the 
technical responsibilities in managing and maintaining the irrigation systems (together 
with the water management specialist from the capacity building consultancy team); 
•  Assist the IWUMD and PMU in preparing specifications for tubewell drilling contracts 
and associated drip irrigation equipment; 
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the 
IA and contractors, for the irrigation activities; and 
•  Contribute to the regular reporting requirements of the PMU in irrigation subprojects. 
C. 
Road  Supervision  Engineer  (international,  5  person-months  and  national,  19 
person-months) 
25.  Minimum qualifications. Relevant degree, e.g., in civil engineering, with an emphasis on 
roads; experience in road design including construction supervision, preferably farm feeder roads; 
excellent English speaking and writing skills. 
26. 
The scope of work includes: 
•  Assist the DRD and PMU in 
o  employing the selection criteria to confirm the subprojects that are eligible for 
improving the farmer feed road infrastructure   
o  preparing a detailed workplan, technical design, management, and monitoring 
system for the improved farmer feed road infrastructure of all the prescribed 
farmer feed road subprojects in the PAM; 
124 
Appendix 5 
•  Provide technical and management support to the DRD professional staff at the Union, 
region,  district,  and  township  levels  (together  with  PIU  staff)  for  effective  Project 
implementation of all farm feeder projects. This includes helping to oversee the design 
process carried out by the feasibility and detailed design contractor and setting up a 
construction supervision system, and then training staff in this system; 
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the 
IA and contractors, for the farm feeder road activities; and 
•  Contribute  to  the  regular  reporting  requirements  of  the  PMU  in  farmer  feed  road 
subprojects. 
D. 
Supervision Engineer (for DOA seed farms) (national, 24 person-months) 
27.  Minimum qualifications. Relevant degree, e.g., in civil engineering, with an emphasis on 
buildings; experience in design and including construction supervision, preferably for buildings; 
excellent English speaking and writing skills. 
28. 
The scope of work includes: 
•  Assist  the  DOA  and  PMU  in  preparing  a  detailed  workplan,  technical  design, 
management, and monitoring system for the DOA seed farm improvements; 
•  Assist the DOA and PMU in reviewing the bill of quantities and the bid preparation, 
bidding, and bid evaluation of the Chepa Seed Farm infrastructure;  
•  Provide technical and management support to the DOA professional staff at the Union, 
region,  district,  and  township  levels  (together  with  PIU  staff)  for  effective  Project 
implementation  of  seed  farm  improvement.  This  includes  helping  to  oversee  the 
design  process  carried out  by  the feasibility  and  detailed  design  contractor (e.g. for 
buildings  including  seed  storage  facilities  on  the  seed  farms  and  other  related 
infrastructure, liaising closely with the irrigation and road engineers) and setting up a 
construction supervision system, and then training staff in this system;  
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the 
IA and contractors, for the DOA seed farm activities; and 
•  Contribute to the regular reporting requirements of the PMU in seed farm subprojects. 
E. 
Financial Management Specialist (international, 8 person-months and national, 46 
person-months) 
29.  Minimum qualifications. Relevant degree e.g. in accounting or CPA, master’s degree in 
finance  or  MBA;  experience  working  in  financial  management  on  international  development 
projects  in  developing  countries,  with preference given  to  experience  on ADB-funded  projects; 
excellent English speaking and writing skills.  
The objective of the position is to ensure sound finance, accounting, and audit procedures 
30. 
are in place and implemented. The scope of work includes: 
•  Provide  training  in  accounting  and  financial  management  to  the  PMU’s  Finance 
Officers; 
•  Train  IA  staff  in  procedures  to  maintain  project  financial  records  and  EA  staff  in 
consolidating project financial reports from IAs; 
•  Develop and help implement a financial planning system for Project implementation 
and its subsequent operation (unless already done by start-up consultants). Develop 
long,  medium-term  and  annual  operating  plans  and  schedules  as  agreed  between 
Appendix 5 
125 
ADB,  MOPF,  and  the  EA  (MOALI)  for  Project  implementation  and  subsequent 
administrative operation; 
•  Together  with  the  PMU  Finance  Officers,  develop  and  establish  a  manual  and 
standard  procedures  for  Project  accounting  to  the  standard  agreed  between  ADB, 
MOPF, and the EA (unless already done by start-up consultants). Help ensure this is 
implemented; 
•  Monitor and report on a monthly basis during the first year of project implementation 
regarding  the  progress  of  various  actions  listed  in  the  time-bound  action  plan  for 
financial management; 
•  For  internal  control,  funds  flow  management,  and  financial  reporting,  develop  and 
make  operational  a  manual  and  procedures  (unless  already  done  by  start-up 
consultants)  as  agreed  between  ADB,  MOPF,  and  the  EA  for  Project  financial 
management, for  use  by  the  PMU  in  project  implementation  and  the  executing  and 
implementing agencies to operate; 
•  For  audit  planning,  to  comply  with  the  terms  and  standards  agreed  between  ADB, 
MOPF,  and  the  EA,  prepare  the  TOR  for  independent  external  auditors  to  conduct 
audits  of the  Project  accounts,  use  of  advance  accounts,  and related  disbursement 
procedural matters, and advise and assist the EA in the recruitment of specialists to 
conduct internal audits of the project accounts and advance account activities; and 
•  For audit management, advise and assist the PMU in facilitating external and internal 
audits. 
F. 
Procurement Specialists (international, 9 person-months and national, 37 person-
months) 
31.  Minimum  Qualifications.  Bachelor's  degree  or  equivalent  with  5  years  of  relevant 
working  experience.  Familiarity  with  (a) 
internationally-funded  project  preparation  and 
implementation issues; (b) government accounting systems; and (c) procurement procedures of 
international organizations/agencies, especially those of ADB.  
32. 
The  Specialist  will  assist  EA,  IAs  and  PMU  in  procurement  activities  and  ensure 
compliance with ADB requirements by providing full assistance and on-the-job training to EA and 
IA (including PMU) staff on all aspects of ADB procurement procedures, in the timely recruitment 
of consultants and procurement of goods and works. The responsibilities will include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Assist  the  EA/IAs/PMU  to  undertake  all  activities  related  to  the  operation  and 
implementation of the project; 
Review  and  update  the  Procurement  Plan  in  the  Project  Administration  Manual 
(PAM) on an ongoing basis. 
Support and assist the EA/IAs/PMU in various stages of recruitment of consultants 
in  compliance  with  ADB  requirements  for  project  implementation  consultants, 
including 
technical 
revision/preparation  of  TORs,  assessment  criteria, 
assessments, conduct of consultant selection committee meetings, submission to 
financiers, etc., in collaboration with the technical advisor; 
Support the EA/IAs/PMU in the preparation of procurement documents, including 
preparation and finalization of Bidding Documents and Invitation for Bids (IFB) for 
procurement  of  various  works  and  goods  issuance  of  IFB,  conduct  of  pre-bid 
meeting and bid opening, preparation and finalization of Technical Bid Evaluation 
Reports  (TBER),  conducting  of  opening  of  the  financial  bids  and  evaluation  of 
126 
Appendix 5 
(v) 
(vi) 
financial bids, preparation and finalization of Price Bid Evaluation Reports (PBER), 
and contract negotiating with the most responsive bidder and signing the contract; 
Assist  the  EA/IAs/PMU  in  contract  interpretation,  contract  administration  and 
documentation on contractual matters, and any additional tasks as assigned time 
to time that are relevant to the assignment; 
Ensure the monitoring system is implemented for procurement deadlines including 
monitoring (a) the administration of consulting service contracts, (b) the payment 
of  services  rendered/goods  delivered,  and  (c)  the  quality  of  consulting  services 
and/or goods and civil works provided; and  
(vii)  Undertake any other duties as may be reasonably assigned. 
G. 
Value Chain Gender Specialists (international, 3 person-months intermittent)  
33.  Minimum qualifications. Relevant degree, preferably a master’s degree, in agricultural 
economics or similar degree with strong expertise in women’s role in agricultural value chains; 
demonstrated  experience  in  working  on  gender  issues  in  the  Southeast  Asia  or  Asia  region; 
excellent knowledge of and practical experience in undertaking value chain analyses, preferably 
with a gender perspective; strong analytical, research and writing skills, and command of written 
English.. 
The major objective of the position is to produce an analytical report (see phases below – 
34. 
estimated total time required: 2 pm) containing the gender analysis of each of the targeted crop 
value chains addressed by the CFAVC project in Myanmar. The report will be based on qualitative 
and  quantitative  data  collection  and  analysis,  including  primary  data  from  field  research.  The 
report will include (i) analytical framework and methodological approach; (ii) gender analysis of 
the  targeted  crop  value  chains,  including  findings  about  gender  specific  opportunities  and 
constraints  found  along  the  value  chains;  (iii)  recommendations  for  including  gender  in  the 
agribusiness  policies  that  will  be  formulated  under  the  project  (a  5-page  policy  brief  will  be 
developed);  and, (iv)  recommendations for  making  agribusiness  programs/projects/subprojects 
gender responsive. The approach and methodology should promote building capacity for gender-
responsive agricultural value chain analysis within DOP and DOA (including the MOALI gender 
focal points) and relevant partners, and ensure that the results of the gender analysis are widely 
disseminated  and  utilized  in  policy  and  program  planning.  The  consultant  is  also  expected  to 
provide technical advice to the agribusiness policy unit on key policy issues within the targeted 
value chains from the social and gender perspective.  
In addition, the consultant may be asked to provide services (for a total of 1 pm) in relation 
35. 
to  very  specific  activities  included  in  the  gender  action  plan  such  as  work  with  the  PMU 
International/National M&E Specialist(s) to ensure that the gender and pro-poor indicators and 
targets in the DMF and the gender action plan are included in the PPMS of the project or prepare 
the  materials  for  raising  awareness  on  gender  equality  in  the  targeted  value  chains  (why  and 
how).  
36. 
Process and Deliverables for the analytical report 
(i) 
Phase 1: Desk review. At the start of the assignment, the International Specialist 
with support of national gender expertise (local organization/firm or consultant) will 
undertake  a  desk  review  of  policy  and  project  documents  and  thematic  reports 
related to the targeted agricultural value chains (including general information on 
gender  in  agriculture/agribusiness,  gender  analysis  of  agricultural  value  chains, 
gender  issues  related  to  access  to  productive  resources  such  as  land,  credit, 
Appendix 5 
127 
(ii) 
(iii) 
agricultural inputs, extension/technology, etc. in Myanmar). This should build on, 
and  complement  the  desk  review  of  the  TRTA  value  chain  research  and  TRTA 
gender analysis.  
Phase 2: Assignment work plan. Based on the findings from the desk review and 
in  line  with  the  requirements  of  the  TOR,  the  Specialist  will  elaborate  an 
assignment  work  plan  (around  5  pages)  which  will  be  submitted  to  the  project 
executing agency for endorsement. It will present the initial findings from the desk 
review, and will identify gaps in information which will need to be filled as part of 
the  assignment.  The  work  plan  will  describe  the  proposed  approach  and 
methodology  that  will  be  applied  for  undertaking  the  gender  analysis  of  the 
targeted agricultural value chains, and will specify the time frame allocated for each 
stage of work. It will also detail the linkage to the TRTA value chain research and 
gender analysis, the involvement of project stakeholders and key gender actors 
and informants. The proposed approach and methodology will contain information 
on a tentative selection of producers, processors, enterprise groups, traders and 
other key actors such as input suppliers and service providers to participate in the 
gender analysis of the targeted value chains of the project. The work plan will also 
include a draft outline of the final report as well as drafts of research instruments. 
Finally, the work plan should outline capacity development opportunities to ensure 
the  sustainability  of  value  chain  analysis  within  DOP  and  DOA  and the  Gender 
Focal Points.  
Phase 3: Fieldwork related to value chain gender analysis. The international 
specialist, with support of national gender expertise and in close collaboration with 
the DOP and DOA/gender focal points, will conduct the gender analysis of each of 
the targeted value chains using both quantitative surveys as well as participatory 
methods such as:  
• 
focus  group  discussions  with  female  and  male  actors  along  the  different 
segments of the value chains (separate and/or mixed); 
•  key informant interviews; and 
• 
implementation  of  other  research  methods  as  identified  in  the  specialist’s 
methodology proposal, meetings with key actors in addition to producers such 
as collectors, traders, processors, input suppliers, service providers (finance, 
transport,  service,  equipment,  crop  insurance,  etc.),  government  institutions 
and units such as DOP, DOA, and relevant NGOs, and others. 
(iv) 
Phase 4: Draft report. After the field work, the Specialist will prepare a draft report 
in  English  presenting  the  major  findings  and  providing  recommendations.  The 
report will include:  
1.  analytical  framework  and  methodological  approach,  and  set  of  tools  and 
research  instruments  such  as guides  that can  be  used in future  value  chain 
gender analysis by the EA;  
2.  gender analysis of each of the targeted crop value chains, including findings 
about  gender  specific  opportunities  and  constraints  found  along  the  value 
chains;  
3.  clear set of recommendations for including gender in the agribusiness policies 
that  will  be  formulated  under  the  project  (a  5-page  policy  brief  will  be 
developed); 
4.  clear  set  of  recommendations  for  ensuring  gender  responsive  agribusiness 
programming and planning; and 
5.  The  specialist  will  also  present  major  findings  and  recommendations  during 
validation workshops to be organized at local and national levels, and solicit 
128 
Appendix 5 
(v) 
comments from relevant stakeholders. S/he will ensure all comments on the 
draft report will be integrated in the final report. 
Phase 5: Final report. The specialist will prepare a final report in English with the 
above mentioned (under iv) content, which incorporates the feed-back from the EA 
and relevant stakeholders. 
H. 
Specialized  Support  Services in Gender  (local;  equivalent  to  national,  30  person-
months, intermittent)52 
37.  Minimum qualifications. Strong track record of working on gender equality in Myanmar 
and more particularly solid background in gender related work in the context of agriculture and 
rural  development.  Experience  working  on  a  multilateral  development  project.  A  strong  and 
collaborative relationship with MOALI and DSW will be key to facilitating the implementation and 
monitoring of the project gender action plan.   
1. 
Objectives and Scope of Work 
38. 
The service provider will be responsible to provide overall guidance and technical advice 
to the EA/IAs in relation to implementation of the project gender action plan and to ensure effective 
gender mainstreaming in the project and achievement of the intended gender equality results. 
39. 
The  services  will  be  provided  on  an  intermittent  basis  over  the  entire  project 
implementation  period,  with  assigned  gender  expert(s)  dedicated  to  the  project.  The  following 
tasks will be carried out: 
(i)  Provide technical advice related to the different aspects of the project from the social 
development  and  gender  perspectives  and  based  on  the  gender  analysis  of  the 
agricultural value chains (to be conducted at project inception) to ensure women and 
men beneficiaries leverage full impact of the project’s activities.  
(ii)  Review and develop detailed baseline and targets for overall gender action plan and 
poverty reduction indicators. 
(iii)  Review the project gender action plan (included in the PAM) and specifically working 
with the MOALI and DSW Gender Focal Points and the project communities, provide 
overall  leadership,  guidance  and  technical  advice  with  regards  to  implementing, 
regularly monitoring and reporting on the gender action plan (quarterly to ADB, using 
the template in Appendix 3).  Refer to the ADB gender tip sheets for gender action 
plan implementation, monitoring and reporting. Coordinate with the MOALI to ensure 
alignment  with  and  support  the  operationalization  of  the  NSPAW  (especially  the 
livelihoods and participation areas) and Myanmar Agricultural Development Strategy 
2016. 
(iv)  Provide strong technical support by leading the following activities: (i) the capacity-
building  activities  for  the  MOALI  gender  focal  points  (in  close  collaboration  with 
DSW),  and  other  key  departments  in  MOALI  involved  in  the  project  in  gender 
analysis  and  mainstreaming  and gender requirements for the  project; (ii)  support, 
coordinate,  review  and  provide  feed-back  on  the  gender  analysis  of  the  targeted 
52  A  provisional  amount  of  $112,000  (inclusive  of  contingencies)  is  allocated  as  part  of  the  project  budget  under 
provisional sums for procuring specialized support services in gender. This is the equivalent to 30 person-months of 
a national gender consultant (who would have the same TOR). Nevertheless, the option of hiring a specialized firm 
or local organization with strong experience in gender at the community level/engaging women in rural development 
to support the project gender action plan implementation, monitoring and reporting must also be considered, and the 
approach considered the most suitable and sustainable should be adopted. 
Appendix 5 
129 
value  chains  and  in  the  agricultural  sector  –  more  particularly  work  with  the 
International  Value  Chain  Gender  Specialist  for  the  desk  review,  identifying  key 
actors along the value chains and key informants for the field research, organise and 
facilitate all field research related activities and validation workshops, take detailed 
notes  during  the  field  work,  translate  from  Myanmar  to  English  and  English  to 
Myanmar,  and  other  activities  as  needed;  (iii)  provide  advice  to  MOALI  and  the 
agribusiness policy unit on key recommendations from the gender analysis of  the 
targeted value chains for inclusion in the agri-business policies; (iv) capacity-building 
activities in gender equality in climate-friendly agribusiness VCs (based on gender 
analysis in VCs report) for relevant project stakeholders.  
(v)  Work closely with the M&E specialist to ensure that the gender indicators and targets 
included in the DMF and the gender action plan, as well as indicators to measure 
poverty status changes over time are included in the PPMS for the project and build 
capacity to collect and document the relevant quantitative and qualitative data.  
(vi)  Assist  the  project  consultants  to  design  and  help  manage  the  implementation  of 
additional  socio-economic  surveys  as  appropriate  and  which  are  relevant  to  the 
subprojects in the target areas with data disaggregated by sex, ethnicity and income, 
including gender, poverty and community development assessments. 
(vii)  Coordinate  with  and  provide  technical  inputs  to  the  project  safeguard  specialists 
regarding  the  livelihood  and  social  development  components,  and  advising  on  a 
training needs assessment of impacted households.  
(viii)  Ensure  that  social  development  and  gender  issues  are  accurately  covered  at  all 
phases  of  the  project;  ensure  poor  and  women’s  livelihood  needs  are  regularly 
assessed and addressed. 
(ix)  Prepare and conduct before-and-after surveys to assess project gender impacts. 
(x)  Support  and  provide  technical  advice  at  the  start  of  and  during  project 
to  gender  action  plan 
implementation  on  any  other  matters 
implementation, monitoring and reporting as and when required.  
in  relation 
(xi)  Prepare a Gender Appendix to the Project Completion Report summarizing major 
achievements  regarding  the  intended  gender  equality  results  and  reporting 
achievements on every activity and target included in the gender action plan. Refer 
to the ADB Tip Sheet on reporting gender results at project completion. 
(xii)  Facilitate  knowledge  sharing  on  social  development  and  gender  related  issues, 
through partner forums, web pages and reports and including lessons learned/ best 
practice from Myanmar or elsewhere. 
2. 
Institutional Arrangements 
40. 
The service provider will report to the PMU Director. The PMU will support the selected 
local  firm/consultant  in  undertaking  its responsibilities and  organizing field work  when needed, 
especially  related  to  (i)  the  preparation  of  required  social  and  gender  analysis  appendices  of 
subproject feasibility studies, (ii) gender action plan implementation, monitoring and reporting (iii) 
and capacity-building activities. The service provider will liaise with the gender specialist at the 
ADB RM if needed. 
3. 
Reporting 
The  service  provider  will  support  the  preparation  of  reports  and  documents  following 
41. 
Government of Myanmar and ADB rules and guidelines which will include: 
(i)  Social  and  Gender  analysis  appendices  of  feasibility  studies  for  subproject 
preparation; 
130 
Appendix 5 
(ii)  Progress reports at least semi-annually on gender action plan implementation using 
the template in Appendix 3; and  
(iii)  Any other social development study reports as required and requested by MOA. 
I. 
Social  Safeguards  Specialist  (international,  2  person-months  and  national,  10 
person-months) 
42.  Minimum  qualifications.  Relevant  degree,  e.g.,  sociology;  experience  in  rural  and 
community  development  work;  experience  working  on  international  development  projects, 
including 
indigenous 
peoples/ethnic  minority  development  plans,  preferably  on  ADB-funded  projects;  experience 
working  on  social  safeguards  on  development  projects  in  Southeast  Asia;  excellent  English 
speaking and writing skills.  
land  acquisition  and  resettlement  plans  and 
the  preparation  of 
43. 
The objective of the position is to provide guidance in screening subprojects, conducting 
feasibility  studies,  preparing  land  acquisition  and  resettlement  plans  (LARP)  and  indigenous 
peoples/ethnic minority development plans (IPP), according to the ADB SPS (2009) and the land 
acquisition and resettlement framework and IPP framework established for the project. 
The scope of work includes:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii) 
(xiv) 
training 
to  executing  and 
Provide  safeguard  concept  and  monitoring 
implementation agency staff;  
Assist in establishing M&E reporting for social safeguard indicators; 
Monitor implementation of the subproject LARPs and IPPs; 
The  social  safeguards  expert  will  be  responsible  to  the  PIC  international  team 
leader  and  will  work  closely  with  the  PIC  engineers,  Social  Development  and 
Gender  Specialists,  and  the  staff  of  the  implementing  agencies  at  the  national, 
regional, district, and township levels; 
Assist  and  direct  community  consultations  as  per  the  LARF  to  identify  land 
acquisition needs for subprojects identified during implementation; 
Lead  and  provide  guidance  in  conducting  and  reporting  subproject  social 
safeguard  feasibility  studies  and  ensure  subproject  feasibility  study  procedures 
and approval processes are being applied in accordance with the LARF; 
Prepare LARP and IPP where required; 
Review  feasibility  study  documentation  to  ensure  it  provides  details  of  all  land 
acquired  from  each  household  in  accordance  with  ADB  SPS  (2009)  and  the 
CFAVC LARF; 
Ensure  land  acquisition  agreements  are  duly  signed  by  husband  and  wife  and 
witnessed by village and commune authorities; 
Review all subprojects to ensure that no land has been acquired through coercion, 
compensation monies paid, and that land purchased or acquired by cooperatives 
was done so under free private commercial transparent transactions; 
Identify  impacts  on  ethnic  minority  households  and  communities  and  where 
identified,  prepare  an  IPP  as  recommended  under  the  IPPF  and  also  establish 
monitoring procedures; 
Prepare training guidelines for preparation of a resettlement plan, and indigenous 
peoples’  plan  in  accordance  with  Myanmar  Government  Laws  and  Regulations 
and ADB's SPS and the LARF and IPPF prepared under the PPTA; 
Provide  inputs  to  the  monitoring  and  reporting  systems  and  provide  information 
required for third party audit of land acquisition and voluntary donation cases; and 
Help the PMU to set-up a combined social safeguards and environment grievance 
redress system. 
Appendix 5 
131 
J. 
Environmental Safeguards Specialist (international, 6 person-months and national, 
20 person-months) 
44.  Minimum qualifications. Relevant degree, e.g., in environmental management or natural 
resource management; experience on international development projects, preferably ADB-funded 
projects, wherein environmental management plans (EMPs), initial environmental examinations 
(IEEs),  and  environmental  assessment  and  review  framework  (EARFs)  were  completed; 
experience working on environmental safeguards and/or implementing climate change adaptation 
and disaster risk reduction projects on development projects in Southeast Asia; excellent English 
speaking and writing skills  
The objective of the position will be to develop plans, procedures, and stakeholder buy-
45. 
ins  in  all  aspects  of  environmental  management,  monitoring  and  impact  assessment  in  the 
implementation of the project EARF and the IEEs of the subprojects.  
The scope of work includes:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
assisting  the  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU),  the  PMU  Safeguards  and 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officers, and other relevant personnel and agencies in 
the  implementation  of  the  Project’s  EARF  and  the  subproject  IEEs.  More 
specifically:  
o 
to ensure that the steps of the EARF covering environmental screening and 
impact assessment are followed by the PMU 
to  deliver  training  (i)  in  EARF  procedures  for  screening  and  assessing 
environmental  impact  by  way  of  the  IEE,  and  (ii)  in  record-keeping  and 
reporting 
to establish and publicize the grievance redress mechanism  for subprojects, 
ensuring  that  publicity  is  appropriate  to  the  scale  and  complexity  of  the 
subproject and includes, as a minimum, the disclosure of all contact persons 
for lodging complaints 
o 
o 
mapping out capacity needs of policymakers and other stakeholders in terms of (i) 
climate data needs, (ii) vulnerability and impact assessments, (iii) subnational and 
gender  mainstreaming  of  climate  resilience  at  policy  and  operational  levels,  (iv) 
conducting  feasibility  studies  of  gender-responsive  adaptation  projects,  (v) 
knowledge management, and (vi) appropriate M&E; 
advising  project  staff,  IAs,  and  relevant  government  departments  on  knowledge 
management on climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction; 
preparing training materials, guidelines and sector manuals and conduct training 
programs  and workshops for  integrating (i)  adaptation  into  subnational  planning 
and development, (ii) gender considerations into adaptation investments, and (ii) 
adaptation indicators into national, sectoral and project M&E systems; 
assisting  the  PMU  in  prepare  quarterly  and  semi-annual  project  monitoring 
progress reports for submission to ADB; and 
Help the PMU to set-up a combined social safeguards and environment grievance 
redress system. 
K. 
M&E Specialist (international, 6 person-months and national, 20 person-months) 
46.  Minimum  qualifications.  Relevant  degree,  e.g. 
in  economics;  experience  on 
in  developing  and 
international  development  projects,  preferably  ADB-funded  projects, 
maintaining M&E systems (PPMS), and planning and overseeing baseline data collection, and 
132 
Appendix 5 
impact surveys, particularly on agricultural development projects; excellent English speaking and 
writing skills. Knowledge of GIS would be an advantage.  
47. 
The scope of work includes:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
develop  the  project  M&E  system  (PPMS)  including  necessary  reporting  formats 
(unless already done by the start-up consultants);  
train the PMU, RPIUs and TPIUs in the implementation of the PPMS; 
based on data from the M&E system showing the location of subprojects create 
maps showing where subprojects are located and the status of these;  
plan  (including  preparation  of  TORs  for  an  external  survey  firm)  and  oversee 
baseline data collection, and impact surveys; 
assist  the  PMU  in  the  production  of  progress  reports  for  submission  to  MOALI, 
PSC  and  ADB,  and  work  with  safeguards  specialists  to  ensure  that  safeguard 
monitoring reports are produced, including monitoring against the gender action 
plan. 
Reporting  Requirements  and  Time  Schedule  for  Deliverables.  The  project 
48. 
implementation  period  of  the  consultant  services  is  7  years  (tentatively  1  January  2019  -  31 
December 2025). Deliverables include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Inception Report – within 3 months of mobilization – presenting approach to tasks 
and reporting, with details of how each task will be performed, and identifying what 
resources will or may be required. 
Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) – summarizes the highlights per quarter, the 
activities  undertaken  and  a  summary  of  disbursements;  physical  and  financial 
progress of the project; achievement of targets for outputs and inputs defined in 
DMF, to be submitted within 14 working days of the first month of the succeeding 
quarter. 
Project Performance Monitoring Reports (PPMS) – shall be submitted every 6 
months, highlighting the performance based on the DMF targets. 
Borrower’s  Project  Completion  Report  –  within  6  months  from  physical 
completion of the project. 
Safeguard monitoring reports – due as required in the project LARFs, EARFs 
and EMDF (linked documents). 
Gender Action Plan - due at least semi-annually, as required in the gender action 
plan linked document. 
Transfer  of  Knowledge:  The  PIC  will  take  every  opportunity  to  work  alongside 
49. 
government counterpart staff on a day-to-day basis, and provide on-the-job training and conduct 
workshops, as necessary, for government staff and project stakeholders on project management, 
financial management, M&E and safeguard issues, as well as technical subjects within the scope 
of PIC services, as required.  
Client’s Input and Counterpart Personnel. Services, facilities and property to be made 
50. 
available to the consultants by the client: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
All  available  project  reports  and  data  including  feasibility  reports  and  detailed 
engineering design for the three representative subprojects; 
Office space with furniture and office equipment, plus internet access; 
Vehicles; 
Counterpart support staff in PMU and PIU. 
Appendix 5 
133 
III.  CAPACITY BUILDING AND CSA TRAINING 
51. 
Objective  of  the  assignment.  The  Capacity  Building  and  Climate  Smart  Agriculture 
Consultants will provide technical capacity building and advisory services to the EA and IA in the 
implementation  of  the  project.  The  capacity  building/CSA  consultants  will  work  in  close  co-
ordination  with  the  project  implementation  consultants  (PIC),  contracted  under  a  separate 
package,  who  will  concentrate  principally  on  support  to  project  management,  procurement, 
safeguard compliance and M&E. 
A. 
Laboratory, Quality and Safety Training Specialist (international, 4 person-months) 
52. 
Qualifications:  
•  Relevant degree, e.g., in chemistry, biotechnology, food technology;  
•  Experience  in  the  rehabilitation  of  food  safety  laboratories  (in  particular  in  the 
equipping of such laboratories); 
•  Experience in supporting laboratories to become ISO17025; 
•  Experience of supporting laboratories in Southeast Asia is an advantage; and 
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills.  
53. 
The scope of work includes:  
•  Assist  the  IAs  in  upgrading  the  pesticide,  food  safety,  and  commodity  testing 
infrastructure  (equipment  and  instrumentation)  of  three  National  Government 
laboratories,  the  MOALI  –  Plant  Protection  Division  (PPD)  Pesticide  Testing 
Laboratory  (PTL),  the  MOALI  -  PPD  Food  Safety  Testing  Lab  (FSTLAB),  and  the 
Ministry of Commerce (MOC) – Dept of Consumer Affairs (CA) Commodity Testing & 
Quality Management Laboratory (CTQM). Specific tasks will include assisting in the 
selection  of  equipment  (reviewing  the  work  of  the  PPTA  recommendations)  and 
preparation of specifications for tender documents.  
•  Once  equipment  arrives,  provide  training  to  laboratory  staff  in  the  use  of  such 
equipment; 
•  Work with the laboratories to develop a plan to become self-sustainable. i.e. once the 
increased testing capability is in place, each laboratory will need to adjust its fees to 
be commensurate with the value of the test run; 
•  Prepare a plan for the laboratory to become ISO17025 accredited, noting that it is not 
expected that the laboratory will become accredited during the consultant’s time on 
the project; 
•  Support the DOA and MyanTrade in developing specifications for the purchase of rapid 
reactions kits (to test the quality of produce being stored in private farms) and provide 
training to recipients in the use of such kits. Recipients will be selected by DOA and 
MyanTrade according to selection criteria included in the PAM. The consultant may 
be requested to assist with the selection process.  
B. 
Farm  Mechanization  Specialist  (international,  3  person-months  and  national,  6 
person-months) 
54.  Minimum Qualification Requirements 
•  Degree  in  agriculture  or  agriculture  engineering,  with  at  least  10  years  of  relevant 
working experience (for the international in emerging economies); 
•  Experience in agriculture mechanization for climate smart agriculture technologies; 
134 
Appendix 5 
•  Experience in the planning and implementation of agriculture mechanization training 
programs 
55. 
Scope  of  Work.  The  specialist  will  support  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and 
Irrigation  (MOALI)  Agriculture  Mechanization  Department  (AMD),  Department  of  Rural 
Development (DRD) and DOA-Extension Division (ED) to promote agriculture mechanization in 
collaboration with private sector companies.  This will include will include the development and 
implementation of workshops and demonstrations on mechanization and training on machinery 
operation and repair. Participants will include private dealers, service providers, mechanics, repair 
workshops, MOALI staff, and farmers.  
56. 
C. 
57. 
Detailed Tasks. The responsibilities will include: 
•  The  identification  of  machinery  suitable  for  (a) smallholder  farmers,  particularly  for 
women-headed  households;  (b) machinery  suitable  for  the  pulse-based  farming 
systems; and (c) machinery supportive of climate smart interventions (direct seeding, 
deep placement of fertilizer, laser leveling, water saving irrigation technologies, etc.); 
•  The development of training material on best practice mechanization technologies and 
practices applicable to crop varieties and soil types in the Central Dry Zone (CDZ); 
•  Training of trainers from the AMD on mechanization best practice; 
•  Assist  AMD  to  develop  with  private  sector  and  DOA-ED  /  DRD  mechanization 
demonstrations on lead farmers fields; 
•  Assist  AMD  to  assess  the  demand  for  machinery  operation  and  repair  skills  in  the 
target area and organize training with private sector and/or the AMD Meikthila Training 
Centre. 
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the 
IA, for the farm mechanization activities 
Agribusiness  Policy  and  PPP  Specialists  (international,  9  person-months  and 
national, 35 person-months) 
Qualifications:  
•  Relevant  degree,  e.g.,  in  agricultural  policy,  agricultural  economics,  or  agricultural 
marketing; 
•  Experience  in  agricultural  policy  formulation,  research  and  analysis,  and  advocacy 
work in development projects in developing countries; 
•  Experience working in developing an agriculture/agribusiness policy framework and in 
carrying out policy development in South or Southeast Asian countries; and 
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills . 
The objective of this position is help the newly formed agribusiness policy unit to develop 
58. 
an agribusiness policy framework for MOALI and help formulate agribusiness policy priorities. 
59. 
The scope of work includes: 
•  Help (i) in developing an agribusiness policy framework, and (ii) in formulating climate-
smart, agribusiness policy priorities and a workplan which includes, but is not limited 
to, the policy topics described in the PAM.    
•  Guide  the  Policy  Unit  Director  and  Research  Officers  in  formulating  agribusiness 
policies that have a direct impact on creating an enabling environment for agribusiness 
stakeholders in the Project’s value chains  
•  Recommend agriculture policy training programs that are available regionally   
D. 
60. 
61. 
Appendix 5 
135 
•  Train the  Director  and  Research Officers  in  various policy  tools for  analyzing  policy 
options  and  potential  outcomes,  using  priority  policy  topics,  such  as,  the  expected 
impact from registering Shwebo Paw San Rice as a Geographic Indication 
•  Assist the Policy Unit in advocating agribusiness policies across departments in the 
MOALI, across ministries (MOALI, MOC, MOI), and among the stakeholders along the 
value chains 
•  Assist  the  Policy  Unit  in  preparing  “Policy  Briefs”  disseminated  among  public  and 
private  stakeholders  to  inform  them  of  specific  attributes  of  the  agribusiness  policy 
reforms  taking  place  and  in  getting  feedback  on  policies  that  are  in  the  formative 
stages. 
•  With  support  from  the  gender  specialists  from  the  PIC  firm,  ensure  that  gender  is 
mainstreamed into policies 
Agricultural  quality,  safety  and  standards  specialists  (international,  6  person-
months and national, 12 person-months) 
Qualifications:  
•  Experience in developing agricultural commodity standards and applying them within 
the agricultural sector 
•  Applied  knowledge  of  the  role  of  standards  in  trade  and  certification  systems,  with 
specific knowledge of the ASEAN AEC trade frameworks and the current situation in 
the GMS 
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills 
•  Relevant degree 
The scope of work includes:  
•  Together with the policy unit, agribusiness policy specialists, PIC Team Leader, and 
the  MOC,  prepare  a  workplan  for  developing  various  product  quality,  food  safety, 
manufacturing, and other standards (at farmgate, post-storage, post-processing, and 
pre-export) and/or codes of practice along the value chains of the targeted agricultural 
commodities; 
•  Assist the Technical Committee of the National Standards Committee and the MOC in 
developing  appropriate  standards  for  the  project’s  targeted  commodities,  including 
setting  specifications  and  minimum  requirements  for  certification,  labelling  and 
marking;  
•  Working closely with the climate smart agribusiness specialist and the IA, develop food 
safety management systems appropriate for the milling of rice and the processing of 
pulses, beans, and oilseeds by  
o 
integrating  Good  Manufacturing  Practices  and  HACCP  into  the  management 
systems 
o  aligning HACCP with ISO 22000 Food Safety Management into the systems 
•  Conduct workshops with direct and indirect stakeholders of the targeted value chains 
for presentation and discussion of drafted standards, both Government regulated as 
well as voluntary standards;   
•  Advocate  for  the  approval  of  the  drafted  standards  that  come  under  Government 
regulation; 
•  Work closely with the IA and the direct stakeholders in getting industrial support for 
the drafted voluntary standards; and 
•  Develop an implementation plan for integrating the various standards and food safety 
management systems into the value chain activities. 
136 
Appendix 5 
E. 
62. 
Geographic  Indication,  Branding  &  Marketing  Specialist  (international,  4  person-
months and national, 9 person-months) 
Qualifications:  
•  Experience in developing brands for processed food and marketing high-valued agro-
processed products in the private sector 
•  Experience working in high-valued agricultural commodity marketing in South and/or 
Southeast Asia  
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills  
•  Relevant degree, e.g. in marketing, business management, or agricultural economics 
with a specialization in agricultural commodity marketing  
63. 
The objectives of the position are (i) to raise awareness of processing plants in product 
branding  required  for  high  end  domestic  markets,  such  as  large  supermarket  chains,  and 
international  markets  that  demand  high  quality  products,  and  (ii)  to  develop  and  promote  the 
Shwebo Paw San rice after being registered as a Geographic Indication.  
64. 
F. 
65. 
66. 
The scope of work includes:   
•  Work  with  the  Intellectual  Property  Division  of  the  Science  and  Technology 
Department of the Ministry of Education in developing and promoting the Shwebo Paw 
San rice that is registered as a geographic indication (GI); 
•  Work  with  the  Myanmar  Trade  Promotion  Organization  (MTPO)  of  the  MOC  in 
providing advise to companies on branding and deciding if there is a need for product 
brands, in addition to that for Shwebo Paw San rice; and  
•  Recommend participation for project supported processors in regional trade shows. 
Green  finance  capacity  building  specialists  (international,  5  person-months  and 
national, 9 person-months) 
Qualifications:  
•  Experience working in a private bank managing loans for agribusiness investment 
•  Experience of climate finance and/or climate-friendly financial products  
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills  
•  Relevant  degree  e.g.  in  banking,  finance,  or  agricultural  economics  with courses  in 
finance  
The scope of work includes:  
• 
Identify  financial  institutions  that  have  an  interested  in  developing  their  agricultural 
portfolios and receiving project assistance; 
•  Develop environmental and climate screening criteria and tools to guide FIs' lending 
activities; 
•  Build capacity of FIs for evaluating loans against these environmental and climate risk 
screening criteria; and 
•  Help integrate mitigation and adaptation opportunities into FIs' lending activities. 
Appendix 5 
137 
G. 
Market  and  credit  information  specialist  (international,  6  person-months  and 
national, 18 person-months) 
67.  Minimum Qualification Requirements 
•  Relevant  degree,  e.g.,  master’s 
in 
information  systems  management, 
land 
management or geography; 
•  At  least  7  years’  experience in market  information  systems,  including  mobile based 
systems. 
68. 
Scope  of  Work.  The  specialist  will  support,  DOP,  in  close  collaboration  with  DOA,  to 
facilitate  the  linkage  of  existing  market  price  and  credit  information  networks  between  local 
markets and traders, with the target beneficiaries.  
69. 
Detailed Tasks. The specialist will assist DOP to: 
• 
Identify  existing  information  systems  that  can  be  built  on  and  expanded.  E.g.  e.g. 
Greenway  and  Shwe Thee Nha,  and  DOA’s  call  center  which may  also be  used to 
provide such information to farmers and agribusinesses. 
•  Help to expand such systems so that 100% of the project beneficiaries are using the 
market information network to help negotiate markets and market prices for their crops 
and products.  
H. 
Land  Use,  GIS  and  Agro-Ecological  Zoning  Specialist  (international,  6  person-
months and national, 18 person-months) 
70.  Minimum Qualification Requirements 
•  Master’s in information systems management, land management or geography 
•  At least 7 years’ experience in the development and application of GIS-based planning 
and management systems in emerging economies 
71. 
Scope of Work. The specialist will assist the Department of Agriculture Land Management 
and Statistics (DALMS), in partnership with the Land Use Division of the Department of Agriculture 
(DOA),  to  develop  a  fit  for  purpose  GIS  database  system  covering,  inter  alia,  land  resource 
administrative  types,  land  allocation,  related  infrastructure  (water,  roads,  settlements,  etc.), 
groundwater information and the administrative classification of farmland. 
72. 
Detailed Tasks. The specialist will assist DALMS to: 
•  Specify and procure 24,000 km2 of Rapid Eye 5m resolution satellite imagery; 
•  Develop participatory land use maps for the 12 project districts; 
•  Compile a fit for purpose GIS database; 
•  Produce  at  least  6  Township  management  plans  that  identify  and  program  land 
administration interventions at township level ((identification of available unused and 
suitable VFV land and state-owned land for possible re-allocation; needs for further 
land  use  certification  and  tenure  regularization  –  grazing  lands,  fishponds;  de-
gazzeting of occupied reserved forests; establishment of community forests; etc.); 
•  Assist in the development of related staff training products. 
138 
Appendix 5 
I. 
Rural Land Planning and Administration Specialist (international, 6 person-months 
and national, 8 person-months) 
73.  Minimum Qualification Requirements 
•  Masters in land management planning or geography 
•  At least 7 years’ experience in the development and application of land planning and 
management systems in emerging economies 
Scope of Work. The specialist will assist the Department of Agriculture Land Management 
74. 
and Statistics (DALMS), in partnership with the Land Use Division of the Department of Agriculture 
(DOA), to develop a planning tool to select up to 200 villages clustered in village tracts to deliver 
inputs and facilitation services, covering both locations for irrigation development in the alluvial 
plains, and upland areas for improved rainfed agriculture and livestock production. 
75. 
Detailed Tasks. The specialist will assist DALMS to: 
•  Produce at least 6 township land management plans to: (a) Identify and program land 
administration interventions  at township level (identification of available unused and 
suitable VFV land and state-owned land for possible re-allocation; needs for further 
land  use  certification  and  tenure  regularization  –  grazing  lands,  fishponds;  de-
gasketing of occupied reserved forests; establishment of community forests; etc.); and 
(b) Select  up  to  three  Village  Tracts  for  each  township  for  project  specific  land 
administrative  interventions  (institutional  capacity  building  for  village  development 
committees and Village Tract Administrative Body of Farmland, village planning, land 
tenure regularization, capacity building). 
•  Establishing regional/township crop suitability for on and off-season production for a 
selection of relevant crops under different inputs scenarios.  
•  Build  capacity  to  validate,  strategize  and  implement  participatory  township  land 
management plans produced at the national level. 
•  Assist in the development of related staff training products. 
J. 
Land  Administration  Services  Specialist  (international,  3  person-months  and 
national, 8 person-months) 
76.  Minimum Qualification Requirements 
•  Masters in land management planning or geography; 
•  At  least  10  years’  experience  in  training  in  the  development  and  application  land 
planning  and  management  systems  and  GIS  information  systems  in  emerging 
economies. 
Scope of Work. The specialist will assist the Department of Agriculture Land Management 
77. 
and Statistics (DALMS), in partnership with the Land Use Division of the Department of Agriculture 
(DoA),  to  develop  a  capacity  building  program  to  support  township  land  administrations  staff, 
targeting DALMS and the General Administrative Department (GAD), including the design of a 
model office at the township level to put into place more client friendly service delivery. 
Detailed  Tasks.  The  specialist  will  assist  DALMS  to  develop  staff  training  programs 
78. 
covering: 
•  Training  in  the  use  of  modern,  but  cost  effective  and  simple  techniques  to  handle 
routine  and  new  land  administration  tasks  (land  use  titling,  crop  statistics,  securing 
Appendix 5 
139 
• 
tenure  over  communal  village  lands  and  woodlots;  reclaiming  allocated  but  unused 
VFV land for re-allocation to the poor); land use planning; and 
land  administration  systems,  participatory  land  use  planning,  work  ethics,  and 
relationship with clients, land dispute management; work planning, report preparation, 
etc. 
K. 
Capacity Building Coordinator (national, 60 person-months) 
79. 
Qualifications:  
• 
• 
Relevant degree e.g. agriculture or agronomy  
Experience  in  project  management  and  co-ordination.  Specific  experience  on 
donor-funded projects will be an advantage 
At least 7 years’ experience in agricultural development 
At least 3 years’ experience in undertaking capacity building activities  
Excellent English speaking and writing skills 
• 
• 
• 
The objective of the position is principally to organize the capacity building activities of the 
80. 
project in co-ordination with the team and IAs. The scope of work includes:  
•  Prepare activity and personnel schedules for the team, and integrate into the overall work 
plan in coordination with the PIC team leader and the FAO chief technical adviser (for a 
separate GAFSP funded package); 
•  Coordinate the team’s inputs as per the work plan; 
•  Organize capacity building activities in coordination with other team members and IAs; 
•  Undertake capacity building across various project components, as per gaps in the training 
provided by others (e.g. on climate smart agriculture), and where complementary to other 
experts’ expertise. Prepare joint training activities as required with the FAO team and PIC 
team; 
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the IA 
and team, in coordination with the PIC team; and 
•  Prepare an inception report, quarterly progress reports and final report.     
L. 
Seed Production & Certification Specialist (national, 7 person-months) 
81. 
Qualifications:  
•  Experience working in the production of certified seed of rice, pulses, and/or oilseeds in 
the private or public sector 
•  Experience in applying climate smart agricultural practices in seed varietal selection and 
multiplication  
•  Experience in cleaning, drying, and storing certified seed in modern storage facilities, with 
experience in storing seeds in Hermetic bags preferred   
•  Good communication and organizational development skills; experience in organizing and 
conducting TOT programs and on-farm seed demonstrations    
•  Relevant degree, e.g., in agronomy with specialization preferably in crop breeding, seed 
multiplication 
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills 
82. 
The objective of the position is to build the capacity of DOA seed farms to produce high-
quality varieties of climate-resilient seed varieties of rice, pulses, bean, and sesame. The scope 
of work includes: 
140 
Appendix 5 
•  Work in close liaison with the FAO seed production specialist (not part of this project) 
who will be supporting farm-level production of seeds, purchased from the DOA seed 
farms 
•  Build the capacity of DOA seed farms to produce high quality seeds. Work together 
with other specialists to plan improved infrastructure and equipment for the farms   
•  As  required,  support  DOA  and  DRD  in  the  introduction  of  new  climate-resilient 
varieties  
•  Help facilitate  an  improved  collaboration  between  DOA  seed farms  and the  private 
sector  to  assess  the  most  demanded  varieties  of  pulses  and  oil  seeds  with  good 
qualities in terms of climate change resilience, pest and disease resistance, nutritional 
qualities, good market demand;  
•  Work  with  DOA  to  liaise  with  DAR  to  plan  availability  and  production  of  breeder, 
foundation and registered seeds, and undertake field inspections; 
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the 
IA, for seed production activities 
•  Support  business  plan  development for  each  DOA  seed farm  so that they  become 
financially sustainable soon.  
M.  Water Management Specialist (national, 36 person-months) 
83. 
Qualifications:  
•  Experience in building the capacity of farmers in on-farm water management 
•  Relevant degree e.g. in irrigation or water management    
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills 
The objective of the position is to build the capacity of farmers, and farmer’s groups (in 
84. 
particular water user groups) on improved on-farm water management techniques.   
85. 
The scope of work includes:  
•  Assist the IWUMD in developing an organized management system, i.e., water users 
groups, for managing and maintaining the improved irrigation infrastructure 
•  Together with the irrigation supervision engineer from the PIC team, provide capacity 
building  with  the  IWUMD  to  the  water  users  groups  managing  and  maintaining  the 
irrigation systems 
•  Support IWUMD in providing capacity building to farmers in target irrigation schemes, 
as well as those farmers receiving tube wells (and drip irrigation) under the project, on 
improved  on-farm  water management  practices  such  as  optimal  crop-specific  water 
application methods, land leveling, soil amelioration, drainage, etc. 
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the 
IA, e.g., to ensure female representation in water user groups 
N. 
Post-harvest Handling & Storage Specialist (national, 11 person-months) 
86. 
Qualifications:  
•  Experience  in  post-harvest  handling  and  storage  on  long-term  implementation  of 
development projects 
•  Relevant  degree,  e.g.,  in  agricultural  engineering  or  civil  engineering  with  a 
specialization in grain post-harvest handling and storage    
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills 
87. 
The objective of the position is to improve the cleaning, drying, and storage practices of 
the DOA Seed Farms, the private seed growers, and the farmer groups by providing technical 
assistance and training in post-harvest handling and storage of certified seed and grain. 
Appendix 5 
141 
88. 
The scope of work includes:  
• 
Working closely with the DOA (IA), DAR, the MOC (IA), the PMU Project Director, 
and the PIC International Team Leader and national Engineer (for the DOA seed 
farms), the National Seed Production and Certification Specialist, and others such 
as  IRRI,  ACIAR…etc  integrate  through  workplans,  the  appropriate  cleaning, 
drying, and storage facilities into the subprojects (of the DOA Seed Farms, etc) in 
order  to  effectively  train  the  equipment  and  storage  operators  in  the  codes  of 
practice, including GMP, GHP, and HACCP, in the operations  
Liaise  with  other  development  initiatives  engaged  in  harvest  and  post-harvest 
operations  such  as  reduction  of  shattering  losses,  separation  losses,  scattering 
losses and threshing losses; 
Identify,  collect  and  document  best  practices  of  harvest  and  post-harvest 
operations with a special focus but not limited to pulses, oil-seeds and rice; 
In collaboration with DOA-ED develop appropriate extension messages, including 
mobile phone based app-content, for use with FFS, lead farmers, and seed farmer 
groups; 
Identify  useful  machinery,  equipment  and  operating  procedures  to  minimize 
harvest and post-harvest losses, including improved storage operations. 
Facilitate procurement of needed equipment to run demonstrations and trials on 
improved harvest and post-harvest operations. 
Training and providing technical assistance to the DOA Seed Farms, the private 
seed  growers  and  storage  managers,  the  farmer  groups,  and  processors  in 
appropriate  cleaning,  drying,  and  storage  methods  in  the  TOT,  FFS,  and  group 
training venues 
Working  with  the  PMU  monitoring  and  evaluation  staff  and  the  regional 
representatives of the IAs in training them to recognize what needs to be monitored 
to effectively evaluate the impact of adopting the codes of practice 
Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by 
the IA, for the post-harvest support activities 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
O. 
Farm Mechanization Business Development Specialist (national, 6 person-months) 
89.  Minimum qualification requirements 
•  Degree in agriculture economics or business management with at least 10 years of 
relevant working experience in Myanmar 
•  Extensive experience in agriculture mechanization in Myanmar 
Scope of Work. The specialist will help promote agriculture mechanization in collaboration 
90. 
with private sector companies.  The specialist will also work with AMD Agriculture Mechanization 
Services  in  the  CDZ  to  assist  them  to  prepare  business  plans  with  a  view  to  their  eventual 
privatization, as proposed in the Agricultural Development Strategy (ADS). 
91. 
Detailed Tasks. The responsibilities will include: 
142 
Appendix 5 
•  Support  private  sector  agriculture  mechanization  contractors  with  applications  for 
machinery procurement under the Hire Purchase Financing Program supported by the 
LIFT; 
•  Work  with  selected  AMD  Agriculture  Mechanization  Stations  to  develop  business 
plans with a view to their sustainable, profitable operation and eventual privatization. 
P. 
Climate Smart Agribusiness Specialist (national, 30 person-months) 
92. 
Qualifications:  
•  Experience  in  the  agricultural  processing  sector  in  Myanmar,  in  the  target  crops. 
Previous practical experience in the private sector is preferred. 
•  Knowledge  and  experience  of  applying  Good  Manufacturing  Practice  (GMP),  Hood 
Hygienic Practice (GHP) and HACCP 
•  Excellent English speaking and writing skills 
•  Relevant degree 
93. 
The scope of work includes:  
•  Assist  the  IAs  in  designing  and  implementing  the  capacity  building  program  for 
agribusinesses  in  particular,  in  improving  product  quality  by  practicing  good 
manufacturing practices (GMP) while incorporating climate smart practices (such as 
improved energy and water use efficiency).  
Identify existing documentation of best practices for improving product quality along 
the downstream value chain (after the farmgate). This includes in food safety, product 
quality assurance, GMP, GHP, HACCP, product branding and market promotion. This 
will be done in parallel with standards development activities under Output 3 carried 
out by the policy unit with support from the agricultural quality, safety and standards 
specialists; 
• 
•  Upgrade guidelines in a participatory manner, working together with the policy unit with 
• 
support from the agricultural quality, safety and standards specialists; 
Identify  external  training  providers  for  implementing  a  training  of  trainers  (ToT) 
approach; 
•  Elaborate contract farming models (with the agribusiness policy unit in MOALI) and in 
coordination with the PIC team leader;  
•  Prepare and help implement capacity building modules so that standards (including 
GMP and HACCP) developed by the policy unit are adopted by agri-processors and 
traders with appropriate backward linkages to farmers through appropriate contracting 
farming  models  so  that  agri-processors  and  traders  can  also  build  the  capacity  of 
farmers to improve farm-gate standards; and 
•  Ensure that the gender action plan recommendations are being implemented by the 
IA, for the agribusiness support activities. 
IV. 
FEASIBILITY STUDIES AND DETAILED DESIGN CONSULTANTS 
A. 
Objective of the assignment  
Appendix 5 
143 
94. 
The Feasibility Studies and Detailed Design Consultants will prepare designs for: 
(i) 
The rehabilitation/upgrading of infrastructure on ten DOA seed farms (noting that 
one has already been designed during project preparation); 
The rehabilitation/upgrading of 130 km of tertiary canals, identified by IWUMD as 
per  selection  criteria  in  the  PAM  (noting  that  one  scheme  has  already  been 
designed by the PPTA consultants); 
The  rehabilitation  of  15  community-owned  reservoirs  used 
irrigating 
approximately 1000 hectares of land, identified by IWUMD as per selection criteria 
in the PAM. 
The rehabilitation/upgrading of 300 km single-track farm feeder roads, identified 
by DRD as per selection criteria in the PAM, into all-weather roads (not asphalt); 
for 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
B. 
Scope of work 
95. 
Rehabilitation/upgrading of infrastructure on ten DOA seed farms, including: 
(i) 
Visit and survey the prescribed sites for the rehabilitating and upgrading of DOA 
seed farm infrastructure together with DOA staff. Such infrastructure could include 
roads, irrigation canals and buildings.   
Undertake topographical and other surveys as required to undertake the work. 
Prepare feasibility studies of the chosen subproject sites along with the detailed 
engineering  designs  that  accompany  each  of  these  sites.  This  should  include 
drawings, BOQs and specifications so that tender documents can be produced.  
Present  the  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs  to  the  DOA,  and  the  PIC 
national engineer and get their feedback and approval.  
Once approved, submit the feasibility studies and the detailed designs to the PMU 
Project Director.  
Complete any modifications to the feasibility studies and detailed designs and re-
submit.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Rehabilitation/upgrading of 130 km of tertiary canals and 15 community-owned reservoirs, 
96. 
identified by IWUMD as per selection criteria in the PAM, including: 
•  Visit  and  survey  the  prescribed  sites  for  the  irrigation  improvements  (rehabilitating 
minor  canals  and  renovating  small  reservoirs)  together  with  the  local  IWUMD 
engineers. 
•  Undertake topographical and other surveys as required to undertake the work. 
•  Prepare  feasibility  studies  of  the  chosen  subproject  sites  along  with  the  detailed 
engineering  designs  that  accompany  each  of  these  sites.  This  should  include 
drawings, BOQs and specifications so that tender documents can be produced.  
•  Present the feasibility studies and detailed designs to the IWUMD engineers, officials, 
and the PIC International and National Irrigation Specialists and get their feedback and 
approval.  
•  Once  approved,  submit  the  feasibility  studies  and  the  detailed  designs  to  the  PMU 
Project Director.  
•  Complete  any  modifications  to  the  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs  and  re-
submit.  
144 
Appendix 5 
Rehabilitation/upgrading of 300 km single-track farm feeder roads, identified by DRD as 
97. 
per selection criteria in the PAM, into all-weather roads (not asphalt): 
•  Visit and survey the prescribed sites for the repair of the farm feeder roads together 
with the local DRD road engineers.  
•  Undertake topographical and other surveys as required to undertake the work. 
•  Prepare  feasibility  studies  of  the  chosen  subproject  sites  along  with  the  detailed 
engineering  designs  that  accompany  each  of  these  sites.  This  should  include 
drawings, BOQs and specifications so that tender documents can be produced.  
•  Present the feasibility studies and detailed designs to the DRD road engineers, and 
the PIC international and national road engineers and get their feedback and approval.  
•  Once  approved,  submit  the  feasibility  studies  and  the  detailed  designs  to  the  PMU 
Project Director.  
•  Complete  any  modifications  to  the  feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs  and  re-
submit.  
C. 
Scope of Work 
98. 
The consultancy firm for the feasibility study and detailed design (FSDD) will assist the 
project  management  unit  (PMU),  executing  agency  (EA),  project  management  unit,  and  the 
project  implementation  consultants  (PIC)  in  the  feasibility  and  design  of  subprojects.  The  key 
aspects of the consultant’s work will be to:  
(i) 
(ii) 
undertake  feasibility  studies  to  determine  if  the  subproject:  (i)   is  pro-poor  (i.e. 
benefits will mainly accrue to poor farming households); (ii) for irrigation projects 
there is demonstrated water availability in sufficient quantity and quality to ensure 
the intended benefits of the project can be achieved; (iii) the planned infrastructure 
works  are  technically  feasible;  (iv)  has  demonstrated  commitment  from  local 
government authorities; (v) has commitment from cooperatives and or water users 
to  operate  and  maintain  structures  post-project  and  to  distribute  water  and 
resources in an equitable manner; (vi)  is economically feasible (EIRR >12%) 
prepare detailed engineering designs of the works and tender documents (if the 
subprojects are approved by Project Steering Committee (PSC))  
99. 
To ensure that the subprojects are designed in a logical and efficient manner, these will 
be grouped and packaged. The FSDD firm will start feasibility and design work on a package by 
package basis and will allocate resources as required for these to be completed. Given the time 
needed to undertake feasibility studies and detailed engineering design for each package, as well 
as  preparing  tender  documents  (approximately  six  months),  packages  will  likely  have  to  be 
undertaken one after the other. However, there may be some overlap depending on the speed 
and resources of the FSDD firm. It is recommended that grouping of packages will be done based 
on  location,  as  well  as  total  estimated  works  contract  size.  Viable  subprojects  will  then  be 
approved by the PSC after submission and following recommendations from PMU. The prioritizing 
of the subprojects should be agreed upon in consultation with the project implementing units (PIU) 
and local authorities 
100.  The detailed engineering design of subprojects will be done in a participatory way with the 
involvement  of  the  PIUs,  local  officials,  communes,  and  water  users.  The  FSDD  will  take  into 
account future project activities and eligibility criteria of the supporting the subprojects during the 
feasibility work.  
Appendix 5 
145 
101.  The  contractor  needs  to  determine  that  the  subproject  is  technically,  environmentally, 
socially  and  economically  feasible.  For  this  to  be  determined,  more  detailed  field  surveys  and 
analysis will be undertaken to determine that the subproject: (i)  is pro-poor (i.e. benefits will mainly 
accrue  to  poor  farming  households);  (ii)  for  irrigation  projects  there  is  demonstrated  water 
availability in sufficient quantity and quality to ensure the intended benefits of the project can be 
achieved;  (iii)  works  are  technically  feasible;  (iv)  has  demonstrated  commitment  from  local 
government authorities; (v) has commitment from water users to operate and maintain structures 
post-project and to distribute water and resources in an equitable manner; (vi)  is economically 
feasible (EIRR >12%).  
102. 
 For subproject designs, existing design procedure practices under national standards will 
be  used,  however,  where  innovative  climate-resilient  improvements  can  be  used,  FSDD  will 
incorporate  such  innovations  in  the  design  providing  sufficient  justification  for  such  additional 
costs, structures or practices can be proven 
103. 
 For the topographical surveys (which will be undertaken to the detail required for detailed 
design), it is recommended that the design contractor uses its own staff or subcontracts a national 
private firm. The same is true when additional data are required. The FSDD firm is encouraged 
to  involve  PMU  and  PIU  staff  in  the  surveys  for  on-the-job  capacity  building.  For  irrigation 
schemes, hydrological surveys may be required if secondary data does not exist.  
104.  For  rural  road  rehabilitation  subprojects,  activities  required  will  include  a  detailed 
topographic survey of the full length of the road and preparation of a complete set of road design 
drawings with required supporting documents, calculations and specifications, and assist in the 
preparation of the tender documents and contracts for construction of the subproject. The ADB 
safeguards on environmental impact, land acquisition and DRR must be taken into account. Also, 
the practicalities of public access and safety must be considered. 
105.  For  estimation  of  the  EIRR,  farm  budgets  will  need  to  be  estimated.  The  methodology 
used during project preparation for the representative subprojects can be used.  
106.  Socioeconomic  data  will  be  collected  on  each  subproject  site.  If  required,  resettlement 
plans (LARPs) and IEEs/environment management plans will be prepared. These should follow 
the  project  Land  Acquisition  and  Resettlement  Framework  (LARF)  and  project  Environment 
Assessment  and  Review  Framework (EARF).  DDR  and  IEE for  the representative subprojects 
were  prepared  in  the  PPTA  stage  and  can  be  followed.  Due  regard  will  also  be  given  to  the 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy. 
107.  Tender documents should follow standard formats prepared project preparation, unless 
modifications are required by the PMU. 
D. 
Deliverables 
108.  For each package the following reports (deliverables) will be prepared: 
•  A work plan and personnel schedule should be submitted no later than two weeks after 
mobilization. 
•  Short monthly reports (no more than 1 page per subproject in a format to be agreed with 
the PMU) 
•  A  draft  feasibility  report  (for  each  subproject)  should  be  submitted  no  later  than  three 
months after mobilization. The initial environmental examination (IEE), if required, should 
146 
Appendix 5 
be translated into Myanmar, as should the public disclosure plan (an annex to the Land 
Acquisition and Resettlement Plan). 
•  Tender  documents  for  work  packages  (including  detailed  design  drawings)  should  be 
submitted no later than six months after mobilization. 
109.  The reports will be submitted in electronic copy and hard copy (three copies) to the PMU. 
The reports must be written in English. The PMU will provide comments to the reports within 30 
days.  The  reports  should  then  be  updated  by  the  FSDD  firm.  In  the  absence  of  comments  or 
approval within the set deadline, the reports are deemed to be approved.  
110.  Once feasibility studies and designs are approved by PSC and ADB,53 the consultants will 
support PMU to prepare tender documents and contracts for construction of the subprojects 
E. 
Key Personnel  
111.  Team  Leader/Irrigation  Design  Engineer  (international,  5  person-months).  Will  be 
responsible for overall team coordination, and delivery of quality and timely outputs. S/he will be 
a qualified engineer (preferably civil engineer) with adequate experience (at least 10 years) in the 
design of irrigation rehabilitation and upgrading works, the tasks to undertake will be: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Responsible  for  overall  direction  of  the  consultant  team,  and  coordination  and 
management of inputs; 
Manage the FSDD team relationships with government, the PMU, ADB and other 
stakeholders; 
Identify tasks on the critical path, and ensure that implementation schedules are 
followed; 
Take  the  lead  in the feasibility  and detailed  design of  structures,  and  outsource 
and specific studies as required (e.g. topographic studies) and  
Take the lead in the preparation of the initial work plan and personnel schedule 
(including determining resource needs), monthly reports, feasibility study reports 
and technical sections of the tender documents 
112.  Deputy Team Leader/Irrigation Design Engineer (national, 10 person-months). The 
deputy  team  leader/irrigation  design  engineer  will  be  a  qualified  engineer  (preferably  civil 
engineer) with at least five years in the detailed design of irrigation rehabilitation and upgrading 
works.  S/he  should  be  highly  proficient  in  MS  Excel  and  knowledge  and  experience  in  using 
AutoCAD is preferable. S/he will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Prepare plans of the subprojects, showing where selected hydraulic structures are 
located,  including  reservoirs,  main  canals  and  the  positioning  of  secondary  and 
tertiary canals. The latter may require ground truthing using GPS;   
Assist the team leader in the feasibility and detailed design of structures (including 
the  preparation  of  drawings  and  BoQs),  including  the  supervision  of  any 
engineering surveys (e.g. topographic surveys). Undertake field visits as required 
to  gather  data  and  be  involved  in  public  disclosure  meetings  (with  the 
environmental and social safeguards teams);   
53 ADB may review the first one or two feasibility studies, and if they are of the quality accepted by ADB, subsequent 
feasibility studies will follow post review procedures upon request. In any case, ADB will require feasibility study to 
be delivered in batches. 
Appendix 5 
147 
(iii) 
(vi) 
(iv) 
(v) 
In  collaboration  with  the  Agricultural  Economist  /  Agriculturalist,  assist  in  the 
assessment  of  the  crop  water  requirement  for  design  and  scheme  water 
distribution purposes;  
In collaboration with the Hydrologist, assist in the preparation of the rating curves 
at canal headwork levels; 
Assist  in  the  preparation  of  the  ‘Water  Requirements  and  Availability’  annex  at 
irrigation scheme level (main canal) of the feasibility reports, including a proposal 
of  water  distribution  from  the  main  irrigation  canal  to  branching  or  secondary 
canals; and 
Provide inputs to reports as required 
113.  Road Design Engineer (international, 2 person-months; national, 8 person-months). 
S/he will be a qualified engineer (preferably civil engineer) with adequate experience (at least 10 
years) in the design of roads and upgrading works, the tasks to undertake will be: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Prepare plans of the subprojects and assist the team leader in the feasibility and 
detailed  design  of  road  structures  (including  the  preparation  of  drawings  and 
BoQs), including the supervision of any engineering surveys.  
Undertake  field  visits  as  required  to  gather  data  and  be  involved  in  public 
disclosure meetings (with the environmental and social safeguards teams); and 
Provide inputs to reports as required 
114.  AutoCAD  Specialists  (national,  two  persons  for  6  person-months  each):  The 
AutoCAD  specialists  will  be  qualified  engineers  (preferably  civil  engineers)  with  over  3  years’ 
experience  in  the  use  of  AutoCAD,  and  with  experience  in  the  design  of  rural  infrastructure, 
irrigation rehabilitation and upgrading works, they will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Prepare  detailed  design  drawings  using  AutoCAD,  based  on  detailed  designs 
prepared by the irrigation engineers; and 
Link the design drawings to the calculation of BoQs. 
115.  Hydrologists  (international,  2  person-months;  national,  4  person-months):  The 
hydrologists will have a relevant educational background with at least ten years’ experience in 
hydrology,  including  in  rural  infrastructure,  irrigation  rehabilitation  and  upgrading  design.  They 
should be highly proficient in MS Excel (including the use of pivot tables) and MS Access. They 
will report to the team leader and will be responsible for: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Assessing the watershed, ground water and or river hydrology in the area of the 
intake of selected schemes (using secondary or primary data); and 
Preparing the ‘Water Requirements and Availability’ annex from the water sources 
into the irrigation schemes.  
116.  Agricultural Economist (international, 5 person-months). The agricultural economist 
will  have  a  relevant  educational  background  (preferably  in  economics)  with  at  least  ten  years’ 
experience  in  undertaking  economic  analysis  of  agricultural  projects,  preferably  irrigation 
rehabilitation  projects.  Experience  of  undertaking  EIRRs  according  to  ADB  or  World  Bank 
guidelines will be an advantage. S/he will report to the team leader and will be responsible for: 
(i) 
Preparing farm budgets for the subprojects including organization of a farm survey 
to determine farm size, current cropping type and patterns, crop yields, cropping 
intensities, and cropped areas.  
148 
Appendix 5 
(ii) 
Prepare EIRRs for the subprojects and write the economic and financial analysis 
annex  and  economic  analysis  section  of  the  feasibility  reports.  This  will  require 
undertaking  sensitivity  analysis  and  determining  subproject  benefit  distribution, 
poverty  impact  and  household  financial  returns.  The  economic  and  financial 
analysis reports and Excel files prepared at project preparation stage can be used 
as templates.   
117.  Agronomist  (national,  5  person-months).  The  agriculturist  will  have  a  relevant 
educational  background  in  agronomy  or  related  fields  with  at  least  five  years’  experience  in 
agricultural development. The expert should have experience in undertaking agricultural surveys. 
S/he will report to the international agricultural economist and will be responsible for: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Under the guidance of the agricultural economist, undertake farm surveys to collect 
necessary information for the agricultural economist to prepare farm  budgets for 
the  subprojects.  This  will  include  collecting  information  to  determine  farm  size, 
current cropping type and patterns, crop yields, cropping intensities, and cropped 
areas (preferably sub-divided between head, middle and tail reaches).  
The potential to changing the cropping calendar on the basis of improved water 
availability and less impact damage to produce with rural road improvement should 
be determined 
Collect market prices for agricultural products and for inputs, as required by the 
agricultural economist.  
118.  Social  Safeguards  Specialist  (international,  2  person-months;  national,  5  person-
months).  The  social  safeguards  specialists  will  have  a  relevant  educational  background 
(preferably in a social science) with adequate experience in resettlement and social safeguard 
procedures for donor organizations such as the ADB or World Bank. The national specialist will 
assist the international specialist. They will report to the team leader and will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Organize socioeconomic surveys in the subproject areas in order to prepare the 
socioeconomic survey and analysis annex of the feasibility reports; 
Take  the  lead  in  organizing  public  disclosure  meetings  in  order  to  present  the 
project  and  determine  stakeholder  concerns  –  and  ensure  that  the  engineering 
teams are aware of these; 
Once  sites  for  infrastructure  have  been  identified,  undertake  field  visits  and 
conduct  an  involuntary  resettlement  and  ethnic  group  screening  to  determine  if 
there  are  any  resettlement  impacts  (see  template  in  the  Land  Acquisition  and 
Resettlement Framework [LARF]) and ethnic group impacts (see template in the 
Ethnic Group Development Framework [EGDF]); 
If  impacts  are  expected,  then  undertake  a  census  of  affected  households  and 
ethnic groups and determine any impact; 
Prepare the due diligence report (DDR) for category C and a land acquisition and 
resettlement plan (LARP) (for Category B) including a public disclosure plan as an 
annex,  and  details  on  mitigation  measures.  The  LARPs  produced  in  during  the 
project preparation stage can be used as templates, and procedures outlined in 
the LARF should be followed.  
Prepare  the  due  diligence  report  (DDR)  for  category  C  and  an  ethnic  group 
development plan (EGDP) (for Category B) including a public disclosure plan as 
an annex, and details on mitigation measures. The EGDPs produced in during the 
project preparation stage can be used as templates, and procedures outlined in 
the EGDF should be followed.  
Appendix 5 
149 
(vii)  Once finalized and approved, assist the PMU to ensure that details of DDRs or the 
LARPs,  or  EGDPs  are  disclosed  to  affected  households  and  that  the  public 
disclosure plan is disseminated as required. This may require field visits. 
119.  Environmental Safeguards Specialists (international, 2 person-months; national, 4 
person-months).  The  environmental  safeguards  specialists  will  have  a  relevant  educational 
background  with  adequate  experience  in  environmental  safeguard  procedures  for  donor 
organizations such as the ADB or World Bank. They will report to the team leader and will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
With  the  social  safeguards  team,  jointly  organize  public  disclosure  meetings  in 
order to present the project and determine stakeholder concerns – and ensure that 
the engineering team is aware of such concerns 
Once  sites  for  structures  have  been  identified,  undertake  an  environmental 
screening to determine if there are any environmental impacts, and thus determine 
the environmental category (see template in the Environmental Assessment and 
Review Framework (EARF)); 
If the subproject is classed as category B (potential adverse environmental impacts 
are site-specific, few if any of them are irreversible, and in most cases mitigation 
measures can be designed more readily than for category A projects) then prepare 
an 
including  an  environmental 
management plan (EMP). The procedures set-out in the EARF should be followed, 
and the IEE prepared at PPTA stage can be used as a template; 
If  the  subproject  is  classed  as  category  C  (a  proposed  project  is  likely  to  have 
minimal  or  no  adverse  environmental  impacts)  then  review  environmental 
implication and provide a write-up for insertion in the feasibility study report. 
initial  environmental  examination 
(IEE), 
120.  Procurement  Specialist  (international,  3  person-months;  national,  6  person-
months). The procurement specialist will have a relevant educational background with adequate 
experience  in  ADB  procurement  procedures,  including  the  preparation  of  civil  works  tender 
documents. S/he will report to the team leader and will be responsible for: 
(i) 
The preparation of tender documents for the subprojects in accordance with ADB 
guidelines,  taking  into  account  the  national  procurement  guidelines.  Tender 
documents  prepared  during  the  project  preparation  stage  can  be  used  as 
templates.  
(ii)  Write the ‘subproject procurement’ section of the feasibility reports. 
150 
Appendix 5 
V.  CLIMATE-RESILIENT VARIETY DEVELOPMENT AND DISSEMINATION PACKAGE    
121.  Myanmar  is  one  of  the  most  vulnerable  countries  in  the  world  to  climate  change. 
Agriculture  sector  is  one  of  the  most  vulnerable  sectors  to  such  impacts.  The  climate  change 
events reflected in terms of increased frequencies of temperature extremes, frequent droughts, 
and floods have already started affecting agricultural production and productivity and particularly 
more so in marginal or low input environments like Myanmar. 
122.  The climate-friendly agribusiness value chains sector project aims to support the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MOALI) in production and multiplication of climate-resilient 
varieties of rice and vegetables. In addition, assistance will be provided to MOALI to develop a 
commercialization program with recommendations on the legal framework to develop intellectual 
property rights and partial cost recovery for the institution.  
123.  The climate-resilient  traits  to  be  selected  in  new  varieties shall  include shorter  maturity 
duration,  tolerance  to  drought,  tolerance  to  high  temperature,  tolerance  to  prolonged  flooding, 
anaerobic germination, as well as traits supporting better adaptation to water saving cultivation 
practices-  dry  direct  seeding  and  alternate  wetting  and  drying.  This  will  not  be  a  basic  plant 
breeding  program  which  will  take  10  years  to  develop.  Instead,  the  focus  would  be  on  testing 
available climate-resilient lines within a 5-year program that includes continued selection, agro-
climatic  adaptation,  climate-resilient  trait  evaluations,  yield  comparisons  and  farmer  and 
processor  evaluation.  Ensuring  the  availability  of  quality  seed  of  climate-resilient  varieties  in 
adequate quantity at right time poses greater challenge rather than production per se. 
124.  The project will also support large scale seed multiplication of climate-resilient varieties in 
target  provinces  and  distribution  of  quality  seed  to  farmers.  For  example,  new  rice  varieties 
suitable for direct seeding, and for alternate wetting and drying technologies will be demonstrated 
together  with the full  technology  package  on  about  100  hectares  in each  target  township. The 
project will recommend standards for seed certification procedures for different grades of seed, 
and seed certification procedures for the approval of and implementation by the government. 
125.  By 2025, it is expected that at least two climate-resilient varieties of rice and vegetables 
would be released for commercial production; and that MOALI would be able to achieve partial 
cost recovery in variety  development and foundation seed supply with the corresponding legal 
framework in place. The project will develop seed quality standards, seed certification standards 
for different classes of seeds for the four crops and maintain such standards in the quality seed 
production in the current project.   
126.  The  scope  of  work  also  covers  the  development  and  dissemination  of  climate  smart 
agriculture  (CSA)  practices  including  improved  land-water-nutrient  management  and  crop 
establishment practices. The work includes dissemination of mechanized cultivation practices that 
have  reduced  risk  and  drudgery  and generate  avenues  for  employment  for  youth  and  women 
farmers. The project will work closely with MOALI and other key institutions as well as private-
sector  partners  for  the  deployment  of  the  climate-resilient  varieties  and  technology  of  different 
crops.  In  addition,  the  work  includes  efforts  to  reduce  postharvest  losses  during  harvesting, 
drying,  storage,  and processing through  implementation of  modernized  post-harvest  practices, 
capacity development and training on postharvest technology, and the development of linkages 
between the public and private sector. 
127.  An international research institution of high repute will be recruited to deliver the above 
services. Based on assessment of various institutions in the region focusing on development and 
Appendix 5 
151 
deployment  of  climate-resilient  varieties,  and  substantial  contributions  made  so  far  on  climate 
smart agriculture in various countries including Myanmar, it is proposed to select the International 
Rice Research Institute (IRRI) to deliver the above services.  The detailed terms of reference will 
be developed by MOALI with cooperation from project implementation consultants during the first 
year of project implementation after assessing needs of target crops in target provinces.  
128. 
IRRI has been working with Myanmar on crops and climate change research. The Institute 
has  defined  a  coherent  research  portfolio  on  climate  change  emphasizing  on  three  areas: 
adaptation,  mitigation,  and  policy.  This  sets  crop  production  into  the  broader  context  of  food 
supply and food security alongside socioeconomic issues, such as rural development and gender 
mainstreaming.  IRRI  also  maintains  solid  working  relationships  with  other  international  crop 
research institutes belonging to the Consultative Group on Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and 
has agreed to deliver their solutions to Myanmar a in a seamless manner.   
129.  Currently, Myanmar and IRRI are conducting joint research projects on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, climate-resilient rice varieties, remote sensing-based crop monitoring, 
improvement of farmers’ livelihoods, and postharvest technology. Many national researchers are 
also benefiting from IRRI’s training and capacity-building activities. Some achievements of IRRI 
in relation to the development of climate-resilient varieties are listed below:  
(i) 
(ii) 
Flood  tolerance.  The  erratic  floods  experienced  in  rainfed  and  flood-affected 
areas are usually caused by heavy rainfall, overflow of nearby rivers and canals or 
sometimes  tidal  movements  as  in  coastal  areas.  These  floods  cause  serious 
problems for  rice  and other  crops  because  of the poor  or  non-existent  drainage 
and, in some cases, the topography of the land prevents fast water movement to 
drain flooded fields. Through conventional breeding, IRRI developed a rice variety 
that  can  withstand  being  submerged  under  water  for  two  weeks. After  the  gene 
(called SUB1 gene) was found, it was infused into popularly grown rice varieties in 
rice-growing  countries  in  Asia.  Scuba  rice  is  spreading  fast  in  several  countries 
over the last few years and are currently grown by more than 5 million farmers in 
Asia.  
Drought  tolerance.  Drought  is  the  most  widespread  and  damaging  of  all 
environmental stresses, affecting 23 million hectares of rainfed rice in South and 
Southeast  Asia.  IRRI  scientists  have  identified  several  key  regions  of  the  rice 
genome  that  give  the  rice  drought  tolerance  and  improve  rice  grain  yield  under 
drought. IRRI is working towards introducing drought tolerance into popular high-
yielding  rice  varieties.  By  using  drought-tolerant  rice,  farmers  can  enjoy  0.8-1.2 
tons  per  hectare  yield  advantage  than  non-drought-tolerant  varieties.  This  yield 
advantage will make the drought prone areas of target provinces in Myanmar to 
be much more productive, contributing to food security in poor rural communities. 
130.  Some achievements of IRRI on climate smart agriculture techniques are listed below: 
(i) 
Climate smart water management. IRRI has developed the alternate wetting and 
drying technology (AWD) or intermittent irrigation of the rice field as an effective 
water-saving measure.  It  reduces  water  consumption  in  paddy  rice  by  30%  and 
consequently,  reduces  the  cost  of  pumping  water.  Additionally,  AWD  helps 
mitigate emissions of methane—a greenhouse gas—in rice production by 50%.  
152 
Appendix 5 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Nutrient  management.  Fertilizer  often  represents  the  highest  input  cost  for 
farmers after labor, accounting for about 20% of the total cost of production. Soil 
nutrient knowledge can guide the development of practical tools to help farmers 
increase  rice  production  and  reduce  costs  through  smart  nutrient  management. 
Importantly,  the  work  shows  that  when fertilizer  is  used  appropriately,  yield  can 
boost without negative impact on soil health.  
Pest  management.  Through  a  collaborative  research  network  with  national 
scientists in Asia, IRRI and ADB initiated the Rice Planthopper Project. It promotes 
ecological  engineering  as  a  management  strategy  to  build  ecological  diversity 
which strengthens the rice field’s natural capacity to cope with pests. 
131. 
In view of the wide-ranging achievements in development of climate-resilient varieties and 
dissemination of climate smart agricultural practices and technologies to various countries, and 
in recognition of outstanding contributions to the Myanmar research institutions, IRRI is ideally 
placed to provide its services under this package in a comprehensive manner. Estimated budget 
below.  
I. 
Identification,  testing,  multiplication  and  demonstration  of  climate-
resilient varieties of rice and vegetables 
$550,000 
II.  Capacity strengthening climate smart agriculture focusing on rice and 
450,000 
vegetables 
III.  Personnel requirements 
970,000 
$1,970,000 
Appendix 5 
153 
VI. 
EXTERNAL MONITORING AGENCY 
A. 
Scope of Services and Tasks  
132.  Key responsibilities include:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Review of the feasibility reports of subprojects to  include the annexes of (a) Social 
Impact Assessment (the EGDPs, or IPPs and the GAPs), (b) Initial Environmental 
Examination  (the  EMPs),  and  (c)  Land  Acquisition  and  Compensation  Plan 
(LACP).  
Review  of  participation  and  disclosure  and  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  (a) 
process such as participation, consultation, grievance resolution, (b) integration of 
gender vulnerable groups and ethnic groups into planning and implementation of 
activities; and (c) mitigation of environmental impacts with respect to the EGDPs, 
GAPs, EMPs and RPs.  
Development  of  a  monitoring  and  assessment  plan  responding  to  the  scope  of 
works outlined in these terms of reference including the detailed field survey plan.  
Conduct of field monitoring survey according to the monitoring plan by interviewing 
the concerned households as well as the project staff.  
Conduct water quality monitoring.  
Assessment of the attainment and sustainability as defined in the EGDPs, GAPs, 
EMPs  and  RPs.  Particularly,  on  environmental  issues,  EMA  will  provide 
recommendations for any organizational or methodological improvements with an 
aim  to  ensuring  the  sustainability  of  the  government’s  internal  capacity  of 
environmental monitoring.  
B. 
Team Composition and Qualification Requirements 
1. 
Safeguard Monitoring Specialist/Team Leader  
133.  Qualifications.  The  expert  will  have  preferably  5  years  of  relevant  experience  on  the 
planning  and  conduct  of  socio-economic  analysis  and  social  impact  assessment  of  rural 
infrastructure or agricultural development projects. She/he must hold at least a bachelor’s degree 
on irrigation, agriculture, economics or social sciences. 
134.  Tasks. The specialist will be responsible for the overall planning and management of the 
Safeguards Monitoring. Specifically, she/he will be responsible for the following:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Review of the (a) Social Impact Assessment (the EGDPs, or IPPs and the GAPs), 
(b)  Initial  Environmental  Examination  (the  EMPs),  and  (c)  Land  Acquisition  and 
Compensation Plan (LACP) in the FS reports.  
Review previous Safeguard Monitoring Reports.  
Assess the adequacy of: (a) process such as participation, consultation, grievance 
resolution,  (b)  integration  of  gender  vulnerable  groups  and  ethnic  groups  into 
planning  and  implementation  of  activities;  and  (c)  mitigation  of  environmental 
impacts with respect to the EGDPs, GAPs, EMPs and RPs.  
Develop  a  monitoring  and  assessment  plan  responding  to  the  scope  of  works 
outlined in these terms of reference including the detailed field survey plan.  
Conduct  the  field  monitoring  survey  according  to  the  monitoring  plan  by 
interviewing the concerned households as well as the project staff of PPOs.  
Conduct water quality monitoring. 
154 
Appendix 5 
(vii) 
Assess the attainment and sustainability as defined in the EGDPs, GAPs, EMPs 
and  LACPs.  Particularly,  on  environmental  issues,  the  EMA  will  provide 
recommendations for any organizational or methodological improvements with an 
aim  to  ensuring  the  sustainability  of  the  government’s  internal  capacity  of 
environmental monitoring.  
(ix) 
(x) 
(viii)  Prepare  the  Safeguard  Monitoring  Report,  which  includes  the  results  and 
assessment on (a) EMPs, (b) EGDPs (or IPPs), (c) GAPs and (d) LACPs.  
Conduct the field monitoring survey on resettlement.  
Assist  the  Safeguard  Monitoring  Team  Leader  in  preparing  the  draft  safeguard 
monitoring report  on:  (i) Ethnic  Group Development  Plans (EGDPs),  (ii) Gender 
Action Plan (GAPs), and LACPs for the PRI subprojects.  
Appendix 5 
155 
2. 
Resettlement Specialist 
135.  Qualifications. The expert will have preferably 5 years of experience in conducting socio-
economic  surveys  on  rural  infrastructure  or  agricultural  development  projects  utilizing  different 
methodologies such as interviews using structured questionnaires, and focus group discussions. 
136.  Tasks. The specialist will assist in conducting field monitoring survey of PRI subprojects. 
Specifically, the specialist will be responsible for the following:  
(i) 
(ii) 
Conduct the field monitoring survey on resettlement; and  
Assist the Safeguard Monitoring Team Leader in preparing the draft safeguard 
monitoring report on: i) Ethnic Group Development Plans (EGDPs), ii) Gender 
Action Plan (GAPs), and LACPs for the PRI subprojects.  
3. 
Environment Specialist 
137.  Qualifications. The specialist will have preferably 5 years of experience on the conduct 
of  environment  surveys  on  rural  infrastructure  or  agricultural  development  projects  utilizing 
different  methodologies  such  as  interviews  using  structured  questionnaires  and  focus  group 
discussions. 
138.  Tasks. The specialist will assist in conducting field monitoring survey of PRI subprojects. 
Specifically, s/he will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
4. 
Conduct the field monitoring survey on environment; and  
Assist  the  Safeguard  Monitoring  Team  Leader  in  preparing  the  draft  safeguard 
monitoring report on Environment Management Plan for the subprojects.  
Assistant Surveyors - Three (3) assistant surveyors should be selected in each 
relevant province. 
139.  Reporting requirements and Deliverables. The results of the monitoring will be part of 
the quarterly progress reports of the overall project. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Monitoring and assessment plan as well as the draft contents of the Safeguards 
Monitoring  Report  responding  to  the  scope  of  works  outlined  in  these  terms  of 
reference including the detailed field survey plan for each mission.  
Draft Safeguard Monitoring Report of each mission with a soft copy.  
Draft Safeguards Monitoring Report based on NPMO/PIC comments.  
Final Safeguard Monitoring Report, which includes the results and assessment on 
EMPs, EGDPs (or IPPs), GAPs, and RPs.  
Hard copies of the reports must be accompanied with soft copies (not pdf).  
140.  Client’s inputs and counterpart personnel. EMA will be required to spend considerable 
time in each of the participating provinces. PMU and PIUs will make available to EMA all relevant 
data, maps and reports, and ensure access to all equipment purchased under the Project at no 
cost to the EMA. PMU and PIUs will provide counterpart and support staff to work with ESM, and 
will arrange necessary introductions to concerned government organizations, ministries and their 
departments. 
