Project Design Advance 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 49325-003 
Loan Number: PDA6011 
March 2017 
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka: Northern 
Province Sustainable Fisheries Development Project 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
CONTENTS 
PROPOSED PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
B. 
PDA Readiness Activities 
Overall PDA Project Implementation Plan 
PDA PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
PDA Project Implementation Organizations–Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
PDA Project Organization Structure 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Fund Flow Diagram 
Risk Analysis 
Proposed Action Plan 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Advance Contracting 
Procurement of Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
Consultant's Terms of Reference 
Individual Terms of Reference 
SAFEGUARDS 
VII. 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
X. 
XI. 
XII. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
5 
7 
7 
8 
9 
9 
9 
10 
10 
12 
12 
14 
15 
18 
19 
19 
19 
21 
21 
21 
21 
22 
26 
35 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
37 
38 
39 
Project Administration Manual for the Project Design Advance: Purpose and 
Process 
The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  for  the  Project  Design  Advance  (PDA)  is  an 
abridged  version  of  ADB’s  regular  PAM  and  describes  the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the PDA on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with  Government  and  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  policies  and  procedures.  The  PDA 
PAM  should  include  references  to  all  available  templates  and  instructions  either  through 
linkages to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM. 
The  Ministry  of  Fisheries  and  Aquatic  Resources  Development  (MFARD)  is  wholly 
responsible for the implementation of ADB financed PDA projects, as agreed jointly between 
the  Government  and  ADB,  and  in  accordance  with  Government  and  ADB’s  policies  and 
procedures.  ADB  staff  is  responsible  to  support  implementation  including  compliance  by the 
MFARD  of  its  obligations  and  responsibilities  for  PDA  project  implementation  in  accordance 
with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
After  ADB’s  approval  of  the  PDA  proposal,  changes  in  implementation  arrangements  are 
subject to agreement and approval pursuant to relevant Government and ADB administrative 
procedures  (including  the  Project  Administration  Instructions),  and  upon  such  approval  they 
will be subsequently incorporated in the PDA PAM. 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
ADB 
ADF 
AGD 
AFS 
CFHC 
EA 
GOSL 
KG 
= 
MFARD 
= 
MOF 
= 
MSD 
= 
PAM 
= 
PDA 
= 
PIMU 
QCBS 
= 
SLPSAS  = 
= 
TOR 
= 
TOD 
Abbreviations 
Asian Development Bank 
Asian Development Fund 
Auditor General’s Department 
audited financial statements 
Ceylon Fisheries Harbors Corporation 
executing agency 
Government of Sri Lanka 
kilograms 
Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development 
Ministry of Finance 
Management Services Department 
project administration manual  
project design advance 
project implementation and monitoring unit 
quality- and cost based selection 
Sri Lanka Public Sector Accounting Standards 
terms of reference 
Treasury Operations Department  
I. 
PROPOSED PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
1. 
The  Northern  Province  Sustainable  Fisheries  Development  Project  will  support 
investments to revive the fishery industry in the four conflict-affected coastal districts of Jaffna, 
Mannar,  Mullaittivu,  and  Kilinochchi.1 The  project  will  finance  the  development  of  two  fishery 
harbors,  rehabilitate  other  related  infrastructure,  develop  sustainable  aquaculture,  improve  the 
management  of  coastal  and  fishery  resources,  and  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  fishery 
societies and related institutions. 
2. 
The Northern Province, which bore the brunt of a 30-year conflict that ended in 2009, is 
showing signs of economic recovery thanks to development projects initiated by various actors, 
including the government, development partners, and nongovernment agencies. The province’s 
contribution to the country’s gross domestic product rose from 3.2% in 2008 to 3.6% in 2013. The 
incidence  of  poverty  in  the  province  declined  from  30.0%  in  2010  to  10.9%  in  2013.  Despite 
these positive developments, wide disparities remain within the province. The poverty incidence 
is  20.1%  in  Mannar  district  and  28.8%  in  Mullaittivu  district,  significantly  higher  than  the  6.7% 
national  poverty  incidence.  At  SLRs8,330,  the  monthly  per  capita  household  income  in  the 
Northern  Province  is  the  second-lowest  among  the  nine  provinces  after  the  Eastern  Province, 
which was also impacted by the conflict.2 
Although  the  fishery  industry  in  Sri  Lanka  contributed  only  1.6%–1.8%  annually  to  the 
3. 
national  economy  during  2009–2013,  it  plays  a  vital  role  in  meeting  the  basic  nutritional  and 
livelihood needs of the population.3 It contributes about 70% of the animal protein in the national 
diet,  and  provides  direct  and  indirect  employment  opportunities  to  around  0.5  million  people 
(2.5% of the population) and livelihoods to around 2.6 million people. The government plans to 
increase the annual per capita fish consumption from 11 kilograms to 22 kilograms to mitigate 
malnutrition.4 About  20%  of  children  under  5  years  of  age  are  considered  underweight.5 The 
current  fish  production  for  the  domestic  market  falls  short  of  the  consumption  needs,  and  the 
country imports 70,000–80,000 tons (t) annually.6 
4. 
Agriculture,  fishery,  and  livestock  are  the  mainstay  of  the  economy  of  the  Northern 
Province  and  comprised  19.6%  of  the  provincial  gross  domestic  product  in  2012. 7  Of  the 
province’s 1.2 million people, the majority (85%) lives in rural areas and is engaged in fisheries 
and  agriculture.  The  Northern  Province  has  40%  of  the  coastal  belt,  and  before  the  conflict 
1  The  project  concept  paper  and  project  preparatory  technical  assistance  were  approved  in  December  2015.  The 
project and project design advance are included in the country operations business plan, 2017–2019 of the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB). The ensuing project cost is estimated at $125 million. It will be financed, in part, from a 
loan from ADB’s concessional ordinary capital resources ($63.13 million) and a loan from ADB’s regular ordinary 
capital resources ($60 million). 
2  Government  of  Sri  Lanka;  Ministry  of  Policy  Planning  Economic  Affairs,  Child  Youth  and  Cultural  Affairs; 
Department  of  Census  and  Statistics.  2015.  Household Income  and  Expenditure  Survey—2012/13:  Final  Report. 
Colombo. http://www.statistics.gov.lk/HIES/HIES2012_13FinalReport.pdf. 
3  Fishery is divided into three segments: (i) coastal fishery, which is carried out within the 30,000-square-kilometer 
continental shelf; (ii) offshore fishery, which takes place outside the continental shelf, extending up to the edge of 
the  517,000-square-kilometer  exclusive  economic  zone  using  multiday  boats;  and  (iii)  inland  fishery  and 
aquaculture. 
4  Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources. http://www.fisheriesdept.gov.lk/index.html. 
5  United Nations. Sri Lanka. 2014. Millennium Development Goals Country Report 2014: Sri Lanka. Colombo. 
6  Government of Sri Lanka, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development. 2015. Fisheries Statistics—
2015. http://www.fisheries.gov.lk/elfinder-2.0-rc1/files/stat/Fisheries%20Statistices/Web%20pdf%20Document.pdf. 
7  Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Statistics Department. 2013. Provincial Gross Domestic Product–2012. News release. 
10 September. 
5 
escalated in 1983, it recorded a marine fish catch of 75,740 t, accounting for 40% of the national 
total.  In  1995,  its  marine  fish  catch  dropped  to  an  all-time  low  of  4,500  t,  2%  of  the  national 
production.  Following  the  end  of  the  conflict,  the  lifting  of  security  restrictions  on  access  to 
coastal  waters,  and  the  start  of  ongoing  support  toward  the  sector’s  revival,  production  in  the 
Northern  Province  increased from 13,840  t  in  2008  to  55,640  t  in  2013 but remains  below  the 
1983 production levels (footnote 6). 
5. 
The  conflict  caused  widespread  social  vulnerability  and  economic  instability  in  the 
province.  Families  were displaced  multiple times.  Most  of the  internally  displaced  people  were 
resettled by 2012, but a few families have yet to be resettled. Some of the returnees have been 
displaced  from  their  original  lands  for  more  than  15  years.  Widowed  and  single  women,  who 
comprise  about  5%  of  the  population,  are  vulnerable  and  require  focused  support.  Economic 
activities  were  affected  and  the  fisheries  industry  in  particular  was  heavily  impacted.  Fishing 
vessels,  equipment,  and  related  infrastructure  were  damaged  or  destroyed.  Cooperative 
societies, once the strength and pride of the northern fisherfolk, ceased to function and lost all of 
their assets.  
6. 
Coastal livelihoods are dependent on natural resources. Given the limited development 
that  took  place  during  the  30-year  conflict,  the  natural  resource  base  has  been  largely 
undisturbed.  However,  some  threats  to  the  resources  are  emerging,  including  (i)  damage  to 
corals  and  other  organisms  in  the  seabed  because  of  illegal  fishing  methods  such  as  trawler 
and dynamite fishing, (ii) destruction of mangroves, (iii) coastal erosion, and (iv) illegal mining of 
sand dunes. Furthermore, climate-induced risks, such as sea level rise, increased frequency of 
storms, and rising ocean temperatures, may impact marine habitats and coastal infrastructure. 
7. 
Since 2009, the government and development partners have supported the recovery of 
the fisheries industry by providing boats, engines, nets, and credit; rebuilding infrastructure; and 
reestablishing cooperative societies. Nonconventional aquaculture with high export and income-
earning potential—such as sea cucumber production, seaweed culture, and crab fattening—are 
currently  being  pilot-tested.  Improvements  to  the  roads  and  railways  have  reconnected  the 
Northern Province with the rest of the country, which has resulted in greater access to markets 
and promoted private sector investments. Many public and private banks have opened offices in 
the province, enabling access to financial services.  
8. 
Although  these  developments  created  an  enabling  environment  to  develop  the  fishing 
industry, the Northern Province still needs essential infrastructure and capacity strengthening of 
its fishery  societies  and related  institutions. While  Sri  Lanka  has  20  major fishery  harbors,  the 
Northern  Province  has  none.  The  lack  of  harbor  facilities  and  multiday  boats  makes  it 
impossible to engage in deep-sea fishing. To further develop the fishery industry in the province, 
investments  are  required  to  (i)  rebuild  large-scale  infrastructure  such  as  harbors,  anchorages, 
and  associated  facilities;  (ii)  introduce  new  fishery  technologies;  (iii)  expand  aquaculture 
sustainably; (iv) strengthen community-based organizations and related institutions; (v) develop 
a  fisheries  management  and  zoning  plan  to  ensure  that  resources  are  not  overexploited;  and 
(vi)  develop  economic  activities  for  households  headed  by  women.  The  government  has 
requested  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  support  to  help  rebuild  the  fishery  industry,  which 
provides livelihoods for more than 40,000 families in the Northern Province. 
9. 
The ensuing project and project design advance (PDA) are consistent with the priorities 
for  the  agriculture  and  natural  resources  sector  in  ADB’s  country  operations  business  plan, 
6 
2017–2019,  and  support  the  key  pillar  on  inclusive  and  sustainable  economic  growth.8 It  is 
aligned  with  the  key  priorities  of  promoting  natural  resource  management  and  increasing 
productivity  and  resilience,9 and  complements  other  post-conflict  developments  that  ADB  has 
supported in the Northern Province.  
10. 
Impacts,  Outcome,  and  Outputs:  The  project’s  impacts  will  be  improved  nutritional 
status,  food  security,  and  incomes  of  fisher  communities,  aligned  with  the  Government  of  Sri 
Lanka’s Ten-Year Development Policy and Framework of the Fisheries and Aquatic Resources 
Sector,  2007-2016. 10 The  outcome  will  be  fisheries  production  in  the  Northern  Province  is 
sustainably  increased.  The  proposed  outputs  are:  (i) climate  resilient  infrastructure  developed 
and  operational;  (ii)  aquaculture  developed;  (iii)  entrepreneurial  skills,  market  links,  and  credit 
access for local communities, including women, strengthened; and (iv) management of coastal 
and fishery resources improved. The project area is defined as the coastal belt of the districts of 
Jaffna, Mullaittivu, Mannar, and Kilinochchi. On land, it includes the grama niladhari divisions11 
fronting  the  shoreline  and  those  surrounding  inland  lagoons  and  other  important  coastal 
systems,  such  as  estuaries.  In  the  sea,  it  includes  the  area  as  defined  under  the  Coast 
Conservation Act,1981.12  
11. 
Project preparatory technical assessment (PPTA) is being implemented from July 2016-
March  2017  to  develop  the  feasibility  study.  The  PDA  will  finance  consultancy  services  to 
undertake  detailed  engineering  design  which  includes  the  updating  of  costs,  updating  of 
environment  and  social  safeguard  assessments  and  preparation  of  bidding  documents  and 
supporting  the  bidding  process.  The  consultancy  services  will  include  a  national  consultancy 
firm and two individual international consultants. The key PDA outputs will be detailed designs 
and bidding documents. The PDA will not finance land acquisition, resettlement, or civil works. 
The PDA will speed up contract awards and disbursements by ensuring that contracts are ready 
for award by the time of loan effectiveness. 
A. 
PDA Readiness Activities 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
12.  MFARD has an existing Project Implementation and Monitoring unit (PIMU) to implement 
the  ongoing  Fisheries  Harbors  and  Anchorages  Development  Project 
the 
government.  This  same  unit  which  is  headed  by  a  Project  Director  and  includes  a  Finance 
Manager and Director Development will implement the PDA. The PIMU will be supplemented by 
two  engineers  and  additional  accounting  and  support  staff  to  manage  the  PDA.  The  call  for 
expressions of interest from consultancy firms to undertake the detailed designs under the PDA 
was  issued  on  25  July  2016.  Request  for  proposals  were  issued  to  shortlisted  firms  on  21 
October 2016 and it is expected that the consultancy contract will be awarded in March 2017.  
funded  by 
8  ADB. 2016. Country Operations Business Plan: Sri Lanka, 2017–2019. Manila. 
9  ADB. 2015. Operational Plan for Agriculture and Natural Resources: Promoting Sustainable Food Security in Asia 
and the Pacific in 2015–2020. Manila. 
10 Government of Sri Lanka, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources. 2007. Ten Year Development Policy and 
Framework of the Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Sector. 2007-2016. 
11 The smallest administration unit, comprising around 2-3 villages. 
12 As defined under the Coast Conservation Act, the seaward boundary is the limit of two kilometers seawards of the 
Mean Low Water Line. 
7 
B. 
Overall PDA Project Implementation Plan 
Advance action 
- 
1 
-
4 
-
5 
-
2 
-
3 
-
6 
PDA Year 1 
1 
2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 
PDA Year 2 
2 
3  4  5  6 
1
0 
1
1 
1
2 
1 
Activities 
A. 
Consultancy 
under PDA 
Implementation  
firm 
Advertisement 
Selection 
Contract award 
selection 
Consultants mobilized 
Surveys and investigations 
Detailed designs 
Updating  of  environmental 
and social assessments 
Preparation of bid documents 
for  works 
bidding 
Initiate 
packages 
Award contracts 
Inception report 
Mid term report 
for 
    Final report (detailed designs) 
Advertisement 
individual 
consultant 
Individual Consultant mobilized 
B.  Management Activities 
Submission 
progress report 
Submission of annual report 
Submission of AFS 
Projected date of ensuing loan 
quarterly 
of 
AFS- Audited Financial Statements, PDA-Project Design Advance
8 
9 
III. 
PDA PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
PDA Project Implementation Organizations–Roles and Responsibilities 
implementation 
PDA  Project 
organizations 
Oversight body 
•  Design Coordinating 
Committee (DCC) 
Executing agency 
•  Ministry of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Resources 
Development 
•  Project Implementation and 
Monitoring Unit 
ADB 
Management Roles and Responsibilities  
(i)  The DCC will be chaired by Secretary MFARD and will include 
representatives from  the Ceylon Fisheries Harbors 
Corporation, Coast Conservation Department, Ministry of 
Prison Reforms, Rehabilitation, Resettlement and Hindu 
Religious Affairs, Northern Provincial Council, and Department 
of External Resources 
(ii)  Provide policy guidance 
(iii)  Ensure smooth inter-agency/ministry coordination 
(i)  Ensure the project implementation and management unit is fully 
staffed 
(ii)  Submit audit, progress and other reports to ADB and 
government 
(iii)  Monitor use of all funding provided by ADB and government 
(iv)  Ensure that complaints received are adequately addressed 
(v)  Support and coordinate with ADB review missions 
(vi)  Submit timely withdrawal applications to ADB 
(i)  Oversee and supervise consultants 
(ii)  Review and comment on consultants outputs 
(iii)  Ensure timely advance procurement for civil works contracts for 
the ensuing project in accordance with ADB’s Procurement 
Guidelines 
(iv)  Review of withdrawal applications before submission to EA 
(i)  Monitor and advise overall project implementation 
(ii)  Review and issue no-objection to procurement and documents 
(iii)  Provide funding against eligible claims  
B. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Executing Agency 
Ministry  of  Fisheries  and  Aquatic 
Resources Development 
Officer's Name: Mrs. W. M. M. Adikari 
Position: Secretary 
Telephone: +94 112333945 
Email address: secfisherieslk@gmail.com 
Office Address: New Secretariat, Maligawatta, Colombo 10,   
                          Sri Lanka. 
ADB 
Staff Name: Sri Widowati 
Position : Country Director 
Telephone:+94 11 4455455 
Email address: swidowati@adb.org 
Mission Leader 
Staff Name: Manjula Amerasinghe 
Position : Project Management Specialist 
Telephone:+94 11 4455455 
Email address: nmamerasinghe@adb.org 
C. 
PDA Project Organization Structure 
Design Coordinating 
Committee 
Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Resources Development 
Project Implementation 
and Monitoring Unit 
Consultants 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
13. 
The  total  cost  of  the  PDA  project  is  $1.59  million,  including  a  concessional  loan  from 
ADB's  ordinary  capital  resources  in  an  amount  of  $1.3  million  to  support  the  preparation  of 
detailed  designs. The  PDA  loan  will  have  an  interest  rate  charged  at  2%  per  annum, and  it  is 
expected that the PDA loan will be repaid from the proceeds of the ensuing loan on the date of 
effectiveness of the ensuing loan. The PDA cost estimates are summarized in Table 1. 
10 
Table 1: PDA Project Investment and Financing Plana 
($ million) 
Item 
A. 
Base Costc 
Costb 
ADB 
Government 
1 
Consulting Firm 
    1.16  
0.99  
              0.17  
2 
Individual Consultants 
3 
PIMU staff and office expenses 
Subtotal (A) 
B. 
Contingenciesd 
0.26  
0.06 
0.22  
              0.04  
0.00 
0.06 
1.48  
              1.21  
              0.27  
     0.11  
              0.09  
              0.02  
Total (A+B) 
1.59  
              1.30  
              0.29  
ADB= Asian Development Bank, PDA = project design advance.  
a  A PDA loan carries interest charges where applicable, and these charges are deferred until the PDA loan is repaid 
from the ensuing financing or other repayment terms take effect.  
b  Includes taxes and duties of $0.21 million to be financed from government resources on cash contribution.  
c  In mid-2016 prices. 
d  Physical contingencies computed at 7.5% for consulting services.  
Source: Asian Development Bank 
Table 2: Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category  
($ 000) 
Item 
A 
Investment Costsa 
1  Consultant 
Foreign 
Exchange 
Local 
Currency 
Total 
Costb 
% of 
Total 
Base 
Cost 
Remuneration and 
perdiem 
International and local 
travel 
Equipment 
Studies, surveys and 
reports 
Training, seminars and 
workshops 
Software 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
f 
g  Miscellaneous costs 
Subtotal (A) 
182.50  
517.55 
700.05 
47.1 
40.00  
0 
70.26 
8.21 
110.26 
8.21 
           1.70  
570.37 
572.07 
0 
17.00  
0 
241.20 
8.80 
2.94 
5.63 
1,183.76 
8.80 
19.94 
5.63 
1,424.96 
7.4 
0.6 
38.5 
0.6 
1.3 
0.4 
96.0 
B 
Other Costs 
1 
PMU staff and office 
expenses 
Subtotal (B) 
Total Base Cost 
0 
0 
241.20 
60.00 
60.00 
1,243.76 
60.00 
60.00 
1,484.96  
4.0 
4.0 
100.0 
11 
C 
Contingenciesc 
1 
2 
Physical 
Price 
Subtotal (C) 
18.09  
88.78  
106.87  
0 
18.09 
0 
88.78 
0 
106.87 
7.2 
0.0 
7.2 
Total PDA Project Cost (A+B+C) 
259.29  
ADB= Asian Development Bank, PDA = project design advance.  
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding.  
a  Includes taxes and duties of $0.21 million on consultancy services to be financed from government resources. 
b  In mid-2016 prices. 
c  Physical contingencies computed at 7.5% for consulting services. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
1,332.54  
1,591.83  
Table 3: Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Number 
Item 
Category 
Total Amount allocated for 
ADB financing 
$ million 
1  Consultancy 
TOTAL 
1.30 
1.30 
ADB= Asian Development Bank 
*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the recipient 
Source: ADB estimates 
ADB financing Basis 
Percentage and Basis for 
Withdrawal from the Loan 
Account 
100% of total expenditure claimed* 
A. 
Financial Management Assessment 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
14. 
A  financial  management  assessment  was  carried  out  for  the  MFARD  for  PDA  of 
Northern  Province  Sustainable  Fisheries  Development  Project  during  May-June  2016  in 
accordance  with  ADB’s  Guidelines  for  the  Financial  Management  and  Analysis  of  Projects 
(2005)  and  Financial  Management  Assessment  Technical  Guidance  Note  (May  2015).13 This 
assessment primarily looked at the capacity of MFARD to manage PDA funds. This included an 
assessment of the financial management capacity of MFARD including fund-flow and budgeting 
arrangements,  staffing,  accounting  and  financial  reporting  systems,  financial  information 
systems,  internal  controls,  and  internal  and  external  auditing  arrangements.  The  primary 
instrument  used 
financial  management  assessment 
questionnaire,  interviews  with  the  PIMU  of  Fisheries  Harbors  and  Anchorages  Development 
project  (government  funded  ongoing  projects)  and  internal  auditors.  A  more  detailed 
assessment  is  being  undertaken  under  the  ongoing  project  preparatory  technical  assistance 
(PPTA) for the ensuing loan. 
the  assessment  was  ADB’s 
for 
15.  MFARD is the executing agency for the proposed PDA project. The existing PIMU will be 
strengthened  through  additional  staff  to  implement  the  PDA  project.  The  last  project  that 
MFARD  implemented  under  ADB  funding  closed  in  2011.  The  Project  Director  and  Project 
Accountant of PIMU will be responsible for the financial management under the PDA project.  
13 Available upon request. 
12 
There  is  an  internal  audit  department  within  MFARD  and  is  adequately  staffed  to  carry 
16. 
out  internal  audit  functions  of  MFARD  including  all  departments,  corporations  and  other 
establishments  of  MFARD.  Externally funded  projects  are  also  within  the scope  of the  internal 
audit.  MFARD  will  ensure  that  the  PDA  project  falls  within  the  scope  of  the  internal  audit 
department. 
Under 
the  on-going  government 
17. 
funded  Fisheries  Harbors  and  Anchorages 
Development  project,  the  PIMU  maintains  manual  project  records  and  reports  are  prepared 
using  excel  spread sheets. This  is  the  practice for  all  projects  implemented  by  MFARD.  Since 
expenditure  will  be  limited  to  consulting  contracts  and  PIMU  expenditure,  this  is  considered 
acceptable, but will be further assessed for the ensuing loan. 
The  PIMU  accountant  will  maintain  separate  project  accounts  and  records  by  funding 
18. 
source for all expenditures incurred on the PDA project and prepare project financial statements 
in  accordance  with  Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles.  The  project  records  should 
adequately  identify  the  goods  and  services  financed  from  loan  proceeds  by  funding  source, 
financing resources received, expenditure incurred as per project components and counterpart 
funds received.  
19. 
The  project  financial  statements  will  be  annually  audited  by  the  Auditor  General’s 
Department (AGD). The audited project financial statements together with the auditor’s opinion 
should be presented in the English language to ADB within 6 months from the end of the fiscal 
year by the MFARD. MFARD was briefed on the ADB policy on non-submission of the audited 
financial statements within the covenant period.  
Compliance  with  financial  reporting  and  auditing  requirements  will  be  monitored  by 
20. 
review missions and followed up regularly with all concerned, including the external auditor.  
ADB will only finance consultancy services contracts. ADB financing will not be used to 
21. 
fund incremental project management expenses, civil works or purchase of equipment.  ADB’s 
direct  payment  and  reimbursement  procedure  will  be  used  for  payment  of  consultancy 
contracts. An imprest fund will not be opened. Given the nature of payments and the volume of 
the payments statements of expenditure (SOE) procedure is not proposed.  
13 
B. 
Fund Flow Diagram 
ADB 
t
n
e
m
e
s
r
u
b
m
e
R
i
GOSL 
/TOD 
t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
A
n
a
o
L
MFARD/PIMU 
Consultant 
t
n
e
m
y
a
P
t
c
e
r
i
D
Document Flow 
Fund Flow 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  GOSL  =  Government  of  Sri  Lanka,  MFARD  =  Ministry  of  Fisheries  and  Aquatic 
Resources  Development,  PIMU  =  Project  Implementation  and  Monitoring  Unit,  TOD  =  Treasury  Operations 
Department 
14 
Payments  for  counterpart  expenses  are  also  made  by  the  PIMU.  Government 
22. 
counterpart  funds  will  be  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MOF)  through  MFARD  to  PIMU. 
Counterpart funds are required to pay government financing of the consultancy contract and to 
cover PIMU expenses. It is the MFARD’s responsibility to obtain sufficient budgetary provisions 
and counterpart funds for payments. MFARD should work closely with PIMU and MOF to obtain 
adequate budgetary provisions.  
23. 
The proposed PDA does not include retroactive financing.  
C. 
Risk Analysis 
24. 
Key  risks  pertain  to  lack  of  budgetary  provisions  and  no  recent  experience  in  ADB 
funded  projects.  A  financial  management  action  plan  is  proposed  below.  The  financial 
management  risk  is  considered  Moderate.  With  the  proposed  risk  mitigating  measures,  it  is 
expected that the financial management capacity would be adequate. 
Area of 
Assessment 
Country 
Specific  
Risk Rating 
Risk Assessment 
Mitigation Measures 
Table 4: Risk Assessment 
Moderate 
Due to delay in submitting 
financial statements for audit 
and lack of resources within 
the Auditor General’s 
Department (AGD), 
submission of audit opinion 
for ADB funded projects is 
delayed.  
Periodic meetings with auditor general in 
respect of ADB-funded projects 
Capacity development for executing and 
implementing agencies on auditing, 
accountability and preparation of 
financial statements allowing sufficient 
time for audit to be carried out.  
Moderate 
Insufficient budgetary 
provisions to cover ADB 
and counterpart fund 
requirement. 
EA should closely work with MOF to 
obtain sufficient budgetary provisions 
and counterpart funds. EA should ensure 
proposed PDA is in the MFARD budget. 
Entity Specific   Moderate 
Last project implemented 
with ADB closed in 2011.  
ADB can provide training on ADB project 
management requirements, project 
financial accounting, disbursement 
policies, and procedures to the PIMU 
staff. 
Overall – Moderate 
Control Risk 
Executing 
Agency  
Moderate 
MFARD has implemented 
several ADB funded projects 
up until 2011. MFARD 
management letter 2014 
The proposed PDA loan will fund only 
consultancy contracts. PIMU will not 
procure any equipment. 
15 
Area of 
Assessment 
Risk Rating 
Risk Assessment 
Mitigation Measures 
highlights some weaknesses 
in use of allocations, 
monitoring and records of 
fixed assets. 
Fund Flow 
Moderate 
MFARD has the capacity to 
manage the funds. However, 
insufficient budgetary 
provisions may lead the 
PIMU to use ADB advance 
for counterpart funds as well.  
To minimize this risk imprest fund 
procedure will not be used and direct 
payment procedure is recommended. 
MFARD should ensure timely release of 
counterpart funds from MOF.  
Staffing 
Low 
The PIMU is adequately 
staffed to undertake this PDA 
project. Additional support 
staff will be recruited. 
 Additional support staff will be recruited. 
Existing PIMU staff to be assigned with 
PDA responsibilities will also require 
Management Services Department 
(MSD) approval.  
Accounting 
policies and 
procedure 
Moderate 
MFARD follows cash basis of 
accounting. Annual 
appropriation account is 
prepared based on existing 
Financial Regulations and 
various treasury circulars. 
Financial regulation 626, 
requires accrual basis 
accounting to be followed for 
donor funded projects. 
Ministry of Finance and Institutes of 
Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka are 
taking action to follow Sri Lanka Public 
Sector Accounting Standards (SLPSAS) 
it is yet to be practiced by the respective 
Ministries. The government’s aim is to 
have all public sector institutes follow 
accrual basis from 2017. PIMU will be 
required to prepare project financial 
statement on accrual basis.  PIMU staff 
needs training on ADB project financial 
management and reporting 
requirements. ADB to conduct training 
programs on ADB project financial 
management and reporting.  
Internal Audit 
Low 
MFARD has an internal audit 
department which functions 
well  
Audit scope to include the proposed PDA 
project. Audit management committee 
meetings are to be held quarterly and 
PDA findings to be discussed.  
16 
Area of 
Assessment 
Risk Rating 
Risk Assessment 
Mitigation Measures 
External Audit  Moderate 
AGD to carry out the external 
audit.  
There is an identifiable delay 
in submitting APFS across 
the ADB funded projects in 
Sri Lanka and this PDA 
project is likely to experience 
the delay.  
PIMU to prepare project financial 
statements within two months of the 
fiscal year end and forward the same to 
AGD allowing sufficient time frame to 
conduct the audit. 
A copy of the Audited Project Financial 
Statement (APFS) to be submitted to 
ADB within 6 months from the fiscal year 
end.  
Close monitoring of preparation of on 
time project financial statements and 
periodic meetings with auditor general in 
respect to ADB-funded projects to 
reduce the delay in APFS submission. 
Budgeting 
High 
It is evident from MFARD 
audit report that 
appropriation allocation 
provisions are not fully spent.  
MFARD and PIMU should prepare 
realistic budget and to obtain sufficient 
provisions and funds when necessary 
from MoF.  
Reporting and 
monitoring 
Low 
Due to improper budgeting, 
MOF decreases the 
allocation and does not 
provide the entire request in 
full. This may impact on fund 
flow. 
Ensure proposed PDA is in the MFARD 
budget when the PDA is effective to 
begin activities. 
Delay in preparation of 
periodic progress reports and 
financial statements due to 
manual recording system 
and use of  excel spread 
sheets  
Periodic progress reports to be prepared 
including financial progress. Project 
progress report should contain 
information on cumulative expenditure, a 
comparison with actual and budget 
released, physical and financial 
progress. 
(Recording of the project 
expenses are in manual and 
excel spreadsheet is used to 
prepare final accounts.) 
PDA will have few transactions. 
Therefore data integrity can be easily 
ensured.   
Information 
Systems 
Moderate 
Project accounts are 
maintained manually. 
There are relatively small numbers of 
transactions expected during the project 
period.  
Use of excel spreadsheet 
can be observed in 
Explore the possibility of procuring off-
the -shelf accounting package for the 
17 
Area of 
Assessment 
Risk Rating 
Risk Assessment 
Mitigation Measures 
ensuing loan. 
generating various reports, 
reconciliations and preparing 
finial accounts. These 
methods are prone to errors 
and have a negative impact 
on the accuracy of the 
financial figures. Due to the 
relatively small number of 
transactions such errors can 
be recognized 
Overall – Moderate 
H=High, S=Substantial, M=Moderate, or Low. 
ADB=Asian  Development  Bank,  AGD=Auditor  General’s  Department,  APFS=audited  project  financial  statement, 
EA=executing  agency,  MFARD=Ministry  of  Fisheries  and  Aquatic  Resources  Development,  MOF=Ministry  of 
Finance, MSD=Management Services Department, PDA=project design advance, PIMU=Project Implementation and 
Monitoring Unit, SLPSAS=Sri Lanka Public Sector Accounting Standards 
D. 
Proposed Action Plan 
25. 
The proposed action plan for financial management related activities are as follows: 
Action Plan 
Responsibility 
Timeframe 
Table 5: Financial Management Action Plan 
 Management Services Department 
(MSD) approval for existing PIMU staff to 
be assigned with additional PDA 
responsibilities should be obtained. 
MFARD 
Ensure proposed PDA is in the MFARD 
budget and sufficient budgetary 
provisions for counterpart and foreign aid 
are received in time when the PDA is 
effective. 
MFARD and PIMU 
Timely submission of Audited Project 
Financial Statements 
PIMU to prepare financial statements 
within two months of the fiscal year 
end allowing sufficient time for AGD to 
conduct the audit. 
By PDA approval 
date 
MFARD should 
include adequate 
provision request in 
coming year’s 
budget. MFARD 
should ensure 
availability of 
sufficient provisions 
by PDA effective 
date 
Within 2 months of 
the FY end 
AGD=Auditor General’s Department, MFARD=Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development, 
PDA=Project Design Advance, PIMU=Project Implementation and Monitoring Unit 
18 
E. 
Disbursement 
26. 
The PDA loan proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),14 and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between  the  Government  and  ADB.  Online  training  for  project  staff  on  disbursement  policies 
and  procedures  is  available  at:    http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning.  Project  staff  are 
encouraged to avail of this training to help ensure efficient disbursement and fiduciary control. 
ADB’s  disbursement  procedures  (direct  payment  and  reimbursement)  will  be  used  for 
27. 
withdrawal  of  project  funds.  Withdrawal  applications  will  be  authorized  by  the  PIMU  and  sent 
directly  to  ADB.  The  PIMU  will  be  responsible  for  (i)  preparing  disbursement  projections,  (ii) 
requesting budgetary allocations for foreign aid allocation and counterpart funds, (iii) collecting 
supporting  documents,  and  (iv)  preparing  and  submitting  withdrawal  applications  to    ADB  in 
accordance with Loan disbursement Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time). 
28. 
Statement-of-expenditure (SOE) procedure is not proposed for this PDA loan. 
29. 
Before  submitting  the  first  withdrawal  application,  MFARD  should  submit  to  ADB 
sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal applications on 
behalf  of  the  government,  together  with  the  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of  each 
authorized person.  There is no minimum value proposed for this PDA.  
F. 
Accounting 
The MFARD will maintain separate PDA project accounts and records by funding source 
30. 
for all expenditures incurred on the PDA project. PDA Project accounts will follow international 
accounting principles and practices. Project financial statements shall include at the minimum a 
statement  of  receipt  and  payment  with  accompanied  notes  and  schedules.  These  shall  be 
prepared to ensure maximum alignment to international accounting standards. 
G. 
Auditing 
The MFARD will cause the detailed consolidated PDA project accounts to be audited in 
31. 
accordance with International Standards on Auditing in accordance with the Government's audit 
regulations  by  an  auditor  acceptable  to  ADB.  The  audited  project  financial  statements  will  be 
submitted in the English language to ADB within 6 months of the end of the fiscal year by the 
executing agency.  
32. 
The audit report for the project financial statements will include a management letter and 
auditor’s opinions, which cover: (i) whether the project financial statements present an accurate 
and fair view or are presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the applicable 
financial  reporting  standards;  (ii)  whether  the  proceeds  of  the  loan  were  used  only  for  the 
purpose  of  the  project;  and  (iii)  whether  the  borrower  or  executing  agency  was  in  compliance 
with the financial covenants contained in the legal agreements, if any. 
33. 
ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the PDA Project and the 
opinion  of  the  auditors  on  the  financial  statements  within  14  days  of  the  date  of  ADB’s 
confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website 
14 Available at: http://www.adb.org/documents/loan-disbursement-handbook 
19 
34. 
The  Government  and  MFARD  have  been  made  aware  of  ADB’s  policy  on  delayed 
submission,  and  the  requirements  for  satisfactory  and  acceptable  quality  of  the  audited 
accounts. ADB reserves the right to verify the PDA project's financial statements to confirm that 
the share of ADB’s financing is used in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures.  
20 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting 
All  advance  contracting  will  be  undertaken  in  conformity  with  ADB’s  Procurement 
35. 
Guidelines  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time) 15 and  ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of 
Consultants  (2013,  as  amended from  time to time).16 On  the  request  of  the  Government,  ADB 
will  undertake  the  selection  of  the  consultancy  firm  for  the  detailed  designs  and  MFARD  will 
negotiate and sign the contract. The Government and MFARD have been advised that approval 
of  advance  contracting  does  not  commit  ADB  to  finance  the  PDA  project.  The  call  for 
expressions of interest from consultancy firms to undertake the detailed designs under the PDA 
was  issued  on  25  July  2016.  It  is  expected  that  the  consultancy  contract  will  be  awarded  in 
March 2017. 
B. 
Procurement of Consulting Services 
Consultants will be recruited according to ADB’s Guidelines on the Use of Consultants.17 
36. 
The terms of reference for all consulting services are detailed in Section D. 
37. 
A  consulting  firm  with  an  estimated  91  person-months  (national)  and  two  individual 
consultants  (3.5  person  months  each)  will  be  recruited  to  prepare  the  detailed  engineering 
designs and bid documents for proposed civil works under the ensuing loan. The consulting firm 
will  be  engaged  using  the  quality-  and  cost-based  selection  (QCBS)  method  with  a  standard 
quality: cost ratio of 90:10. 
C. 
Procurement Plan 
Basic Data 
Project  Name:  Project  Design  Advance  for  Northern  Province  Sustainable  Fisheries  Development 
Project 
PDA Loan Amount: $1.3 million 
Executing  Agency:  Ministry  of  Fisheries  and 
Aquatic Resources Development 
Date of this Procurement Plan: February 2017 
Date of first procurement Plan: July 2016 
Type 
Quality- and Cost-Based 
Selection (QCBS) 
Recruitment of Consulting Firm 
Prior / Post 
Prior  
Comments 
90:10. ADB will undertake the 
selection and MFARD will 
negotiate and sign the contract 
List of Consulting Services 
Package 
number 
1 
Description 
Estimated 
value 
$1.25 million 
Detailed 
Design team 
Recruitment 
method 
QCBS 
Review  Advertise 
Prior 
date 
Q3 2016 
2. 
Harbor 
$0.14 million 
ICS 
Prior 
Q1 2017 
Type of 
proposal 
Full 
technical 
proposal 
N/A 
Comments 
National 
International 
15 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Procurement/Guidelines-Procurement.pdf 
16 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Guidelines/Consulting/Guidelines-Consultants.pdf 
17 Checklists  for  actions  required  to  contract  consultants  by  method  available  in  e-Handbook  on  Project 
Implementation at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/ 
21 
3. 
Design 
Engineer 
Environment 
Specialist 
$0.14 million 
ICS 
Prior 
Q1 2017 
N/A 
International 
D. 
Consultant's Terms of Reference 
For Detailed Design Consultants (National Firm) 
a 
Background 
38. 
The Government of the Sri Lanka has requested ADB to provide financial assistance for 
development of fisheries infrastructure facilities along the coast line under the Northern Province 
Sustainable  Fisheries  Development  Project.  The  project  will  revive  the  fisheries  sector  in  the 
four conflict affected coastal districts of Jaffna, Mannar, Mullaitivu, and Killinochchi. The project 
aims to: (i) develop climate resilient infrastructure facilities,  (ii) develop sustainable aquaculture, 
(iii) improve management of coastal and fishery resources, and (iv) strengthen the capacities of 
the  fishery  societies  and  related  institutions.  ADB  will  provide  funding  through  a  loan  to  the 
Government of Sri Lanka to develop the two fishery harbors, eight anchorages and 25 landing 
sites. Feasibility studies will be made available to the consultant. The Ministry of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Resources Development is the executing agency. 
b 
Objectives and Purpose of the Consultancy Services 
The consultant team will perform the detailed engineering design of offshore structures, 
39. 
dredging,  reclamation,  shore  facilities  with  architectural,  structural,  mechanical  and  services 
which  are  required  for  the  fishery  harbors,  anchorages  and  landings  sites.  The  consultant  will 
undertake the detailed engineering design of the fishery harbors, anchorages and landing sites 
according to the recommendations of the feasibility reports and other modification which should 
be  included  but  not  identified  during  the  feasibility  study  stage.  In  addition  to  the  above  the 
consultant  should  prepare  the  bills  of  quantities  (BOQ),  engineer's  estimate  and  bidding 
documents  according  to  the  ADB  procurement  guidelines  and  assist  the  PIMU  to  procure 
suitable contractors to undertake the works related to fishery harbors, anchorages and landing 
sites.  
40. 
The consultant has to perform a number of activities which are explained in the following 
paragraphs. In general the consultant is responsible for ensuring effective and timely completion 
of the design to the highest standards. 
Detailed  Engineering  Design:  The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for  the  detailed 
41. 
engineering design of the fishery harbor. The tasks to be performed include but not limited to: 
i.  Review of preliminary designs prepared during the project preparatory stage and 
undertake  the  detailed  design  of  the  offshore  structures  and  shore  facilities 
according to the recommendations of the feasibility study. The design should be 
based  on  best  international  standards  and recommended  practices. The  lists  of 
the offshore structures and shore facilities in paragraph 42 should be considered 
as  a  guideline.  The  required  structures  and  facilities  should  be  selected 
considering  the  requirements  and  the  situation  of  the  site  following  the 
discussions with Ceylon Fishery Harbors Corporation (CFHC) under the Ministry 
of  Fisheries  and  Aquatic  Resources  Development  and  PIMU  and  the  fisher 
22 
community.  CFHC  approval  must  be  taken  for  the  Master  plan  of  the  list  of 
selected structures and facilities. 
iii. 
iv. 
ii.  Undertake  necessary  surveys,  investigations,  and  laboratory  tests  for  the 
detailed  design  including  but  not  limited  to:  topographic  surveys,  bathymetric 
surveys,  sediment  survey,  geotechnical  investigations,  water  level  and  current 
measurements and water quality assessments. 
Analyze  the  sustainability  of  the  offshore  structures  and  facilities  through 
physical/ numerical modeling and simulations. 
Analyze  and  update  wave  transformation,  hydrodynamics,  sediment  transport 
and wave disturbance,  and potential coastal and environmental impacts due to 
proposed development, including phased development through numerical and/or 
physical modeling and simulations and operations. 
Estimate  the  annual  requirement  of  dredging  through  numerical  and/or  physical 
modeling and simulations. 
Implement  mitigation  measures  for  the  impacts  due  to  new  constructions 
including but not limited to sand erosions and accumulations. 
Adoption  of  the  green/blue  economy  concept  to  address  waste  management, 
reduce energy consumption, and use of solar energy for electricity generation; 
Prepare detailed engineering design drawings and accurate cost estimates. 
Prepare specifications and terms of reference for the construction. 
Prepare  bidding  documents  including  but  not  limited  to  bill  of  quantities, 
engineer's estimate, design drawings and construction schedules. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
42. 
Assist PIMU to procure suitable contractors for the construction stage. Tasks include: 
i.  Update the bidding documents prepared under the PPTA. 
ii. 
iii. 
Train EA staff on ADB’s procurement procedures and bid evaluations. 
Advice  on  the  construction  and  the  contract  risks  and  recommend  appropriate 
mitigation measures. 
iv.  Recommend preferred equipment and construction methods. 
Facilitate the tendering process to select suitable contractor/s. 
v. 
Following  considerations  should  be  ensured  in  the  process  of  designing  the  fishery 
43. 
harbors: 
i. 
Safe  berthing  of  different  types  of  fishing  vessels  currently  operating  from  the 
area as well as future fleet that may operate. 
ii.  Harbor basin shall be adequate to accommodate the current fleet and projected 
fleet. The projected horizon could be taken as 50 years. 
iii.  Harbor  basin  shall  have  sufficient  depths  to  accommodate  current  fleet  and 
iv. 
projected fleet. 
Access  channels  to  the  harbor  shall  be  sufficiently  deep  and  shall  provide  safe 
navigation during the rough season of the sea. 
List of offshore and onshore structures and facilities for the fishery harbor: 
44. 
Offshore structures and facilities: 
i.  Rubble  packed  gabion  boxes/caissons  or  concrete  breakwaters,  groins,  quay 
wall etc. 
ii.  Harbor  basin  of minimum  depth  of -3.0 mean  sea  level  (MSL)  and  -5.0 MSL  as 
required by the Ceylon Fisheries Harbor Corporation. 
23 
iii. 
A quay wall or jetty of +1.5 MSL crest height and of minimum width of 8 m with 
cast iron bollards, rubber fenders, stainless steel chains and shackles. 
iv.  Harbor entrance mouth 60-80m width and access channel depth will depend on 
the depth of the basin. 
v.  Navigation lights at the harbor entrance and for access channel. 
Onshore structures and facilities: 
Auction hall with opened surrounding. 
i. 
ii.  Net mending hall with 1 m height peripheral wall and 1 m high gates. 
iii.  Off loading building of temperature -100 C. 
iv. 
Two  storied  administration  office  for  harbor  manager,  deputy  harbor  manager 
and staff. 
v.  Quarters for harbor manager and deputy harbor manager. 
vi.  Office facilities for the fishing community and community hall. 
vii. 
viii. 
Fuel tanks for Diesel and Kerosene. 
Fuel/lubricant  sales  office  and  dispensing  unit  (80  Ltr/min)  for  diesel  and 
kerosene. 
Sanitary facilities for fishermen. 
Security office with accommodation. 
Internal  roads,  parking  and  boundary  wall/  chain  link  fence  of  2.4  m  height  and 
gates. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
Provision for fishing gear shop facilities. 
Storage room of boat engine. 
Slipway and boat repair yard. 
Treatment plant for wastewater disposal. 
Provision for solar energy power. 
xii.  Cold storage of 20 ton capacity. 
xiii.  Weigh bridge with weighing limit beyond 40 ton with control room. 
xiv. 
xv. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
xviii. 
xix.  Reverse Osmosis (RO) plant for water purification. 
xx.  Water sump of 75,000 L capacity and overhead tank of 25,000 L capacity. 
xxi.  Water,  electricity  and  telecommunication  connections  from  National  Water 
Supply  and  Drainage  board,  Ceylon  Electricity  Board,  and  Sri  Lanka  Telecom 
respectively. 
xxii.  Generator supply fixed with a transformer. 
xxiii.  Radio communication system and building. 
xxiv.  Office for the fishery inspector. 
xxv. 
xxvi.  Office for the coast guard. 
xxvii. 
xxviii. 
Accommodation for the coast guard. 
Landscaping. 
Accommodation for the fishery inspector. 
The  table  below  outlines  the  major  activities  and  major  outputs  with  the  expected 
45. 
completion dates. 
Table 6: Summary Major Outputs and Activities 
Major Activities 
Consultant  team mobilize 
Expected 
Completion 
Date 
March 2017 
24 
Major Outputs 
Inception Report including 
Expected 
Completion 
Date 
April 2017 
Major Activities 
Undertake necessary surveys, 
investigations, measurements  and 
tests 
Expected 
Completion 
Date 
April  2017 
Major Outputs 
design criteria 
Report on bathymetric and 
sediment survey  
Report on topographic survey 
Report on geotechnical 
investigations  
Report on Wave climate 
Expected 
Completion 
Date 
May 2017 
May 2017 
May 2017  
June 2017 
Mid Term Report 
June 2017 
Numerical and /or physical 
modeling and detailed engineering 
design of the offshore structures  
Preparation of Master plan for all 
the facilities 
June 2017 
June 2017 
Report on detailed design of 
the offshore structures  
Master plan and Architectural          
drawings 
July 2017 
August 2017 
Detailed engineering design for 
shore facilities 
June 2017 
Report on detailed design of 
shore facilities 
July 2017 
Detailed engineering design for 
mechanical, electrical and plumbing 
works 
August 2017 
Mechanical, electrical and 
plumbing designs and layouts 
September 
2017 
Preparation of technical 
specifications 
August 2017 
Submission of technical 
specifications 
September 
2017 
Update/prepare environmental 
impact assessment (EIA/IEE)  
August  2017 
Environmental Assessments   September 
2017 
Finalize resettlement plans 
August 2017 
Final resettlement plan 
August 2017 
Quantity calculation and cost 
estimation 
August 2017 
Bill of quantities & Engineer's 
Estimate 
September 
2017 
Preparation of bidding documents 
including evaluation criteria (first 
set) 
August 2017 
Bidding document  
Facilitate tendering process 
Project management and advisory 
support to the ministry and PMU 
August 2017 
onwards 
Throughout 
Draft Final Report on Detailed 
designs and other aspects  
Final Report on detailed 
designs and other aspects 
Procurement of contractor for 
first package 
Progress Reports 
September 
2017 
October 2017 
November 2017 
January 2018 
monthly and 
final report on 
Procurement in 
May 2018 
25 
The  consultants  will  be  procured  according  to  ADB’s  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of 
46. 
Consultants (2013, as amended from time to time).  A quality and cost based selection method 
at  a ratio  of  90:10  will  be  used  based  on full technical  proposal. The time frame for  the  entire 
consultancy  services  is  15  months.  However,  the  design  team  is  expected  to  complete  the 
detailed designs within 9 months, the services of the procurement specialist will go beyond this 
intermittently over another 6 months. CVs for the key experts must be provided and they will be 
evaluated. CVs for non- key experts too should be provided and they would be evaluated on a 
pass-fail  basis.  The  number  of  personnel  per  expertise  is  identified  in  parenthesis.  The 
individual terms of reference for the consultants are summarized in section E.  
Table 7: Summary of Consulting Services Requirement of Key Experts and Non 
Key Experts 
Positions 
National (Key Experts) 
Team Leader/Harbor Design Engineer 
Harbor Design Engineer (2)                                         
Coastal Engineer (2) 
Structural Engineer (4) 
MEP Engineer (2)                                                                 
Procurement Specialist (1) 
Sociologist (1) 
Environmental Specialist (1) 
Non-Key Experts 
Architect (3) 
Surveyor (3) 
Quantity Surveyor (2)   
CAD Draftsman (1, Structural) 
CAD Draftsman (1, Architectural) 
CAD Draftsman (1, MEP) 
Total 
Person-Months Required 
  6.0 
12.0 
  6.0 
16.0 
10.0 
5.0 
3.0 
5.0 
9.0 
6.0 
4.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
91.0 
E. 
Individual Terms of Reference 
Team Leader/Harbor Design Engineer – (6 person months) 
47. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  postgraduate  degree  in  harbor  design  engineering/coastal 
engineering or a related discipline and have around 15 years of relevant experience. The expert 
should be competent in planning, designing, project management, quality assurance and quality 
26 
control  measures.  The  team  leader  is  responsible  for  overall  delivery  of  the  design  and 
procurement related requirements. Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
k) 
l) 
m) 
n) 
the  consultant 
for  overall  direction,  mentoring  of 
Set up an effective strategy and organizational structure for the consultant team. 
Prepare  and  implement  all  administrative  systems  and  procedures  needed  to 
ensure  the  effective  design  of  fishery  harbors,  anchorages  and  landing  sites  in 
accordance  with  the  scope  of  works,  relevant  regional,  international  experience 
and best international standards. 
Carry  out  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  feasibility  studies  and  assessments 
done to-date and draw attention to changes which may have become necessary 
since their preparation. 
Be  responsible 
team, 
coordination  of  inputs  and  management  of  individual  consultants  to  develop 
designs to satisfy the technical specifications. 
Be responsible for the overall management of the design, engineering team and 
their activities. Review design reports, calculations and drawings. Provide expert 
advice  as  required  and  ensure  outputs  are  complete,  well  prepared  using 
consistent formats and their content are prepared to the highest standards.  
Have the overall responsibility for the timely delivery and quality of all the outputs 
in formats that are acceptable to the government and ADB. 
Communicate clear instructions to the team members. 
Generate  and  share  comprehensive  and  detailed 
performance, mission-related objectives, and deadlines. 
Manage  relationships  between  government,  PIMU,  ADB  and  all  other  stake 
holders,  
Attend bi-monthly design meetings with the client and ADB. 
Advice on alternative design proposals, their benefits and risks. 
Manage the flow of day-to-day operations. 
Coordinate with and assist PIMU on any relevant activities related to the design. 
Ensure the final deliverables are aligned with the end user's requirements.   
Submit quarterly progress reports to government and ADB. 
reports  about 
team 
Harbor Design Engineer –(2x6 person-months):  
48. 
The consultant will have a postgraduate degree in harbor design engineering and have around 
10 years of relevant experience. The consultant will be responsible for analyzing and designing 
offshore  structures  and  implementing  mitigation  measures  to  address  the  impact  due  to  the 
construction of the fishery harbor. Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Data  collection  through  surveys,  investigations,  and  laboratory  tests  and  other 
means, analysis of coastal processes in the project area. 
Undertake  the  detailed  engineering  designs  of  the  coastal  structures  based  on 
assessment of the coastal processes. 
Analyze site-specific problems identify significant coastal trends that may indicate 
coastal process changes due to the construction of the fishery harbor. 
Undertake physical/ mathematical modeling of the fishery harbor. 
Implement suitable mitigation measures for the impact due to the construction of 
the fishery harbor. 
Estimate the annual dredging requirement for the maintenance of the basin after 
the construction of the fishery harbor. 
27 
g) 
h) 
i) 
the  environmental  specialist  and 
Coordinate  with 
environmental issues. 
Recommend preferred equipment and construction methods. 
Coordinate with the other team members. 
identify  and  analyze 
Coastal Engineer (2x3 person-months) 
49. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  post  graduate  degree  in  coastal  engineering  and  have  10  years  of 
related  experience.  The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for  assessing  the  impact  of  project 
interventions  on  coastal  processes  and  identify  the  areas  of  accretion,  erosion  and  suitable 
coast protection measures.  
Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Data  collection  and  analysis  of  coastal  processes  and  relevant  studies  of  the 
project   area. 
Identification of the environmental impacts and suggesting mitigation methods to 
incorporate in the designs.  
Work  in  close  consultations  with  the  Coast  Conservation  Department  (CCD)  in 
finalizing the alternative options for coastal impact mitigation. 
Assist the harbor design engineer in realignment of structures (if required) so that 
fishing vessels can use safe berthing and safe navigation. 
Analyze and elaborate possible alternative concepts for coastal stabilization.      
Structural Engineer (4x4 person-months):  
50. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  postgraduate  degree  in  structural  engineering  and  have  around  10 
years  of  relevant  experience.  The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for  designing  all  structural 
elements of the harbor. Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Review  the  existing  layout  and  liaise  with  the  coastal  engineer  to  finalize  the 
layout plans to meet feasible structural requirements. 
Conduct required soil investigations in the vicinity of the proposed buildings. 
Undertake detailed structural  designs  of  all  structural  elements  of the structures 
and facilities of the fishery harbor. 
Recommend preferred equipment and construction methods. 
Coordinate with the team members. 
51.  MEP Engineer (2x5 person-months):  
The  consultant  will  have  a  degree  in  mechanical  or  electrical  engineering  or  building  service 
engineering  and  have  around  10  years  of  relevant  experience.  The  consultant  will  be 
responsible  for  designing  all  mechanical,  electrical  and  plumbing  requirements  of  the  harbor. 
Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Planning  and  preparation  of  specifications  for  the  mechanical  electrical  and 
plumbing designs.  
Designing of solar energy system to introduce instead of power generations from 
non-renewable energy sources. 
Planning and designing all mechanical, electrical and plumbing requirements 
Liaise  with  the  CAD  MEP  draftsman  to  prepare  mechanical  drawings,  electrical 
and plumbing layouts. 
Recommend preferred equipment and construction methods. 
Coordinate with the team members. 
28 
Procurement Specialist (5 person-months):  
52. 
The  consultant  will  hold  a  degree  in  a  relevant  discipline  and  have  5  years  of  experience  in 
procurement practices and have previous experience with ADB-funded projects. The consultant 
will  work  according  to  the  recommendations  of  the  project  preparatory  technical  assistance 
(PPTA)  team  of  consultants  and  update  the  master  bidding  documents  in  line  with  ADB’s 
Procurement Guidelines. Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Prepare contract packages, the standard criteria and check lists for evaluation of 
the  tenders  for  the  selection  of  suitable  contractors  for  the  construction  stage. 
Assist the PIMU to prepare necessary procurement notices. 
Advice  on  procurement strategies  in  accordance  with  the governments’ and  the 
ADB’s  procurement  guidelines.  Ensure  all  the  procurement  is  carried  out 
according to the ADB guidelines. Advice on the timelines of the procurement. 
Work  with  engineers  to  finalize  cost  estimates,  tender  documents  and  bill  of 
quantities.  
Assist PIMU with award of contracts. 
Update  the  procurement  plan  according  to  the  actual  implementation  schedule 
and agreed changes, ,. 
Undertake  training  to  the  government  on  the  relevant  guidelines,  ADB’s 
procurement procedures to counterpart staff. 
Sociologist (3 person-months):  
53. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  master’s  degree  in  social  sciences  and  8  years  of  relevant  work 
experience.  Prior  experience  in  preparing  resettlement  plans  for  ADB  or  World  Bank  funded 
projects is required. The consultant will use the findings of the PPTA and update and finalize the 
resettlement plans based on final designs. Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Liaise  with  the  fisher  community,  societies  and  community  leaders  and  lead 
consultations with them. 
Identify  any  new  social  issues  that  may  arise  from  the  community  due  to  the 
implementation of the proposed infrastructure project. 
Identify the mitigation measures to overcome these social issues. 
Update the resettlement plan (RP) prepared in accordance with ADB’s SPS 2009 
requirement for Involuntary Resettlement (IR), and specifically appendix 2 of SPS 
2009. 
The RP preparation work will at least involve: survey for making an inventory of 
loss  due  to  land  acquisition  and  involuntary  resettlement,  and  socio  –economic 
survey  for  100%  PAPs.  This  survey  will  also  identify  vulnerable  group  and 
indigenous  people  that  will  be  affected  by  land  acquisition  and  involuntary 
resettlement associated with the proposed project.   
Identify  alternative  locations  for  the  fisher  community  to  operate  from  and  to 
engage in fishing activities during the implementation of the project. 
Environmental specialist (5 person-months):  
54. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  postgraduate  degree  in  environmental  science/management/ 
engineering and have 10 years of relevant experience. Prior experience in working on ADB or 
World Bank funded projects is considered an advantage. The consultant will be responsible to 
update/upgrade  the  environmental  assessment/s  prepared  under  the  PPTA  and  prepare  any 
additional environmental assessments required for government clearances. The consultant will 
29 
work  closely  with  the  independent  international  environment  specialist  to  be  recruited  as  an 
individual consultant: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Review  and  revise  based  on  detailed  designs  the  environmental  impact 
assessment/s undertaken during the project preparatory stage. Draw attention to 
the  changes  which  may  have  become  necessary  since  their  preparation  and 
make recommendations. 
Ensure that the environmental factors and mitigation measures are incorporated 
in the designs. 
Undertake  additional  studies/surveys  if  required  to  finalize  the  environmental 
assessment/s to meet the Coast Conservation Department’s and Government of 
Sri  Lanka’s  regulatory  requirements.  Ensure  that  all  assessments  meet  both 
ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  2009,  and  government  of  Sri  Lanka’s 
requirements.  
 The  assessment/s  should  identify  the  area  of  impact,  assess  the  potential 
impacts  (not  only  at  the  project  site  but  related  facilities  such  as  borrow  sites, 
quarry sites, disposal sites) and describe suitable mitigation measures, include a 
comprehensive  environmental  management  plan  (EMP)  which  identifies  clearly 
the  responsibilities  and  institutional  arrangements for  implementation. This  EMP 
will be attached to the bidding documents for the respective contracts, therefore 
detailed  (site  specific  and  not generic)  EMPs  will  be  prepared.   The report  shall 
follow the outlines presented in Annex to Appendix 1 of the SPS 2009. 
Ensure relevant stakeholders and affected persons are adequately consulted and 
all  consultation  should  be  well  documented.  Ensure  key  information  on  project, 
impacts,  and  proposed  mitigation  and  management  measures  are  provided  to 
affected persons in a manner that is easily understood (in the local language) and 
in a place which is readily accessible. 
Coordinate  with  relevant  agencies  and  obtain  the  necessary  environmental 
clearances and approvals. 
Architect (3x3 person-months):  
55. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  postgraduate  degree/Membership  of  the  institute  of  Architecture  in 
architecture and have 10 years of relevant experience. The consultant will be responsible for all 
architectural  layouts  and  designs  of  the  facilities  provided  in  the  proposed  fishery  harbor.  Key 
tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
Incorporate waste management, energy conservation and green harbor concept 
in designing. 
Consider the easiness of the administration and maintenance in the designs. 
Ensure easy access and enough parking space for the harbor users. 
Optimize the use of land and reservation for future development. 
Ensure the overall aesthetic appearance is pleasant.  
Design  of  architectural  layout  plans  of  the  proposed  facilities  in  the  proposed 
fishery harbor/anchorages. 
Design of detailed architectural drawings. 
Coordinate with the structural engineer in designing facilities. 
Liaise with the CAD draftsman (architectural) to prepare architectural layouts and 
drawings of the facilities. 
Coordinate with the team members. 
56. 
Hydrographic/Land Surveyor (3x2 person-months):  
30 
The consultant will have a degree in surveying or be a licensed surveyor and have 5 years of 
relevant  experience.  The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for  all  surveying  related  activities.  Key 
tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Undertake topographic and bathymetric surveys. 
Coordinate  with  the  coastal  engineer  and  the  architect/structural  engineer  in 
deciding the surveying requirements. 
Prepare topographic layout drawings and hydrographic drawings. 
Assisting to the MFARDD/PIMU for land acquisition process.  
Coordinate with the team members. 
Quantity Surveyor (2x2 person-months):  
57. 
The consultant will have a degree/diploma/certificate in quantity surveying and have 5 years of 
relevant experience. The consultant will be responsible for taking quantities and preparation of 
the bill of quantities. Key tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Conduct  a  market  survey  in  the  area,  assessing  the  prices  of  the  construction 
materials and labor. 
Revise the schedules of rates for buildings, coastal structures and other facilities. 
Estimate quantities and prepare the bill of quantities for the proposed structures 
and facilities. 
Prepare the engineer’s estimate for all proposed items in the bill of quantities. 
Liaise with the coastal engineer, structural engineer, MEP engineer, architect and 
the draftsmen in taking quantities. 
Coordinate with the team members. 
CAD Draftsman - Structural (3 person-months):  
58. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  diploma/certificate  in  draftsmanship  and  have  5  years  of  relevant 
experience.  The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for  preparation  of  all  structural  drawings.  Key 
tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Liaise  with  the  structural  engineer  and  coastal  engineer  in  preparation  of 
structural drawings. 
Prepare all structural drawings. 
Coordinate with the team members. 
CAD Draftsman - Architectural (3 person-months):  
59. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  diploma/certificate  in  draftsmanship  and  have  5  years  of  relevant 
experience.  The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for  preparation  of  all  structural  drawings.  Key 
tasks include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Liaise with the architect in preparation of architectural drawings.  
Prepare all architectural drawings.  
Coordinate with the team members. 
CAD Draftsman – MEP (3 person-months):  
60. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  diploma/certificate  in  draftsmanship  and  have  5  years  of  relevant 
experience.  The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for  preparation  of  all  drawings  and  layouts 
related to mechanical, electrical and plumbing works. Key tasks include: 
a) 
Liaise with the MEP engineer in preparation of drawings and layouts. 
31 
b) 
c) 
Prepare  all  drawings  and  layouts  related  to mechanical,  electrical  and  plumbing 
works.  
Coordinate with the team members. 
Table 8: Cost Estimation and Financing Plan 
for Consultancy team 
($'000) 
Item 
Asian Development Bank 
1 
Consultants 
a.       Remunerations and per diem 
           National Consultants  
b.        Local travel 
Equipment (computer, printer, etc.) 
Software 
2 
3 
4  Workshops,  seminars, and conferences 
5 
Studies, surveys and reports 
6  Miscellaneous administration and support costs 
7 
Contingencies 
Total  
For Individual Consultants  
Total Cost 
414.30  
54.00  
7.00  
17.00  
7.50  
486.00  
4.80  
74.30  
1,064.90  
Harbor Design Engineer (International, 3.5 person months): 
61. 
The  consultant  will  have  a  post  graduate  civil  engineering  degree  or  equivalent  and  over  15 
years’  experience  in  maritime  engineering  preferably  in  coastal/harbor/marine  civil  related 
infrastructure  (including  numerical  modeling  for  harbor  works).  The  consultant  will  review  and 
validate,  the  detailed  engineering  design  including  the  design  reports,  design  calculations  and 
design drawings.  In case of difference of opinion between design review consultant and design 
consultant, decision of the employer shall be final. The consultant will work with the design team 
leader and the PIMU to (i) support the PIMU and ADB; (ii) provide ongoing review of harbor and 
anchorage  design  work  carried  out  by  the  consultant  team.  The  design  review  and  validation 
shall include but not limited to the following tasks: 
a) 
b) 
Review  and  comments  on  all  deliverables  related  to  engineering  designs 
prepared  by  the  detailed  design  team.  This  includes  design  criteria,  manuals, 
detailed engineering drawings etc.,  
Review  and  ensure  that  the  design  meets  all  the  standards  and  parameters 
specified in terms of the TOR for design consultants, technical specifications and 
best international practices. 
32 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
j) 
k) 
l) 
Technical support to the PIMU and ADB. 
Review  and  comment  on  technical  issues  associated  with  the  project  design 
criteria  submitted  by  the  consultant  team  ensuring  best  international  standards 
and  recommended  practices  to  achieve  sustainable  development,  climate 
change mitigation measures and fitness for purpose criteria are included. 
Coordinate appropriate review stages with the consultant team.  
Review  and  comment  on  technical  issues  associated  with  the  project  final 
detailed design documents submitted by the consultant team. 
Review  and  comment  on  technical  issues  associated  with  the  project  cost 
estimate and bidding documents submitted by the consultant team. 
Provide  advice  on  the  necessity  of  proposed  variations  or  extensions  of  time 
whether requested by the consultant team or the PIMU. 
Review any modifications to the final design documents. 
Provide  general  advice  to  the manager  PIMU  and  ADB  on  technical matters  as 
requested including environmental, operational and maintenance requirements. 
Identify  additional  studies  and  surveys  (if  required)  for  detailed  design  and 
provide cost estimates. 
Provide  a  consolidated  report  on  the  above  focusing  on  the  major  components 
and elements but not limited to breakwater adequacy for climate change forces, 
breakwater  global  stability,  breakwater  settlement,  channel  stability,  quay 
foundation  adequacy,  sea  bed  material  dredgability,  reclamation  design  and 
stability, pile structures adequacy, cost estimates and bidding documents. 
The  consultant  will  submit  an  inception  report  within  3  weeks  of  initiating  the  assignment  and 
then  a  midterm  review  report  in  the  third  month  and  final  report  in  the  6th  month  of  the 
assignment. The time frame will be 3.5 months over a 6 month period. 
62. 
Environment Specialist (International, 3.5 person months) 
The  consultant  will  have  a  post-graduate  degree  in  environmental  sciences/management  and 
have  over  12  years  of  experience  in  coastal  and  marine  ecology  and  fisheries.  The  specialist 
will work with the national environment specialist in the detailed design team to: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Review  and  revise  based  on  detailed  designs  the  environmental  impact 
assessment/s undertaken during the project preparatory stage.. 
Ensure that the environmental factors and mitigation measures are incorporated 
in the designs. 
them  undertaken  by 
Together  with  national  consultant  identify  additional  studies/surveys  if  required 
the 
and  get 
environmental  assessment/s  to  meet  the  Coast  Conservation  Department’s  and 
Government of Sri Lanka’s regulatory requirements. Ensure that all assessments 
meet  both  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  2009,  and  government  of  Sri 
Lanka’s requirements.  
the  detailed  design 
finalize 
team 
to 
d) 
The  assessment/s  should  identify  the  area  of  impact,  assess  the  potential 
impacts  (not  only  at  the  project  site  but  related  facilities  such  as  borrow  sites, 
33 
quarry sites, disposal sites) and describe suitable mitigation measures, include a 
comprehensive  environmental  management  plan  (EMP)  which  identifies  clearly 
the responsibilities and institutional arrangements for implementation. This EMP 
will be attached to the bidding documents for the respective contracts, therefore 
detailed  (site  specific  and  not  generic)  EMPs  will  be  prepared.    The  report  for 
ADB shall follow the outlines presented in Annex to Appendix 1 of the SPS 2009. 
e) 
Ensure relevant stakeholders and affected persons are adequately consulted and 
all  consultation  should  be  well  documented.  Ensure  key  information  on  project, 
impacts,  and  proposed  mitigation  and  management  measures  are  provided  to 
affected  persons  in  a  manner  that  is  easily  understood  (in  the  local  language) 
and in a place which is readily accessible. 
34 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
63. 
The PDA will finance only consultancy services for detailed engineering designs and is 
categorized C for environment, involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples. The proposed 
ensuing project’s safeguard impacts are being assessed under the on-going project preparatory 
technical  assistance.  The  proposed  initial  safeguard  categorizations  of  the  ensuing  project  in 
accordance to ADB’s Safeguards Policy Statement (SPS) 2009 are as follows: (i) Category B for 
environment,  (ii)  Category  B  for  involuntary  resettlement,  and  (iii)  category  C  for  indigenous 
peoples.  The  PDA-financed  consultants  will  update  the  initial  environmental  examination  and 
resettlement  plan  based  on  final  detailed  designs.  The  consultancy  team  includes  an 
environment specialist and social safeguard specialist. 
Prohibited  investment  activities.  Pursuant  to  ADB's  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009) 
64. 
(SPS),  ADB  funds  may  not  be  applied  to  the  activities  described  on  the  ADB  Prohibited 
Investment Activities List set forth at Appendix 5 of the SPS.  
35 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
65. 
These aspects are being covered under the PPTA and are not financed under the PDA. 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
66. 
PDA  Project  performance  monitoring:  PDA  Project  performance  will  be  monitored 
based  on  quarterly  and  consolidated  reports  provided  by  the  MFARD.  These  reports  will 
include: (a) progress achieved by activity as measured against the implementation schedule, (b) 
key  implementation  issues  and  solutions;  (c)  updated  procurement  plan;  and  (d)  updated 
implementation  plan for remaining  implementation  period. To  ensure  PDA  projects  continue to 
be both viable and sustainable, PDA project financial statements, together with the associated 
auditor's report,  should  be  adequately  reviewed.  Only  in  the  event  that an  ensuing  loan  is  not 
approved,  will  MFARD  submit  a  PDA  project  completion  report  to  ADB  within  6  months  of 
physical completion of the PDA project.18 
67. 
Compliance  monitoring:  Loan  covenants  on  policy,  legal,  financial,  economic, 
environmental,  labor  standards  and  others  will  be  monitored  regularly  through  various  reports 
(monthly  progress  reports,  quarterly  progress  reports,  and  annual  reports),  and  discussions 
during review missions. 
Safeguards monitoring: There will be no safeguard monitoring required during the PDA 
68. 
loan  as  it  will  only  support  preparation  of  detailed  designs  and  updating  of  the  environment 
assessments  and  resettlement  plans.  ADB  and  the  relevant  government  agencies  will  review 
each of these updates. 
B. 
Reporting 
69. 
The MFARD will provide ADB with: 
(i) 
PDA project’s quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with ADB's project 
performance reporting system; 
consolidated  annual  reports  including  (a)  progress  achieved  by  output  as 
measured  through  the  performance  targets,  (b)  key  implementation  issues  and 
solutions; (c) updated procurement plan and (d) updated implementation plan for 
next 12 months;19 and 
PDA  project  accounts  and  the  executing  agency  AFSs,  together  with  the 
associated auditor's report,  
(ii) 
(iii) 
C. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
70. 
The  PDA  will  maximize  transparency  by  communicating  relevant  project  information  to 
stakeholders  in  various  means.  Surveys  and  consultations  among  stakeholders  will  be 
conducted during updating of social safeguard assessments and resettlement plans. Awareness 
workshops on project activities will be held. 
18 Project completion report format is available at: http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/pai-6-07-a.pdf 
19The regional departments will present the performance of the completed PDA in the project completion report of the 
ensuing loan. See para. 51 of ADB. 2013. Project Design Advance. Staff Instruction. Manila. 
36 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
71. 
ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  PDA  project.20 All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  shall  include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
executing  agency  and  all  PDA  project  contractors,  suppliers,  consultants  and  other  service 
providers. Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible to participate 
in ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the PDA project.21 
To support these efforts, relevant provisions are included in the loan agreement and the 
72. 
bidding documents for the PDA project.  
20 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/Policies-Strategies.pdf 
21 ADB's Integrity Office web site is available at: http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp 
37 
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
73. 
People  who  are,  or  may  in  the  future  be,  adversely  affected  by  the  PDA  project  may 
submit complaints to ADB’s Accountability Mechanism. The Accountability Mechanism provides 
an  independent  forum  and  process  whereby  people  adversely  affected  by  ADB-assisted  PDA 
projects can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations 
of  ADB’s  operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to 
the 
Accountability  Mechanism,  affected  people  should  make  a  good  faith  effort  to  solve  their 
problems by working with the concerned ADB operations department.  Only after doing that, and 
if they are still dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.22 
22 For further information see: http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp.  
38 
XII. 
RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
{All revisions/updates during course of implementation should be retained in this Section 
74. 
to  provide  a  chronological  history  of  changes  to  implemented  arrangements  recorded  in  the 
PAM.}  
39 
