 Community Vegetable Farming for Livelihood Improvement Project 
– Additional Financing (AFR MON 50278-002) 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 50278 
Grant Numbers: G9192; GXXXX 
January 2020 
Mongolia: Community Vegetable Farming for 
Livelihood Improvement Project 
ADB 
CGG 
CGAP 
CPDPCD 
CSO 
DMF 
EOJ 
FMA 
GAP 
GOM 
HLT 
JFPR 
MOF 
MOFALI 
NCB 
NGO 
O&M 
PAM 
PIU 
PPD 
PPMS 
SOE 
SPS 
aimag 
soum 
bagh 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Asian Development Bank 
community grower group 
community group action plan 
Crop Production Development Policy and Coordination Department 
civil society organization 
design and monitoring framework 
Embassy of Japan 
financial management assessment 
gender action plan  
Government of Mongolia 
high-level technology 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Light Industry 
national competitive bidding 
nongovernment organization 
operation and maintenance 
project administration manual 
project implementation unit  
Policy Planning Department of MOFALI 
project performance monitoring system 
statement of expenditure 
Safeguard Policy Statement 
GLOSSARY 
province 
district 
sub-district 
CONTENTS 
I. 
V. 
II.  
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A.  Project Rationale 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A.  Project Readiness Activities 
B.  Overall Project Implementation Plan 
III.  PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A.  Project Implementation Organizations – Roles and Responsibilities 
B.  Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
C.  Project Organization Structure 
D.   Grant Management 
IV.  COSTS AND FINANCING 
A.  Cost Estimates and Financing Plan 
B.  Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds 
C.  Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
D.  Detailed Cost Estimates by Output 
E.  Estimated Disbursement Schedule by Year 
F.  Contract and Disbursement S-curve 
G.  Funds Flow Diagram 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B.  Disbursement 
C.  Accounting 
D.  Auditing and Public Disclosure 
1 
1 
6 
6 
7 
19 
19 
21 
22 
23 
24 
24 
26 
27 
28 
28 
30 
31 
32 
32 
35 
36 
37 
38 
38 
38 
39 
46 
52 
VII.  SAFEGUARDS 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
52 
IX.   PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND COMMUNICATION  56 
56 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
64 
64 
A.  Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
B.  Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
C.  Procurement Plan 
D.  Consultant's Terms of Reference 
A.  Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
B.  Monitoring 
C.  Evaluation 
D.  Reporting 
E.  Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
X.   ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
XI.  ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
XII.  RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
VI.  PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
Financial Management Assessment 
APPENDICES: 
JAPAN FUND FOR POVERTY REDUCTION – GUIDANCE NOTE ON VISIBILITY OF JAPAN  65 
JAPAN FUND FOR POVERTY REDUCTION – GUIDANCE NOTE ON COORDINATION WITH 
THE EMBASSY OF JAPAN AND JICA 
STAKEHOLDER COMMUNICATIONS STRATEGY 
NOTES FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROJECT 
68 
70 
72 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT SUMMARY 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION UNIT STAFFING REQUIREMENT  
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT FIRM/NGO STAFFING REQUIREMENT 
SOUM PROFILES 
REQUEST FOR FUNDING SUPPORT FROM RETA 9057  
86 
                   85 
       91 
                 102 
     114 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes  the  administrative  and  management  provisions 
required  to  implement  the  project  on  time,  within  budget,  and  in  accordance  with  the  policies  and 
procedures of the government and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). PAM includes references to all 
available templates and instructions either through linkages to relevant URLs or directly incorporated 
into the document. 
The  Ministry  of  Food,  Agriculture  and  Light  Industry  (MOFALI)  is  wholly  responsible  for  the 
implementation of the project, as agreed jointly between the grant recipient and ADB, and in accordance 
with  the  government’s  and  ADB’s  policies  and  procedures.  ADB  staff  is  tasked  with  supporting  the 
implementation including compliance by MOFALI with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
MOFALI  and  ADB  shall  agree  to  PAM  (this  document)  and  ensure  its  consistency  with  the  grant 
agreements. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the  two, the provisions of the 
grant agreements shall prevail. 
1.  After ADB approval of the project's Grant Assistance Report (GAR) and Additional Financing Report, 
changes in  implementation  arrangements  are  subject  to agreement  and approval  based  on relevant 
government and ADB administrative procedures (including ADB’s Project Administration Instructions) 
and upon such approval they will be incorporated in PAM. 
A. 
Project Rationale 
I. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Unlike  livestock  herding  with  its  centuries-old  traditions,  vegetable  farming  remains  an 
1. 
underdeveloped sector in Mongolia despite good potential for cropping, particularly in the country’s 
central  growing  region,  spanning  Darkhan-Uul,  Selenge,  and  Tuv  aimags.  In  line  with  the 
Government  of  Mongolia’s  policy  to  diversify  the  economy  and  lessen  the  disproportionate 
dependence  on  livestock  and  (especially)  mining  characteristic  of  recent  years,  agriculture—
including smallholder vegetable farming—has become a priority. Within agriculture more broadly 
conceived, investments in vegetable farming, processing, and marketing are considered particularly 
promising in improving the well-being of Mongolia’s local communities. 
2. 
Gradually creating alternatives to collectivized agriculture of the socialist period, Mongolia 
has  made  strides  to  become  self-sufficient  in  cereal  and  potato  production;  but  until  now, 
vegetable  farming  has  received  less  attention  and  remains  undeveloped  and  inefficient.  This 
perpetuates  low  income  for  vegetable  farmers  and  high  reliance  on  imported  products,  both 
threatening national food security. On average, only about half of the country’s annual vegetable 
demand was met by domestic production from 2008 to 2016. No more than three items (cabbage, 
carrot, and turnip) account for close to 70% of overall area planted to vegetables.1 The demand 
for good quality locally grown fresh produce is on the rise as urbanization increases and better-
informed citizenry becomes more concerned about traditional reliance on meat as a diet staple 
and aware of the need to have a more balanced diet for better health.2 
Limited access to market and foregone income-generating opportunities. It is difficult 
3. 
for farmers to access markets with good terms, and they are often compromised at the hands of 
middlemen.  In  addition,  severe  climatic  conditions  and  short  Mongolian  summers  limit  the 
cropping season and add to the challenges faced by the sector as they result in marked seasonal 
variability of supply and prices. In the absence of adequate post-harvest and storage facilities, 
local producers cannot benefit from the higher off-season prices and a large share of domestic 
demand  is  filled  by  imports.  The  same  lack  of  storage  and  post-harvest  processing  leads  to 
significant waste of seasonal production surpluses. With more commercial experience and know-
how on post-harvesting value-added opportunities and marketing, smallholder farmers will have 
better access to markets, more negotiation power, and more secured income. 
4. 
Inefficient  agricultural  practices  and  low  capacity  to  respond  to  harsh  climate. 
Mongolia  has  not  traditionally  seen  much  crop  farming.  Farmers  lack  technical  expertise  on 
sustainable  farming  practices  as  well  as  relevant  tools  and  technologies  for  expanding  and 
sustaining  growing  patterns  and are considerably  unprepared  for  climate  change.  Additionally, 
about 80% of vegetable production is estimated to be performed manually—in a country that is 
not labor-abundant, this has severe implications. Lack of mechanization together with inefficient 
water  use  and  archaic  irrigation  practices  often  make  farming  financially  marginal  and 
uncompetitive with imports. Currently in project areas, the average farming household produces 
a small 7 tons of vegetables annually. With access to more consistent and good quality inputs, 
introduction  of  appropriate  tools,  and  increased  technical  knowledge  of  sustainable  climate-
resilient cropping practices, smallholder farmers will be able to increase yields and income.  
1  Other main vegetables produced in Mongolia include beetroot, cucumber, garlic, onion, and tomato.    
2  Mongolia  has one  of  the  world’s  highest  incidence  of cardiovascular disease,  which  is also  the country’s  leading 
cause of death. Its high incidence has been linked to lifestyle and (also) diet. This offers a convenient example of 
one of the project’s potential indirect benefits.  
2 
Small fragmented holdings and weak capacity. There are about 300 cooperatives and 
5. 
35,000  households  across  the  country  growing  vegetables  on  plots  of  up  to  100  hectares  (ha), 
totaling an area of about 7,200 ha. Typical, however, are fragmented smallholdings of up to 5 ha 
characterized by limited work force, low levels, and quality of inputs (agrochemicals, seeds, water, 
and others), and scant financial resources. Smallholder farming income is low; and opportunities 
are  curtailed,  not  only  because  of  continuous  application  of  poor  agricultural  practices  and 
inconsistent supply and quality of farming inputs; but also because of lack of collaboration among 
farming  households.  Opportunities  for  better  managed  collective  areas  for  farming,  increased 
livelihood security, and economies of scale can be achieved with more collaboration, organization, 
and shared capacity among the farmers. 
6. 
The  project  aims  to  overcome  some  of  the  handicaps  the  sector  currently  faces  and 
improve  livelihoods  for  households  involved  in  smallholder  vegetable  production.  This  will  be 
achieved  by  implementing  a  community  farming  model  anchored  in  a  more  efficient  use  of 
growers’ own resources, expanded access to agricultural inputs, support infrastructure and know-
how, and improvement of farm-to-market linkages. It will create 30 farming and seed-producing 
groups (community grower groups [CGGs]) organized into inclusive agriculture value chains in 
Bornuur, Orkhon, Ulaangom, and Yeruu soums. The sites have been selected based on suitability 
of areas for vegetable production, scope for applying a pro-poor participatory approach, existence 
of enabling policy environment, and proximity to main transport networks.3 
7. 
Strategic fit. On the back of its Sustainable Development Vision 2030, Program of Action 
2016–2020,  State  Policy  on  Food  and  Agriculture  and  Crop  Production  Law,  Mongolia  is 
committed  to  improving  vegetable  production.4  The  State  Policy  stresses  the  need  to  improve 
agricultural productivity through a value chain approach, climate change adaptation, and capacity 
building for farmers. Smallholder farming is to be one of the priorities. Local vegetable production 
is to meet 70% of domestic demand by 2020 and its totality by 2025 through, among other things, 
on-farm  mechanization,  greater  use  of  protection  culture  (greenhouses  and  plasticulture)  and 
introduction  of  water-saving  irrigation  techniques.  The  project  is  consistent  with  the  Asian 
Development  Bank’s  (ADB)  country  partnership  strategy  for  Mongolia,  2017–2020  and  the 
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry’s (MOFALI) sector priorities.5 It converges with 
ADB’s Operational Plan for Agriculture and Natural Resources, 2015–2020 with its emphasis on 
sustainable natural resources management and climate resilience.6 The project will serve as a 
pilot for scaling up under a climate-smart agriculture loan programmed for 2019. It is proposed as 
a grant in ADB’s country operations business plan for Mongolia, 2017–2019.7 
Sector context. In recent years, Mongolian agriculture has seen its fortunes fluctuate. Its 
8. 
herding  component  shored  up  household  income  and  the  country’s  exports  and  became  a 
stabilizing force during periods of economic stagnation that typically saw a return to herding of 
some of urban in-migrants. The livestock subsector itself has been exposed to significant risks, 
climate-related (such as dzuds) and others (disease, lack of quality certification standards, and 
difficulties  of  re-establishing  viable  management  systems).  Cropping,  too,  has  struggled  with 
3  UIaangom soum was chosen for seed production given the specialization in seed production by Ulaangom town’s 
branch of the National Plant Science and Agricultural Research Institute. 
4  Vision 2030 aims to increase the area of land served by new and efficient irrigation technologies to 65,000 hectares 
(ha)  by  2020  (100,000  ha  by  2025  and  120,000  ha  by  2030),  increase  farmland  fertility,  and  decrease  soil 
degradation. 
5  ADB. 2017. Country Partnership Strategy: Mongolia, 2017–2020. Manila. 
6   ADB. 2015. The Operational Plan for Agriculture and Natural Resources: Promoting Sustainable Food Security in 
Asia and the Pacific in 2015–2020. Manila. 
7  ADB. 2017. Country Operations Business Plan: Mongolia, 2017–2019. Manila. 
3 
creating viable successors to former state farms but, aided by development partners, succeeded 
in  increasing  the  country’s  self-sufficiency  in  crops  considered  to  be  of  strategic  importance 
(potato  and  wheat).  The  viability  of  more  specialized  forms  of  farming  has  also  been 
demonstrated. The boom in mineral export revenues up to 2013 temporarily removed the urgency 
to build on these advances and diversify the economy. In the aftermath of the commodity price 
collapse (post 2013) the potential of agriculture and its smallholder component to act both as an 
income-enhancing and risk reduction tool was finally given formal recognition. 
Lessons. The project draws on lessons from agriculture sector initiatives undertaken in 
9. 
Mongolia. First, while the need to reap economies of scale and benefits of shared learning are 
well  understood, there is  reluctance among  target  households to re-create formal  collectivized 
structures in vegetable production. This stems from past experience of socialist collectives which 
were  top-down,  imposed  on  all  and  very  large  scale.  Simpler,  more  pragmatic  groupings  of 
producers are preferred. Second, opportunities to increase farmers’ income can be found at both 
ends of the value chain, not only on farm (through bigger or more valuable crops) but along the 
way to final consumption (through improved availability, more convenient packaging etc.). Third, 
to  fully  benefit  from  the  value  chain  opportunities,  producers  need  to  be  exposed  to  both 
technological and commercial innovation. Fourth, women in rural Mongolia have often been in the 
forefront  of  income  diversification  activities  including  vegetable  production  and  female-headed 
households can be recruited for new initiatives in the subsector. Fifth, climate change increases 
the need to introduce innovations into the vegetable subsector. Best practices from previous ADB 
and donor projects in community-based natural resource management will be applied to ensure 
better outcomes of the approach being implemented under the pilot project.8 
from 
financing 
Additional  Financing:  The  proposed  additional 
the  High-Level 
10. 
Technology  Fund (HLTF)  is  requested for the design, testing,  and  rolling  out  of  one  high-level 
technology  (HLT)  winter  greenhouse,  particularly  envisioned  to  be  utilized  for  (i)  consulting 
advisory for (a) a rapid assessment and technical viability study for a winter greenhouse model 
suitable for the weather in Mongolia; (b) design and implementation of a winter greenhouse; and 
(c)  a  brief  feasibility  study  for  future  scale-up  and  investment  and  project  development;  (ii) 
provision of required equipment and systems needed for piloting the winter greenhouse, including 
the HLT systems for irrigation, heating, ventilation, and waste management; and (iii) conduct of 
required  consultation  workshops and training for technology  and approaches  being  introduced 
and  piloted  within  the  project.9  Use  of  the  HLTF  for  the  subject  grant  presents  a  strong 
demonstration opportunity for replication in the country and region, in places with similar climate 
and has opportunities for scale-up (footnote 11). 
B. 
Impact and Outcome 
11. 
The impacts will be (i) rural livelihood for smallholder vegetable farmers improved; and (ii) 
resilience and adaptation to climate change improved. The outcome will be model for community 
vegetable farming demonstrated. The project has three outputs. 
C. 
Outputs and Key Activities 
12. 
Output 1: Community grower groups established. The project aims to capture potential 
economies of scale in smallholder farming that exist in areas such as irrigation, equipment use, 
8   ADB.  2008.  Proposed  Grant  Assistance  to  Mongolia  for  Poverty  Reduction  through  Community-Based  Natural 
Resource Management. Manila;  ADB. 2010. Proposed Grant Assistance to Mongolia for Establishment of Climate-
Resilient Rural Livelihoods. Manila. 
9   Financing partner: the Government of Japan. 
4 
or knowledge-sharing by facilitating collaboration among farming households. In principle, this will 
increase areas effectively managed and more quickly to introduce innovations. Under this output, 
(i) training will be conducted for farmers in target areas on how best to organize effective groups 
and  manage  collaboration.  Criteria  for  selection  of  beneficiary  farming  households  will  be 
specified; (ii) about 30 CGG will be formed10 in the four project sites, bringing together an average 
of  six  farmer  households  per  group;11  (iii)  an  inventory  and  ownership  of  existing  resources—
ranging from labor availability, machinery, equipment, know-how, storage, greenhouses, among 
others—will  be  established  and  rules  for  use,  maintenance,  and  cost-sharing  drawn  up  and 
agreed; and (iv) a community growers’ scheme will be established.12  
13. 
Community growers’ scheme. The project will support the creation and initial facilitation 
of a community growers’ scheme which will help CGGs with operations and maintenance (O&M) 
and expansion by covering cost for an amount specified in the budget. Contribution towards the 
scheme from the project will be phased during the four years of the project. The amount of project 
to community share and details on phasing out will be discussed by the project implementation unit 
(PIU)  in  consultation  with  communities  and  local  government  and  be  determined  during  project 
implementation; for example, the project funds will contribute 100% to  cover O&M and expansion 
in year 1, 50% in year 2 (with remaining 50% contribution from CGG member households), 25% in 
year  3  (with  remaining  75%  contribution  from  CGG  member  households),  and  0%  in  year  4 
(community will contribute 100%). Each CGG will submit a request on a case by case basis to the 
PIU  for  O&M  and  expansion  needs―the  PIU  will  determine  its  necessity  and  extend  support 
accordingly.  CGGs  will  receive  partial  support  from  the  project  and  will  provide  partial  financing 
themselves  (as  indicated  above  and  to  be  detailed  during  project  implementation).  Each  CGG 
member  (household  level)  will  be  required  to  contribute  towards  its  own  O&M  and  expansion 
requirements.  The  contribution  per  household  level  will  be  determined  during  early  project 
implementation  stages  with  consultations  with  the  community,  project  beneficiaries  and  local 
government.  The  project  will  help  communities  to  draft  rules  and  regulations  for  the  scheme, 
including withdrawal and disbursement procedures and amount of contribution by each member. 
The objective of the scheme is to support operation and maintenance of facilities and equipment 
provided by the project and to create seed capital for sustainable farming for project farmers by 
replacing  and/or  expanding  the  shared  resources.  After  the  end  of  the  project,  the  scheme  is 
expected to be maintained by the CGGs that remain intact post project implementation. The scheme 
is  being  proposed  as  a  long-term  sustainability  measure  for  project  activities  and  the  social 
mechanism of CGGs to continue beyond the project life. 
14. 
Output 2: Sustainable climate-resilient vegetable farming technology and practices 
applied. The collaboration-based model introduced under output 1 will be  put into practice. The 
project will provide a defined share of farm inputs including seeds, fertilizer and agrochemicals. On-
farm greenhouses of proven design and new models will be set up to widen the range of produce 
grown  and  extend  the  growing  season.  Appropriate  technology  for  “winter”  greenhouses  will  be 
piloted. Efficient water-saving methods will be introduced, and existing irrigation will be improved in 
10 Criteria for the formation of community growers groups are: (i) minimum of five households; (ii) women to account 
for at least 50% of group membership; (iii) commitment to share–under specified and understood conditions–farming 
assets  and  resources;  and  (iv)  all  households  are  considered  vulnerable  and  poor  with  limited  agriculture  land 
resources, having 1 ha or less of land.   
11 Eight groups per vegetable growing soum, and six seed growers’ groups in Ulaangom. The average of six households 
per group is based on extensive community consultations with farming households. 
12 The scheme will be partly subsidized through grant funds for the first couple of years. Funds will be used for O&M, 
and  for  the  establishment  of  more  greenhouses  or  procurement  of  farms  tools  as  required  by  CGGs.  During 
withdrawal processing, disbursement and fiduciary arrangements for the scheme will be agreed upon. For the time 
being, the money for this activity has been earmarked under contingencies. Once all arrangements are in place and 
acceptable to ADB, a variation will be requested to move the funds for the establishment of the scheme.  
5 
the Ulaangom project site through setting up greenhouse drip irrigation, small-scale on-farm water 
tanks  and  supply  equipment.  CGGs  will  be  trained  on  best  practices  in  sustainable  vegetable 
farming with a focus on water allocation and use, soil cultivation, planting, intercropping, organic 
fertilizer,  plant  health,  and  pest  control.  Training  on  greenhouse  farming  techniques  will  be 
conducted; gender-targeted skills training will be given to facilitate increased greenhouse farming 
amongst female members. Through this output, the project aims to improve efficiency and increase 
value for farmers along the value chain, focusing on production and harvesting. 
The additional financing will contribute for the effective achievement of the project’s impacts. 
15. 
Direct  beneficiaries  will  include  around  24  CGGs  (mostly  female-headed),  covering  over  500 
farmers. Indirect benefit will accrue to the wider community with a total population of 45,000 or more. 
The proposed technologies are expected to: 
(i) 
Improve productivity and quality. The proposed precision  winter greenhouse will 
help maximize the crop yields by applying optimal levels of water and fertilizer; and 
enable  the  production  of  higher  value  and  quality  vegetable  production  in  the 
controlled  environment.  In  comparison  to  traditional  greenhouses,  the  technologies 
will  substantially  improve  energy  and  water  use  efficiency,  using  renewable  energy 
source and precisely control water and energy based on real time monitoring system. 
(ii)  Address climate change adaptation, and resilience to disaster risks. By enabling 
crop  diversification  into  higher  value  cash  crops  and  climate-resilient  varieties  with 
varied maturities, the proposed HLT  activities and systems induce opportunities for 
climate change adaptation and higher and more stable income for poor farmers. It is 
also  expected  to  build  resilience  to  harsh  winters  that  limit  the  growing  season  by 
extending the growing season from 3 months to 8 months. 
(iii) 
Introduce  innovation  in  processes,  methods,  techniques,  and  the  use  of  new 
improved  equipment  and  materials  in  construction,  and  operations  and 
maintenance. Training on the HLT winter greenhouse operation best practices and 
climate-resilient  farming  will  be  provided  to  develop  a  sustainable  cultivation  and 
distribution system for greenhouse vegetable value chains. 
16. 
Output 3: Farmers’ access to markets improved. This output will strengthen vegetable 
sector  logistics,  promote  local  enterprise  development  and  farm-to-market  linkages  for 
smallholder farmers. Specifically, (i) a market and value chain study will be conducted; (ii) shared 
storage facilities will be set up; (iii) a food processing workshop will be set up in Orkhon to create 
livelihood  opportunities  for  women  CGG  members,  and  gender-targeted  training  in  food 
processing, packaging, and marketing will be given;13 (iv) vegetable quality assessment, grading, 
and  waste  disposal  information  will  be  disseminated;  (v)  small  selling-points  will  be  set  up  in 
Ulaanbaatar,  aimag  centers  and  on  the  Tuv-Ulaanbaatar  road;  (vi)  a  marketing  brand  will  be 
established;  and  (vii)  business  agreements  between  farmer  groups  and  buyers  will  be  piloted 
(including  private  sector).  Through  this  output,  the  project  will  aim  to  improve  efficiencies  and 
value for farmers along the value chain, focusing on post-harvesting and marketing. 
17. 
The  project’s  value-chain  activities—socially-inclusive,  environmentally-friendly,  and 
13  Supported  through  piggy-back  support  from  the  Sustainable  Development  and  Climate  Change  Department 
Knowledge and Support Technical Assistance REG (50042): Strengthening Women's Resilience to Climate Change 
and Disaster Risk in Asia and the Pacific. The KSTA will fund sub-component under Output 3 for establishing the 
vegetable  processing  workshop,  equipping  the  workshop  with  relevant  tools  and  small-scale  machinery  and 
equipment, providing relevant skills training for women and a social and gender specialist. More details on piggy-
back funding support from KSTA REG (50042) are in Appendix 9.  
6 
financially-viable—are expected to add value for farmers along all stages of the vegetable farming 
cycle. Lessons from ADB’s agriculture and rural development project on agricultural value chains 
and inclusive business will be applied.14  
Project management. MOFALI will manage the project. In spite of a good experience in 
18. 
implementing  ADB-funded  or  ADB-administered  activities,  MOFALI  lacks  adequate  resources  to 
fully  implement  the  project.  The  grant  proceeds  will  be  used  to:  (i)  establish  the  administrative 
framework (PIU); and (ii) finance required grant implementation consultants and operational costs.  
II.  
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
A. 
Project Readiness Activities  
Indicative Activities 
Japan Fund for Poverty 
Reduction 
Grant negotiations 
Establish project 
implementation 
arrangements 
ADB approval 
Grant signing 
Government legal 
opinion provided 
Grant effectiveness 
High-Level Technology 
Fund 
Grant negotiations 
ADB approval 
Grant signing 
Government legal 
opinion provided 
Grant effectiveness 
2017 
2018 
2019 
Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
2020 
Q1 
Responsible Agency(s) 
ADB, MOF, MOFALI 
MOFALI, MOF 
ADB 
ADB, MOF 
MOF 
ADB 
ADB, MOF, MOFALI 
ADB 
ADB, MOF 
MOF 
ADB 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  MOF  =  Ministry  of  Finance,  MOFALI  =  Ministry  of  Food,  Agriculture,  and  Light 
Industry. 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
14  ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Asian Development 
Bank Fund Grant and Technical Assistance Grant to Mongolia for the Agriculture and Rural Development Project. 
Manila. 
B. 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
7 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
Components 
and Activities 
1. Community 
grower groups 
established 
1.1 Conduct 
training 
(including 
gender 
sensitive 
training) for 
local 
communities on 
best ways to 
establish 
effective 
grower groups 
and engage in 
collaborative 
farming. 
1.2. Form 
vegetable 
CGGs, bringing 
together 
around five to 
eight farmer 
households per 
group and eight 
groups in each 
vegetable 
production site 
and six groups 
in seed 
production site 
1.3 Organize 
experience-
sharing events 
and trainings 
with model 
grower groups. 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
8 
Components 
and Activities 
1.4 Conduct 
the stocktaking 
exercise and 
map out all 
farming 
households in 
the grower 
groups, 
including plot 
location, area, 
vegetables 
grown, farming 
assets. 
(equipment, 
machinery, 
etc.). 
1.5. Describe 
the pool of 
resources 
(existing and 
new) available 
to each group 
and establish 
the rules for the 
use of this pool, 
its 
maintenance, 
ownership, 
cost-sharing 
and 
governance. 
1.6 Consult 
with farmer 
groups on the 
community 
farming plans, 
develop 
community 
group action 
plans with 
CGGs in each 
soum. 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
9 
Components 
and Activities 
1.7 Consult 
with farmer 
groups in each 
soum on the 
community 
group plans; 
revise plans as 
necessary. 
1.8 Submit 
community 
group plans to 
soum 
administration 
for approval. 
1.9 Soum 
administration 
submits their 
community 
farming plans 
to PIU for 
approval. 
1.10 Train 
farmer groups 
in implementing 
their 
community 
action plans. 
2. Sustainable 
climate-
resilient 
vegetable 
farming 
technology 
and practices 
applied 
2.1 Provide 
(where needed) 
farm equipment 
and other tools 
to farmer 
groups to 
improve the 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
10 
Components 
and Activities 
efficiency of 
vegetable 
production 
(planting, 
weed-control, 
harvesting). 
2.2 Set up 
small-scale, 
seasonal 
vegetable 
greenhouses. 
2.3 Set up 
seasonal  
greenhouses in 
Ulaangom for 
seed testing 
and improving 
2.4 Set up 
large-scale, all-
season 
greenhouse in 
one of the 
project soums. 
2.5 Set up 
small-scale, 
seasonal 
vegetable 
greenhouses in 
the project 
main soums. 
2.6 Set up 
seasonal  
greenhouses in 
Ulaangom for 
seed testing 
and improving. 
2.7 Test soil to 
establish 
baseline for soil 
quality. 
2.8 Provide 
protective 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
11 
Components 
and Activities 
clothes for 
each group. 
2.9 Provide 
agrochemicals 
(“green” 
pesticides and 
fertilizers) for 
each group. 
2.10 Provide 
support for 
improving 
water access in 
Gashuunii gol 
(water well, 
tank and 
pipeline). 
2.11 Provide 
support for 
access to water 
in Chandmani 
(electricity line 
to water wells). 
2.12 Provide 
mother seed, 
and seed to all 
groups. 
2.13 Support 
transport of 
seed from Uvs 
to the main 
soums. 
2.14 Provide 
training for best 
practices in 
greenhouse 
operations, 
including the 
use of water 
and energy.   
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
12 
Components 
and Activities 
2.15 Train 
farmer groups 
in best 
practices in 
sustainable 
climate-resilient 
farming; (in 
climate 
preparedness, 
crop rotation, 
introduction of 
new vegetables 
and varieties, 
use of organic 
fertilizer and 
pesticide, best 
practices in 
water saving). 
2.16 Set up 
HLT winter 
greenhouse 
(added) 
2.17 Train 
farmer groups 
with practical 
knowledge on 
maintaining, 
and using high-
level 
technology 
winter 
greenhouses 
(added) 
3. Farmers’ 
access to 
markets 
improved 
3.1 Conduct a 
market study 
and value chain 
analysis.  
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
13 
Components 
and Activities 
3.2 Set up 
shared storage 
facility (150 
tons) in 
Orkhon. 
3.3 Set up 
shared storage 
facility (100 
tons) in Yeruu. 
3.4 Set up 
storage for 
seed and 
mother crop 
60tons at 
Ulaangom seed 
center. 
3.5 Establish 
vegetable 
processing and 
packaging 
facility in 
Orkhon. 
3.6 Gender 
targeted 
training for 
vegetable 
value-addition 
and 
processing, 
including 
processing 
techniques, 
packaging, 
branding, and 
marketing   
3.7 Support 
farmer groups 
in participating 
in national 
vegetable trade 
fairs. 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
14 
Components 
and Activities 
3.8 Develop 
and launch web 
and mobile 
based 
vegetable 
farmer market 
information 
system. 
3.9 Support 
grower groups 
in renting a 
shared storage 
facility in 
Ulaanbaatar.  
3.10 Pilot 6 
kiosks in 
Ulaanbaatar 
city for selling 
produce. 
3.11 Set up a 
selling point 
along the main 
road axis 
linking the 
project soums 
with 
Ulaanbaatar. 
3.12 Pilot and 
make sales 
agreements 
between farmer 
groups and 
buyers (agro-
industries, 
commercial 
farms, 
supermarkets, 
public sector 
buyers, 
individuals. 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
15 
Components 
and Activities 
3.13 Train 
farmer groups 
in vegetable 
grading and 
quality control 
and the 
economics of 
processing. 
3.14 Train 
farmers groups 
in business and 
market 
practices, and 
operating and 
regulatory 
environment. 
Knowledge 
products 
3.15 Organize 
and host a 
workshop to 
share 
experience.  
3.16 Arrange a 
collaboration 
with a 
Japanese seed 
institute. 
4. Project 
management 
support 
4.1 Improve the 
capacity of 
local officials to 
manage ADB 
projects. 
4.2 Engage 
firm/NGO/entity 
volunteer group 
to assist in 
project 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
16 
Components 
and Activities 
implementation
. 
4.3 Induction 
training on the 
Project for 
MOFALI and 
soum 
administrations.  
4.4 Train PIU 
on specific 
aspects of the 
Project,  
including 
financial 
management 
(budgeting, 
disbursements) 
and 
procurement. 
4.5 Train PIU 
on ADB 
procedures for 
safeguard 
policies and 
gender 
mainstreaming.  
4.6 Screen and 
conduct due 
diligence for 
small 
infrastructure. 
4.7 Monitoring 
project 
progress on a 
quarterly basis 
and produce 
M&E reports 
including 
safeguards and 
gender 
aspects. 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
17 
Components 
and Activities 
Manage the 
Project 
efficiently and 
effectively 
4.8 Recruit and 
appoint PIU 
Project 
Coordinator, 
finance 
specialist, and 
Procurement 
Specialist. 
4.9 Recruit and 
appoint soum 
project 
advisors. 
4.10 Recruit 
and appoint 
consultants 
with specialty 
skills. 
4.11 Purchase 
vehicle for the 
PIU 
motorcycles for 
the soum 
advisors. 
4.12 Purchase 
computer 
equipment for 
PIU. 
4.13 Hold 
regular project 
steering 
committee 
meetings. 
5. Reports 
5.1 Inception 
5.2 Quarterly 
reports 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D 
18 
Components 
and Activities 
5.3 Annual 
review 
5.4 Mid-term 
review 
5.5 Project 
completion 
report 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
19 
Project Implementation Organizations – Roles and Responsibilities  
A. 
Executing agency: 
MOFALI  
(i) 
•  Assumes overall responsibility and accountability for project planning, 
management, and implementation, appointing project director for this 
purpose  
•  Ensures timely and effective execution of the grant agreement 
•  Acts through a PIU 
•  Co-signs  (with  MOF)  applications  for  withdrawals  from  project 
advance account  
Inputs relevant project documents in MOF’s ODA-MIS system 
• 
•  Submits progress reports to ADB and MOF 
• 
Facilitates project activities such as meetings and trainings with soum 
government and communities 
Facilitates auditing of project accounts 
• 
•  Review PIU progress reports 
•  Establishes and chairs the PSC 
•  Provides overall guidance to the PIU 
•  Provides policy support 
•  Comprises  five  members:  State  Secretary  of  MOFALI  (Chair),  a 
representative of MOF, one representative of MOFALI’s PPD and two 
members  of  MOFALI’s  CPDPCD  (including  project  director)  and 
observers 
(one 
representative from each), the Embassy of Japan, ADB and SDCa 
•  Reviews and assesses project plans and implementation progress  
•  Provides advice on policy matters related to the project 
•  Meets at least semi-annually 
• 
Includes  PIU  staff,  international  consultants,  and  resource  persons 
(national and international)  
four  project  soum  administration 
from 
the 
•  Assumes  direct  oversight,  responsibility  and  accountability  for 
implementation of project outputs 1–3 
•  Responsible for daily project coordination, planning, implementation, 
financial  management,  procurement  and  reporting  to  MOFALI 
management   
•  Monitors  project  progress,  including  periodic  site  inspections  and 
compliance with PAM, GAP, and other project documents 
Inputs relevant project documents in MOF’s ODA-MIS system 
• 
•  Submits semi-annual progress reports to MOFALI executing agency, 
MOF and ADB 
•  Coordinates 
the  preparation  and  delivery  of  any  domestic 
• 
environmental or social safeguard requirements 
Facilitates project stakeholder activities e.g., meetings and trainings 
with soum government, communities 
•  Assumes  direct  oversight,  responsibility  and  accountability  for 
implementation of project outputs 1–3 
• 
Implements all project technical outputs  
•  Provides support to PIU and regular updates 
•  Carries out daily project activities, planning, implementation, financial 
management, procurement and reporting to PIU 
•  Prepares  project  progress,  including  periodic  site  inspections  and 
compliance with PAM, GAP, and other project documents 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Oversight body:  
PSC 
PIUb  
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Implementing 
firm/NGO/Entity 
20 
•  Manages preparation and delivery of any domestic environmental or 
social safeguard requirements 
•  Conducts  project  stakeholder  activities  e.g.,  meetings  and  trainings 
with soum government, communities 
(vii) 
ADB 
•  Oversees  project  administration  and  timely  execution  of  the  grant 
agreement by the executing agency 
•  Disburses grant proceeds 
•  Reviews  and,  as  needed  and  required,  approves  procurement, 
consultant recruitment, progress reports, and audit reports 
•  Reviews project compliance and targets against the DMF, GAP and 
PAM   
•  Monitors project progress and conducts review missions 
•  Disclose monitoring reports on ADB public website 
•  Acts as observer on the project steering committee 
•  Undertakes  coordination  with  EOJ  in  Mongolia,  JICA,  and  ADB’s 
• 
SDPF–Japan team. Specifically 
Invites  EOJ,  JICA,  and  SDPF–Japan  team  to  project  events  and 
missions (for SDPF, inform up to 4 months ahead) 
•  Provides information on project progress and supplies key reports and 
materials 
•  Discusses potential changes in scope 
•  Responds to inquiries information requests for information 
•  Supports donor visibility for dissemination of outcomes and lessons 
(viii)  Other participating agencies 
(ix) 
MOF 
•  Represents GOM in grant negotiations 
•  Signs grant agreement and project approval on behalf of GOM 
•  Co-signs  (with  MOFALI)  applications  for  withdrawal  from  project 
(x) 
Participating soum 
governments  
advance account 
•  Administers the advance accounts  
•  Reviews project progress and/or audit reports, as needed 
•  Make at least one technical counterpart (with agriculture, environment 
or forestry background) available for project-related deliberations and 
liaison  
•  Participate in project planning and training  
• 
Facilitate  collaboration  between  soum  project,  communities  and  the 
project 
(xi) 
•  Potentially share lessons from own similar activities with the project  
CSOs and other donors 
(e.g. SDC, USAID, 
selected CSOs) 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CPDPCD = Crop Production Development Policy and Coordination Department, CSO 
= civil society organization, DMF = design and monitoring framework, EOJ = Embassy of Japan, GAP = gender action 
plan, GOM = Government of Mongolia, JICA = Japan International Cooperation Agency, MOF = Ministry of Finance,  
MOFALI = Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry, NGO = nongovernment organization, SDPF = Partner Funds 
Division,  ODA-MIS  =  Official  Donor  Assistance  –  Management  Information  System,  PAM  =  project  administration 
manual, PIU = project implementation unit, PPD = Policy Planning Department,  PSC = project steering committee, 
SDC = Swiss Development Cooperation. 
a    Swiss  Development  Cooperation  has  been  proposed  as  an  observer  on  the  steering  committee  as  they  have 
implemented similar projects in Mongolia and the project will benefit from their experience and lessons learned.   
b   The staffing requirements for project implementation unit are in Appendix 6. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
21 
Ministry of Finance 
Executing Agency 
MOFALI 
Asian Development Bank 
Mission Leader 
Batkhuu Idesh 
Director General, Development Financing Department 
Telephone:   +976-51-262272 
Office  Address:  Government  Building  -2,  S.  Danzan 
Street 5/1, Ulaanbaatar 15160, Mongolia  
Jambaltseren Tumur-Uya 
Acting State Secretary 
Telephone:   +976-11-262322 
Office  Address:  Government  Building  9a,  Peace 
Avenue-16a,  Bayanzurkh  District,  Ulaanbaatar  15160, 
Mongolia 
Qingfeng Zhang 
Director 
Environment,  Natural  Resources,  and  Agriculture 
Division (EAER), East Asia Department (EARD) 
Telephone No.: +63 2 632 6161 
Fax No.: +63 2 636 2534 
Email: qingfengzhang@adb.org 
Jan F. Hinrichs 
Senior Natural Resources Economist  
Environment,  Natural  Resources,  and  Agriculture 
Division (EAER), East Asia Department (EARD) 
Telephone No.: +63 2 632 1582 
Email: jhinrichs@adb.org 
22 
C. 
Project Organization Structure 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Grant 
Agreement 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) 
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry (MOFALI) 
Executing Agency 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
Chair – State Secretary, MOFALI 
1.
2. Member – PPD   
3. Member – CPDPCD   
4. Member -- CPDPCD 
5. Member – MOF 
Secretary – PIU Project Coordinator 
Observers: 
Member – Bornuur soum 
Member – Orkhon soum 
Member – Ulaangom soum 
Member – Yeruu soum 
ADB 
Embassy of Japan 
Swiss Development Agency 
Legend:        
 Coordination          
                   Reporting 
                   Cooperation/Information exchange  
 Structures established for this project 
Project Implementation Unit 
/located at Crop Production 
Development Policy and 
Coordination Department 
(CPDPCD) / 
 Communities 
4 Soums 
Civil Society 
Organizations 
23 
D.  
Grant Management 
19. 
The project will be implemented over a period of 4 years from January 2018 to December 
2021.  MOFALI  will  be  the  executing  agency.  It  will  establish  a  PIU  at  its  Crop  Production 
Development  Policy  and  Coordination  Department  (CPDPCD).  The PIU,  comprising  a team  of 
full-time  staff,  part-time  consultants  and  a  supporting 
firm/nongovernment  organization 
(NGO)/entity, will support the executing agency in implementing the project. Soum governor office 
capacity will be supplemented for implementation at soum level. 
20. 
PIU.  The  PIU  will  be  responsible  for  daily  administration  of  the  project.  The  PIU  will 
comprise a team of full-time staff and part-time consultants recruited for the project, directly and 
through a supporting firm/NGO/entity (refer to Chapter VI.D. Consultant's Terms of Reference). 
The PIU will lead the coordination, planning, implementation and administration of the project as 
well  as  being  responsible  for  monitoring  and  reporting.  The  PIU  team  will  be  based  at  in 
Ulaanbaatar  at  premises  provided  by  MOFALI  as  part  of  Government  of  Mongolia’s  in-kind 
contribution.  
21. 
PIU staff. To implement the grant, the MOFALI will establish the PIU and recruit project 
coordinator,  finance  specialist,  procurement  specialist,  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E) 
specialist, and office manager. The MOFALI will establish a PIU staff selection committee and 
select the PIU staff following the competitive selection procedures acceptable to ADB. The PIU 
staff  will  be  recruited  in  line  with  the  MOF  regulation  no.  196.  The  PIU  staff  will  support  daily 
operations  and  work  closely  with the  firm/NGO/entity  on  project  implementation  activities.  The 
appointments  and  dismissal  of  the  PIU  staff  will  be  subject  to  ADB  prior  approval. Terms  of 
reference for the PIU staff are in Appendix 6.    
22. 
Project  implementation  support  firm/NGO/entity.  The  firm/NGO/entity  engaged  to 
support project implementation and provide 15 consultants (short term and long term) for up to 
341 person-months inputs. The firm/NGO/entity will be recruited through quality- and cost-based 
selection. Short technical proposals will be required. Procurement and recruitment of consultants 
will be conducted in accordance with ADB’s  Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from 
time to time) and ADB’s Guidelines on the Use of Consultants (2013, as amended from time to 
time). Terms of reference for the PIU consultants are in Appendix 7.    
23. 
Project  steering  committee.  A  project  steering  committee  will  be  established  for  the 
duration  of  the  project.    It  will  meet  at  least  semi-annually  to  review  and  monitor  project 
implementation and its plans and advise on project-related policy matters. It will be chaired by the 
State  Secretary  (MOFALI)  and  include  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MOF), 
MOFALI’s Policy Planning Department and CPDPCD (including project director). The PIU project 
coordinator may be an ex-officio member (with no voting rights). The four project soum governors 
(or their representatives), Embassy of Japan (EOJ), ADB and relevant development partners will 
be invited to participate as observers.  
24 
A. 
Cost Estimates and Financing Plan 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
The  project  is  estimated  to  cost  $3.7  million  (Table  1).15  The  Japan  Fund  for  Poverty 
24. 
Reduction (JFPR) will provide a grant equivalent to $3.0 million; and the HLTF will provide a grant 
equivalent to $0.5 million, both to be administered by ADB (footnote 9). The executing agency will 
provide the balance through in-kind counterpart support in the form of office space, workshop and 
training venues, and staff time for project implementation; at the soum level, staff time and desk 
space  will  also  be  made  available.  In-kind  counterpart  support  will  also  include  exemption  of 
value-added tax. 
Item 
A.  Base Cost 
Table 1: Cost Estimates 
Current 
Amounta  
($) 
Additional 
Financingb  
($) 
Total  
($) 
1. Community grower groups organized 
2. Sustainable climate-resilient vegetable farming practices applied 
3. Farmers’ access to markets improved 
Project management 
369,500 
1,090,600 
800,200 
685,729 
2,946,029 
553,971 
3,500,000 
a  Value-added  tax  exemption  granted  by  the  Government  of  Mongolia  will  be  provided  as  part  of  counterpart 
369,500 
711,600 
785,200 
628,729 
2,495,029 
504,971 
3,000,000 
0 
379,000 
15,000 
57,000 
451,000 
49,000 
500,000 
B.  Contingenciesc 
Subtotal (A) 
Total (A+B) 
contribution. 
b  In 2019 prices as of 17 June 2019. Includes purchase of one vehicle and four motorcycles. 
c  Maximum of 17% of the total in-cash project cost. Price contingencies have been included in all costs based on 
cost  escalation  factors  of  8%  for  2019‒2021  for  local  currency  costs;  1.5%  for  2019‒2020,  1.6%  for  2021  for 
foreign  currency  costs;  and  10%  for  2019,  20%  for  2020‒2021  for  national  consultant  fee  rates,  and  0%  for 
international consultant fee rates. Physical contingencies amounting to $67,866 are included.  Contingencies also 
include  an  earmarked  amount  of  $195,815  for  the  community  growers’  scheme  to  cover  operations  and 
maintenance and expansion activities.          
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
25. 
Cost categories are given in Table 2 below.   
Category 
Civil Works 
Table 2: Description of Cost Categories 
Description 
(i) Small community level water well in Gashuunii gol, Ulaangom soum; (ii) small-scale 
irrigation  works  and  provision  in  Chandmani,  Ulaangom  soum;  (iii)  greenhouses  for 
CGGs; (iv) shared storage facilities in  Orkhon, Yeruu and Ulaangom soums; and (v) 
vegetable processing and packaging workshop in Orkhon soum.  
Goods and 
Services 
(i)  Tractors,  equipment  and  hand  tools  for  CGGs;  (ii)  personal  protective  clothes  for 
CGGs; (iii) agrochemicals for CGGs; (iv) soil test kits to establish soil quality baseline; 
(v) mother seed, and seed to all groups; (vi) transport of seed from Ulaangom to other 
15 The Government of Mongolia has granted a one-off exceptional waiver of value added tax under the project as part 
of its in-kind counterpart contribution given: (i) it is a Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction grant; (ii) project grant amount 
of $3 million with a large number of activities to be conducted over multiple project sites; and (iii) pro-poor project for 
improving livelihood of smallholder farming communities. The project will pay for duties on imported goods where 
required. All project implementation unit staff and national consultant salaries are inclusive of personal income taxes; 
they are responsible for fulfilling their Mongolian tax obligations. Salaries for international consultants and resource 
persons  who are  required  to pay  tax  on  their  income earned  in  Mongolia  are  inclusive of  relevant taxes,  i.e.  the 
project will pay the relevant tax; the treaties for the avoidance of double taxation will need to be checked to determine 
whether income taxes need to be paid by the international consultants or not.   
25 
Category 
Training 
Consulting 
Services 
Project 
Management 
Description 
project soums; (vii) participation  of CGGs  in national  vegetable trade  fairs; (viii)  web 
and  mobile  based  market  information  system;  and  (ix);  motorcycles  for  soum 
coordinators. 
(i)  Training  for  CGGs;  (ii)  training  on  sustainable  farming,  (growing  in  greenhouses, 
irrigation, crop rotation, seed selection and best  practices); (iii) training on vegetable 
grading and quality, waste disposal, business acumen in processing; and (iv) training 
for MOFALI, and soum administrations on project management functions for an ADB 
project. 
(i) Fees of national individual consultants (18 consultants and 2 resource persons for a 
total of 505 person-months); (ii) fees of international individual consultants (1 consultant 
and 2 resource persons for a total of 7 person-months); (iii) annual financial audit; (iv) 
per diems for consultants;  and (v) fees and  expense  reimbursement  to collaborating 
firm/NGO/entity. 
(i) Project planning and team meetings; (ii) stakeholder communications; (iii) knowledge 
products; (iv) outreach program (site visits); (v) local travel for soum administrations for 
steering  committee  meetings;  (vi)  project  office  operations;  (vii)  project  vehicle  and 
motorcycles  and  their  running  costs;a  and  (viii)  in-kind  contributions  from  central 
government. 
Unallocated 
Physical and price contingencies. 
a   As pre-approved on exceptional one-of basis by the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
26. 
Exceptional one-off approval from the Government of Japan for project vehicle and 
motorbikes. Cost estimates include the purchase of one car and four motorbikes for project use. 
There is strong justification for purchase of vehicles: (i) there are  four project sites across four 
different aimags; (ii) the project is employing a participatory community-based approach and most 
of  the  activities  will  be  conducted  in  the  soums  directly  with  the  farming  communities  and  will 
require supervision by PIU staff and consultants who will need easy and frequent access to the 
field; (iii) within the remote and physically logistically challenging topography of Mongolia, and a 
poor, and in many cases, underdeveloped road infrastructure, there is limited public transportation 
and hence a project vehicle will be necessary; and (iv) vehicle rental over 4 years will be more 
expensive than purchase. Upon project completion in an accordance with ADB guidelines, the 
project car will be handed over to MOFALI or one of the soum offices and the motorbikes to each 
of the four soum governors’ offices. Specific details will be determined at project completion along 
with adequate justification for ADB / JFPR.16 
Table 3: Distances to Project Soums from Ulaanbaatar City  
Project Soums 
Ulaangom, Uvs 
Bornuur, Tuv 
Yeruu, Selenge 
Orkhon, Darkhan-Uul 
Distance from Ulaanbaatar City (km) 
1,456 
105 
320 
270 
27. 
Administrative budget support. Administrative budget support of 3% of the total grant 
amount ($90,000), exclusive from the project grant, will be provided given the wide spread of the 
project (covering the full end to end value chain for an underexplored sector in Mongolia in four 
soums) which warrants additional resources beyond those provided by the regular administration 
budget. This budget will be financed from the JFPR administrative budget, not from the project 
grant. The administrative budget support will be used to (i) hire a staff consultant to provide overall 
16 This has been approved by the ADB’s Partner Funds Division and the Government of Japan.  
26 
support to ADB as well as the government’s executing agency in project implementation, if and 
when  needed  and  deemed  necessary,  by  the  implementing  project  officer,  to  (a)  monitor  and 
evaluate activities  and  project  progress  beyond  the  regular  progress checks  conducted  by the 
ADB staff team and resources, (b) evaluate status and progress of the community grower groups’ 
farming action plans, (c) monitor the project’s outreach to the intended beneficiaries, (d) conduct 
periodical community level consultations; and (e) review performances of the project executing 
agency, PIU, and consultants to ensure intended outputs are delivered on time; (ii) knowledge 
product  development  and  dissemination,  including  a  written  impact  report,  multi-media  story 
(video or pictorial), and organization of the final project completion symposium for showcasing 
success and sharing lessons learned; and (iii) facilitate community participation or  civil society 
organization  collaboration  in  consultations,  field  activities,  or  the  final  project  completion 
symposium  planned.  Final  details  will  be  confirmed  during  inception  phase  once  project 
implementation starts. 
28. 
The special administrative budget support will be administered by ADB. The processing 
and implementing project officer will manage and track the utilization of the administration budget 
support and will provide the Partner Funds Division (SDPF) on a periodic basis (annual) an update 
of  its  utilization.  Any  deviation  from  the  proposed  expenditures  should  be  consulted  with  and 
endorsed by SDPF. 
B. 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds 
Table 4.1:  Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds (Current Financing) 
Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Grant 
Amount 
Total Amount Allocated 
for JFPR Financinga ($) 
Category 
Item 
Works, Goods, Training, 
Consulting Services and 
Project Management 
3,000,000 
100% of total 
expenditure claimedb 
Number 
1 
Total 
3,000,000 
JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. 
a  Administered by the Asian Development Bank. 
b   Exclusive of taxes and duties within the territory of the Recipient. 
Source: Asian Development Bank.  
Table 4.2:  Allocation and Withdrawal of Grant Proceeds (Additional Financing) 
Number 
1 
Item 
Works, Goods, Training, 
Consulting Services and 
Project Management 
Total Amount Allocated 
for HLTFa ($) 
Category 
500,000 
Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Grant 
Amount 
100% of total 
expenditure claimedb 
Total 
500,000 
HLTF = High-Level Technology Fund. 
a  Financing partner: the Government of Japan. Administered by the Asian Development Bank. 
b   Exclusive of taxes and duties within the territory of the Recipient. 
Source: Asian Development Bank.  
C. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Table 5:  Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
27 
Item 
A.  Base Costsc 
1  Civil Works 
2  Goods and Services 
2a  Vehicles 
2b  Equipment 
2c  Other Goods and Services 
  Subtotal Goods and Services 
3  Training 
4  Consulting Services 
National 
4a 
International 
4b 
  Subtotal Consulting Services 
5  Project Operation 
ADB financing 
5a 
Government financingd 
5b 
  Subtotal Project Operation 
Subtotal A 
B.  Contingenciese 
Physical 
  Price 
  Community Growers’ Scheme 
  Subtotal B 
CURRENT FINANCING 
ADB 
Government 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
702,400 
67.4 
42,200  100.0 
256,493  100.0 
262,700 
98.1 
561,393 
105,150 
75.0 
93.2 
764,856 
167,000  100.0 
931,856 
194,230 
92.8 
194,230 
2,495,029 
78.4 
196,587  83.1 
196,587 
196,587 
  6.2 
68,104 
77.0 
89.4 
241,053 
195,815  100.0 
91.2 
504,971 
80.3 
3,000,000 
ADDITIONAL FINANCINGa 
Government 
ADB 
TOTALb 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
340,000  32.6 
1,042,400 
27.9 
5,000 
5,000 
1.9 
35,000  25.0 
56,000 
6.8 
56,000 
15,000 
7.2 
15,000 
451,000  14.2 
20,400  23.0 
28,600  10.6 
49,000 
42,200 
256,493 
267,700 
566,393 
140,150 
820,856 
167,000 
987,856 
209,230 
236,577 
445,807 
3,182,606 
1.1 
6.9 
7.2 
3.8 
22.0 
4.5 
5.6 
6.3 
85.2 
39,990  16.9 
39,990 
39,990 
1.3 
88,504 
269,653 
195,815 
553,971 
3,736,577 
2.4 
7.2 
5.2 
14.8 
100.0 
196,587 
   Total Project Cost (A+B) 
  5.3 
a  Additional financing is financing expenditures in parallel to the current financing. 
b  Value-added tax exemption granted by the Government of Mongolia will be provided as part of counterpart contribution. 
c  In 2019 prices as of 17 June 2019. Includes purchase of one vehicle and four motorcycles. 
d  In the form of in-kind contribution. 
e  Maximum of 17% of the total in-cash project cost. Price contingencies have been included in all costs based on cost escalation factors of 8% for 
2019‒2021 for local currency costs; 1.5% for 2018‒2020, 1.6% for 2021 for foreign currency costs; and 10% for 2019, 20% for 2020‒2021 for 
national  consultant  fee  rates,  and  0%  for  international  consultant  fee  rates.  Physical  contingencies  amounting  to  $67,866  are  included. 
Contingencies  also  include  an  earmarked  amount  of  $195,815  for  the  community  growers’  scheme  to  cver  operations  and  maintenance  and 
expansion activities. 
500,000  13.4 
39,990 
1.1 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
28 
D. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Output 
Item 
A.  Base Costsb 
1  Civil Works 
2  Goods and Services 
2a 
2b 
2c 
Vehicles 
Equipment 
Other Goods and Services 
  Subtotal Goods and Services 
Training 
3 
4  Consulting Services 
4a 
4b 
National 
International 
  Subtotal Consulting Services 
5  Project Operation 
ADB financing 
5a 
Government financingc 
5b 
  Subtotal Project Operation 
  Subtotal A 
B.  Contingenciesd 
Physical 
  Price 
  Community Growers’ Scheme 
  Subtotal B 
C.  Total (A+B) 
1. Community 
grower groups 
organized 
2. Sustainable 
climate-resilient 
vegetable farming 
practices applied 
3. Farmers’ 
access to 
markets 
improved 
Project 
management 
Totala 
                 554,600  
           487,800  
1,042,400 
226,000 
145,600 
371,600 
53,000 
100,400 
11,000 
111,400 
1,090,600 
43,006 
44,736 
195,815 
283,557 
1,374,156 
42,200 
30,493 
18,500 
91,193 
1,750 
485,256 
485,256 
107,530 
236,577 
344,107 
922,306 
11,050 
100,006 
111,056 
1,033,362 
42,200 
256,493 
267,700 
566,393 
140,150 
820,856 
167,000 
987,856 
209,230 
236,577 
445,807 
3,182,606 
88,504 
269,653 
195,815 
553,971 
3,736,577 
103,600 
103,600 
51,000 
54,300 
11,000 
65,300 
92,500 
92,500 
800,200 
34,448 
100,591 
135,039 
935,239 
34,400 
180,900 
145,000 
325,900 
9,200 
9,200 
369,500 
24,320 
24,320 
393,820 
a    Value-added tax exemption granted by the Government of Mongolia will be provided as part of counterpart contribution. 
b   In 2019 prices as of 17 June 2017. Includes purchase of one vehicle and four motorcycles. 
c   In the form of in-kind contribution.    
d   Maximum of 17% of the total in-cash project cost. Price contingencies have been included in all costs based on cost escalation factors of 8% for 2019‒2021 for local 
currency costs; 1.5% for 2018‒2020, 1.6% for 2021 for foreign currency costs; and 10% for 2019, 20% for 2020‒2021 for national consultant fee rates, and 0% for 
international consultant fee rates. Physical contingencies amounting to $67,866 are included.  Contingencies also include an earmarked amount of $195,815 for the 
community growers’ scheme to cover operations and maintenance and expansion activities.  
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
E. 
Estimated Disbursement Schedule by Year 
Table 6:  Estimated Disbursement Schedule by Year 
Item 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Totala 
29 
A.  Base Costsb 
1  Civil Works 
2  Goods and Services 
2a 
2b 
2c 
Vehicles 
Equipment 
Other Goods and Services 
  Subtotal Goods and Services 
Training 
3 
4  Consulting Services 
4a 
4b 
National 
International 
  Subtotal Consulting Services 
5  Project Operation 
ADB financing 
5a 
Government financingc 
5b 
  Subtotal Project Operation 
  Subtotal A 
B.  Contingenciesd 
1  Physical 
2  Price 
3  Community Growers’ Scheme 
  Subtotal B 
C.  Total Project Cost (A+B) 
204,600 
456,000 
          362,000  
          19,800  
1,042,400 
42,200 
256,493 
158,300 
456,993 
57,150 
234,864 
54,500 
289,364 
53,450 
84,512 
137,962 
1,146,069 
33,016 
25,696 
81,821 
140,533 
1,286,602 
66,200 
66,200 
21,000 
227,322 
69,000 
296,322 
55,740 
75,769 
131,509 
971,031 
30,625 
100,152 
66,275 
197,052 
1,168,083 
20,160 
20,160 
39,000 
193,424 
43,500 
236,924 
50,740 
56,672 
107,412 
765,496 
22,620 
78,377 
47,718 
148,715 
914,211 
23,040 
23,040 
23,000 
165,246 
165,246 
49,300 
19,623 
68,923 
300,009 
2,243 
65,428 
67,671 
367,680 
42,200 
256,493 
267,700 
566,393 
140,150 
820,856 
167,000 
987,856 
209,230 
236,577 
445,807 
3,182,606 
88,504 
269,653 
195,815 
553,971 
3,736,577 
a   Value-added tax exemption granted by the Government of Mongolia will be provided as part of counterpart contribution. 
b   In 2019 prices as of 17 June 2019. Includes purchase of one vehicle and four motorcycles. 
c   In the form of in-kind contribution.    
d   Maximum of 17% of the total in-cash project cost. Price contingencies have been included in all costs based on cost escalation factors of 8% for 2019‒
2021 for  local currency  costs;  1.5%  for 2018‒2020, 1.6%  for  2021  for  foreign  currency costs;  and  10%  for  2019, 20%  for  2020‒2021  for  national 
consultant fee rates, and 0% for international consultant fee rates. Physical contingencies amounting to $67,866 are included. Contingencies also 
include an earmarked amount of $195,815 for the community growers’ scheme to cover operations and maintenance and expansion activities. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
30 
F. 
Contract and Disbursement S-curve 
The projected contract awards and disbursements under the grants and the corresponding 
29. 
S-curves are presented below. 
Table 7:  Schedule of Disbursement and Contract Awards 
Years 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Total 
Contract Awards ($ million) 
Disbursement ($ million) 
Q1 
0.0000 
0.4833 
0.0830 
0.4940 
0.7240 
Q2 
Q3 
0.0000  0.0000 
0.0000  0.0000 
0.0000  0.2790 
0.1130  0.4140 
0.0000  0.0000 
Q4 
0.0777 
0.1270 
0.3640 
0.3410 
0.0000 
Q1 
0.0000 
0.0000 
Q2 
0.0000 
0.0000 
0.2370 
0.0000 
0.4680 
0.3590 
0.2800 
0.3120 
Q3 
0.0000 
0.0000 
0.1950 
0.3700 
0.4670 
Q4 
0.2000 
0.0900 
0.2730 
0.2490 
0.0000 
Total 
0.0777 
0.6103 
0.7260 
1.3620 
0.7240 
3.5000 
Total 
0.2000 
0.0900 
0.7050 
1.3670 
1.1380 
3.5000 
Figure 1:  S-Curve 
Contract Awards and Disbursement 
($)
Contract Award
Disbursement
2018 
Q1
2018 
Q2
2018 
Q3
2018 
Q4
2019 
Q1
2019 
Q2
2019 
Q3
2019 
Q4
2020 
Q1
2020 
Q2
2020 
Q3
2020 
Q4
2021 
Q1
2021 
Q2
2021 
Q3
2021 
Q4
4,000,001
3,500,001
3,000,001
2,500,001
2,000,001
1,500,001
1,000,001
500,001
1
G. 
Fund Flow Diagram  
31 
 Figure 2.  Flow of Funds 
ADB 
MOF  
Advance Accounts 
JFPR 
HLTF 
PIU 
Sub-Accounts 
(USD) 
JFPR 
HLTF 
Sub-Account 
(MNT) 
JFPR 
HLTF 
Contracts for Works, 
Goods & Services, 
Technical Assistance 
Funds flow 
Payment requests and withdrawal applications 
Direct payment 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  HLTF  =  High-Level  Technology  Fund,  JFPR  =  Japan  Fund  for  Poverty 
Reduction, MOFALI = Ministry of Food Agriculture and Light Industry, PIU = project implementation unit. 
32 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
Financial Management Assessment 
As  part  of  the  project  due  diligence,  a  financial  management  assessment  (FMA)  was 
30. 
carried out in accordance with the ADB’s Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis 
of  Projects,17  Financial  Due  Diligence:  A  Methodology  Note,18  and  Technical  Guidance  Note: 
Financial Management Assessment. MOFALI will be the executing agency. 
31. 
The initial FMA was conducted through working discussions held at the MOFALI office in 
Ulaanbaatar  in  February  2016,  attended  by  staff  of  MOFALI’s  Finance  Division.  ADB’s  FMA 
questionnaire was used as the basis for discussions. The FMA was updated during processing of 
additional  financing  in  November  2019.  The  scope  of  the  FMA  was  to  assess  the  financial 
management capacity of the executing agency. The assessment included a review of fund-flow 
arrangements,  staffing,  accounting  policies  and  procedures,  internal  and  external  auditing 
arrangements, reporting and monitoring, and financial information systems. 
32. 
The overall pre-mitigation financial management risk of the executing agency was rated 
as “moderate” (defined as “likely to occur, will have low impact if occurs”). The executing agency’s 
capacity to administer advance fund and statement of expenditures (SOE) procedures was also 
specifically concluded as moderate. This conclusion was based on the following: (i) the executing 
agency has moderate in-house financial capacity; and its Finance Division comprises five staff, 
three of whom are qualified in accounting or financial management; (ii) the Finance Division staff 
have experience in implementing donor-financed projects, including ADB projects; (ii) the PIU will 
contract  a  qualified  finance  specialist  with  ADB  project  experience  on  a  full-time  basis  for  the 
duration of the project; and (iv) given the small size and budget of the project, any errors could be 
quickly identified and corrected, with limited impact to project operations and viability. 
A ranking of “moderate” risk requires the preparation of an action plan for risk mitigation. 
33. 
The project will implement the following mitigation measures: (i) a qualified finance specialist and 
a procurement officer will remain recruited in the PIU to manage accounts and procurement; (ii) 
the PIU keeps using a computerized, professionally designed accounting software acceptable to 
ADB as the principal software used to keep project records, supported by maintenance of hard-
copy  ledgers  and  records;  (iii)  an  action  plan  for  risk  mitigation  has  been  prepared  and  is 
described in Table 8. During project implementation, this will be regularly reviewed and updated 
to ensure the project responds dynamically to risks; (iv) The Finance Division will provide financial 
guidance to the executing agency, working also with the project finance specialist; (v) ADB will 
provide  training  on  ADB  disbursement  to  relevant  project  staff;  and  (vi)  ADB  will  provide 
intermittent financial training, and mentorship to the executing agency as needed. Measures [ii] 
and [iii] are included in the terms of reference for the project finance specialist. 
17  ADB. 2005. Financial Management and Analysis of Projects. Manila. 
18  ADB. 2009. Financial Due Diligence A Methodology Note. Manila. 
Table 8: Financial Management Action Plan 
33 
Risk Description 
1 
2 
Planning and budgeting: 
MOFALI annual planning and 
budgeting process, applying a 
bottom-up approach based on 
the previous year’s budget 
rather than a budget ceiling, 
could undermine the strategic 
allocations of the GOM and 
MOF that the budget should 
reflect. 
Funds flow: Understanding of and 
adherence to ADB disbursement 
requirements and procedures. 
Risk 
Low 
Action Item 
Period  Responsibility 
Prepare and implement 
an improved annual 
planning and budgeting 
process for the project. 
2019 
onwards 
MOFALI, 
MOF 
Moderate 
 to 
High 
Training will be conducted 
to ensure PIU staff acquire 
requisite knowledge. 
2019 
Onwards 
MOFALI  
3 
Staffing: MOFALI’s Finance 
Division has limited experience in 
finance management of ADB 
funded projects. 
Moderate 
2019 
Onwards 
MOFALI  
ADB 
PIU 
PIU to liaise regularly with 
ADB to ensure that ADB 
guidelines are followed. 
Provide regular training on 
ADB’s disbursement 
policies. 
A separate account will 
be maintained for 
activities financed by 
ADB and the 
Government, and will be 
audited by the external 
auditor. 
Staff at the executing 
agency, implementing 
agency have received 
training on current ADB 
policy, operational and 
procedural requirements. 
Suitable PIU have been 
contracted and have 
received training on ADB 
disbursement 
procedures. 
Key specialists, financial 
management and 
procurement at ADB 
MNRM allocate time to 
support the PIU preparing 
the withdrawal application 
and the bidding 
documents especially 
during the first two 
quarters of project 
implementation. 
ADB project officer shall 
report anomalies in 
recruitment of PIU staff to 
the Office of 
34 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Risk Description 
Risk 
Action Item 
Period  Responsibility 
Accounting: Accounting policies 
and procedures for the project 
are adequate. 
Moderate 
Anticorruption and 
Integrity at the earliest 
opportunity. 
Training will be conducted 
before grant effectiveness 
to ensure PIU staff acquire 
requisite knowledge. 
2019 
ADB 
PIU 
Account and bank 
reconciliations are performed 
in a timely manner.  
Internal audit: Sufficient capacity 
in the internal audit department 
External Audit: External audit is 
considered well- functioning at 
both EA level and for the project. 
MOFALI is audited by the 
Mongolian National Audit Office 
(MNAO) on annual basis.   
The project will be audited by 
independent audit firm. using 
TOR acceptable to ADB. 
Reporting: Regular financial 
reports are produced that are 
suitable for user needs. 
Low 
Low 
Government and external 
auditors should assess 
and control weakness. 
TOR for the audit firm will 
be reviewed and approved 
by ADB. 
2020 
Onwards 
MOFALI  
PIU 
2019 
onwards 
PIU 
ADB 
 Moderate   EA to make comprehensive 
progress reports (including 
financial progress) to ADB 
on a quarterly basis. 
2019 
onwards 
PIU 
8 
Information systems: 
Information system is secure 
and back up of financial data is 
done on a regular and timely 
basis. 
Low  
Financial project reporting 
must comply with ADB and 
Mongolia MOF 
requirements. 
Grant implementation 
consultants will assist the 
PIU to design quarterly and 
annual reports. 
PIU will use accounting 
software that fully meets 
the Government and ADB 
requirements to produce 
financial records and 
statements. The 
accounting files will be 
backed up on a regular 
basis to a server located 
outside the PIU office and 
NEMA. 
2019 
onwards 
PIU 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, FMA = financial management assessment, GOM = Government of Mongolia, MIAD 
=  Monitoring  and  Internal  Audit  Department, MOF  =  Ministry  of  Finance,  MOFALI=Ministry  of  Food  Agriculture  and 
Light Industry, PIU = project implementation unit, TOR = terms of reference. 
Source: Asian Development Bank.  
35 
B. 
1. 
Disbursement 
Disbursement Arrangements for ADB  
The  JFPR  and  HLTF  grant  proceeds will  be  disbursed  in accordance  with ADB’s  Loan 
34. 
Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time)  and  detailed  arrangements 
agreed upon between the Government and ADB.19 
Project advance account and procedures. After grant effectiveness, MOF will establish 
35. 
two  advance  accounts,  one  for  the  current  JFPR  funded  project  and  one  for  the  additional 
financing  from  HLTF.  The  currency  of  the  advance  accounts  will  be  US  dollars.  The  advance 
accounts will be used exclusively for ADB’s share of eligible expenditures (i.e., the JFPR and the 
HLTF  grants)  and  according  to  the  financing  arrangements  described  in  this  document.  The 
advance  accounts  will  be  established  at  a  commercial  bank  endorsed  by  MOF.  MOF  is 
accountable  and  responsible  for  proper  use  of  advances  to  the  advance  accounts,  including 
advances to any sub-accounts. 
36. 
Requests by the executing agency for initial advance and subsequent replenishments of 
the advance accounts will be supported by withdrawal applications to ADB and will be based on 
the executing agency’s estimate of ADB’s share of eligible project expenditures for up to, and not 
exceeding, the next 6 months, supported by a 6-month activity plan and Estimate of Expenditure 
Sheet.20 Subsequent applications for account replenishment will be accompanied by a SOEs; or 
if  full  documentation  is  required,  a  Summary  Sheet,21  as  well  as  the  advance  account 
reconciliation statement.22 
37. 
The withdrawal application for the advance accounts will be prepared in the currency of 
the  advance  account  i.e.,  US  dollars.  Withdrawal  applications  will  be  co-signed  by  the  project 
director and MOF. The initial advance will be prepared by the project director.  
The  minimum  value  per  withdrawal  application  is  set  stipulated  in  ADB’s  Loan 
38. 
Disbursement  Handbook.  Individual  payments  below  the  amount  should  be  paid  (i)  by  the 
executing agency and subsequently claimed to ADB through reimbursement, or (ii) through the 
advance  fund  procedure,  unless  otherwise  accepted  by  ADB.  The  borrower  should  ensure 
sufficient category and contract balances before requesting disbursements. Use of ADB’s Client 
Portal for Disbursements (CPD) system is encouraged for submission of withdrawal applications 
to ADB.23 
39. 
Project sub-accounts. Two sub-accounts for JFPR and two sub-accounts for HLTF will 
be  established  for  daily  project  administration  and  maintained  by  the  PIU  on  behalf  of  the 
executing  agency  (CPDPCD:  one  in  USD  and  one  in  Mongolian  togrog).  The  spread  of  grant 
proceeds in two currencies will help hedge against foreign exchange risks. The subaccounts will 
be used exclusively for ADB’s share of eligible expenditures of the project. Daily management of 
the subaccounts will be performed by the PIU to facilitate local project expenditures. Withdrawal 
requests from the  sub-accounts  will  be  prepared  by the  PIU  finance  specialist  and require co-
19 The handbook is available electronically from the ADB website (http://www.adb.org/documents/ loan-disbursement-
handbook 
20 Form available in Appendix 8A of ADB Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time).  
21 Form available in Appendix 7B of ADB Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time).  
22 Form available in Appendix 8B of ADB Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time).  
23 The CPD facilitates online submission of WA to ADB, resulting in faster disbursement. The forms to be completed 
by the Borrower are available online at https://www.adb.org/documents/client-portal-disbursements-guide.     
36 
signing by the CPDPCD Director and PIU project coordinator. 
Statement of expenditure procedure.24 The SOE procedure will be used for liquidation 
40. 
of advances to the advance account and reimbursement of eligible expenditures. It will also apply 
for  individual  payments  not  exceeding  $10,000  to  ensure  speedy  project  implementation. 
Payments more than the SOE ceiling will be liquidated or replenished based on full supporting 
documentation of eligible expenditures when submitting the withdrawal application to ADB. During 
project implementation, ADB will assess the executing agency’s accounting and administrative 
capacity and feasibility to remove the ceiling for the SOE procedure and review and update the 
FMA, as needed. 
41. 
Signing authority. Before the submission of the first withdrawal applications, MOF should 
submit to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal 
applications on behalf of the government, together with the authenticated specimen signatures of 
each authorized person.  
Interest. Interest earned on the JFPR advance and/or sub-accounts, net of bank charges, 
42. 
can be used for the project, subject to ADB’s approval and within the approved total amount of 
the  grant  account.  Any unused interest  should be  returned to the  grant  account  maintained at 
ADB upon project completion and before closing of the grant account.  
43. 
Training for project staff. Online training for project staff on disbursement policies and 
procedures  is  available  at:  http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning.  Relevant  government 
officials of the executing agency and PIU staff are encouraged to make use of this training to help 
ensure efficient disbursement and fiduciary control. The schematic fund flow for the project is in 
the PAM section IV.G. 
44. 
Financial documentation and records. All supporting documents and records (including 
receipts for expenditures) for liquidating or replenishing the advance account, and transactions 
from  the  subaccounts,  will  be  submitted  to  ADB  or  retained  by  the  executing  agency,  in 
accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time). 
Documents and records will be made readily available for review upon request by ADB e.g., on a 
sampling  basis,  and  for  independent  audit.  The  PIU  will  retain,  file,  and  manage  all 
documentation,  and  provide  duplicate  copies  of  all  financial  statements  and  audit  records  to 
MOFALI and MOF.  
2. 
Disbursement Arrangements for Counterpart Fund 
45. 
The Government of Mongolia (GOM), including the executing agency, will provide in-kind 
support in the form of value added tax exemption and office space for the PIU. These costs will 
be included in the annual budgets of MOFALI and relevant GOM agencies. 
C. 
Accounting 
46.  MOFALI will maintain, or cause to be maintained, separate books and records by funding 
source  for  all  expenditures  incurred  on  the  project  by  adopting  the  International  Public  Sector 
Accounting Standard for accrual-based accounting. The PIU, on behalf of the executing agency, 
will prepare consolidated project financial statements in accordance with GOM's accounting laws 
24 SOE forms are available in Appendix 7B, or 10B of ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from 
time to time).  
37 
and regulations which are consistent with international accounting principles and practices. 
D. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure  
47.  MOFALI will cause the detailed consolidated project financial statements to be audited in 
accordance  with  International  Standards  on  Auditing  by  an  independent  auditor  acceptable  to 
ADB. MOFALI will submit audited project financial statements together with the auditors’ opinion 
will be submitted in the English language to ADB within six months of the end of the fiscal year.  
48. 
The annual audit report for the project accounts and/or financial statements will include an 
audit  management  letter  and  auditor’s  opinions  which  cover  (i)  whether  the  project  financial 
statements present an accurate and fair view or are presented fairly, in all material respects, in 
accordance with the applicable financial reporting standards and/or framework; (ii) whether the 
grant proceeds were used only for the purposes of the project or not; and (iii) whether the borrower 
or  executing  agency  was  in  compliance  with  each  financial  covenant  contained  in  the  legal 
agreements  for  the  grant  project.  Expenditure  categorization  and  analysis  should  be 
representative of project activities and includes classification based on the categories in Table 5. 
49. 
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by review 
missions and during normal program supervision, and followed up regularly with all concerned, 
including the external auditor.  
50.  MOFALI,  the  executing  agency,  has  been  made  aware  of  ADB’s  approach  to  delayed 
submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of the audited project 
financial  statements.25  ADB  reserves  the right to  require a  change  in  the auditor  (in a manner 
consistent with the constitution of the grant recipient), or for additional support to be provided to 
the  auditor,  if the  audits  required are  not conducted  in a  manner  satisfactory  to  ADB,  or  if  the 
audits are substantially delayed. ADB reserves the right to verify the project's financial accounts 
to  confirm  that  the  share  of  ADB’s  financing  is  used  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  policies  and 
procedures.  
51. 
Public  disclosure  of  the  project  financial  statements,  including  the  audit  report  on  the 
project financial statements, will be guided by ADB’s Access to Information Policy (2018).26 After 
review, ADB will disclose the project financial statements for the project and the opinion of the 
auditors on the financial statements within 14 calendar days of the date of their acceptance by 
posting them on ADB’s website. The audit management letter, additional auditor’s opinions, and 
audited entity financial statements will not be disclosed. 
25 ADB’s approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited project financial statements:  
(i)  When audited project financial statements are not received by the due date, ADB will write to the executing 
agency advising that (a) the audit documents are overdue; and (b) if they are not received within the next 6 
months, requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of advance accounts, 
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
(ii)  When  audited  project  financial  statements  are  not  received  within  6  months  after  the  due  date,  ADB  will 
withhold processing of requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of 
advance accounts, processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters. ADB will (a) 
inform the executing agency of ADB’s actions; and (b) advise that the grant may be suspended if the audit 
documents are not received within the next 6 months. 
(iii)  When audited project financial statements  are not received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may 
suspend the grant. 
26  Access to Information Policy: https://www.adb.org/documents/access-information-policy 
38 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
The  executing  agency  has  requested  advance  contracting  for  services  to  enable  early 
52. 
commencement  of  recruitment  of  consultants  and  PIU  staff.  All  advance  contracting  will  be 
undertaken  in  conformity  with  ADB’s  Procurement  Guidelines  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to 
time).  The  advertisement,  shortlisting,  evaluation,  and  consultant  selection  committee 
recommendations under advance contracting will be subject to ADB prior approval. The government 
and the executing agency have been advised that approval of advance contracting does not commit 
ADB to financing the project. Retroactive financing will not be utilized under the project, unless GOM 
laws and procedures allow. 
B. 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services  
53. 
The  PIU,  on  behalf  of  the  executing  agency,  will  be  responsible  for  procurement.  All 
procurement financed by the JFPR and the HLTF grants will be carried out in accordance with 
ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time) and Consulting Guidelines 
(2013, as amended from time to time). The selection and engagement of contractors for works, 
goods, and/or consulting services to be financed by the grant will be subject to ADB approval.  
54. 
National  competitive  bidding  (NCB)  procedures  will  be  used  for  civil  works  contracts 
estimated to cost over $100,000 equivalent and less than $5.0 million equivalent, and for goods 
and  services  supply  contracts  valued  at  over  $100,000  equivalent  and  less  than  $2.0  million 
equivalent. Shopping will be used for procurement of works and equipment estimated to cost less 
than $100,000 equivalent. 
55. 
Recruitment of consultants will be done through individual consultant selection, quality-
cost  based  selection  and  least-cost  selection.  The  relevant  sections  of  ADB’s  Anticorruption 
Policy (1998, as amended to date) will be included in all procurement documents and contracts. 
56. 
An 18-month procurement plan indicating threshold and review procedures, goods, works, 
and consulting service contract packages and NCB guidelines is in Section VI.C. The plan describes 
the  thresholds  and  review  procedures,  and  contract  packages  for  goods,  works,  and  consulting 
services. Any necessary modifications or clarifications to the recipient procurement procedures will 
be documented in the procurement plan. 
C. 
Procurement Plan  
Procurement Plan Basic Data 
39 
Project Name: Community Vegetable Farming for Livelihood Improvement 
Project Number: 50278 
Country:   Mongolia 
Project Procurement Classification: B 
Procurement Risk: Average 
Project Financing Amount: $3.5 million 
Approval Number: 9192; xxxx 
Executing Agency: MOFALI 
Implementing Agency: n/a  
Project Completion Date: 30 June 2022 
JFPR Financing: $3.0 million 
HLTF Financing: $0.5 million 
Date  of  First  Procurement  Plan:  4 
December 2017 
Date  of  This  Procurement  Plan:  18  December 
2019 
(A)  Methods, Thresholds, Review and 18-Month Procurement Plan 
1. 
Procurement and Consulting Methods and Thresholds 
57. 
Except  as  ADB  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following  process  thresholds  shall  apply  to 
procurement  of  goods  and  works:  (i)  shopping  for  goods  (threshold:  $100,000),  and  (ii)  direct 
contracting (threshold: $10,000).  
Comments 
None. 
None. 
All NCBs for Works is subject to prior review. 
All NCBs for Goods is subject to prior review. 
$100,000 or below   First shopping for works is subject to prior review. 
$100,000 or below   First shopping for goods is subject to prior review. 
$100,000 or below  None.  
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Method 
Threshold 
$5,000,000 and 
above 
$2,000,000 and 
above 
Over $100,000, 
and below 
$5,000,000 
Over $100,000, 
and below 
$2,000,000 
International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB) for Works 
International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB) for Goods 
National Competitive Bidding 
(NCB) for Works 
National Competitive Bidding 
(NCB) for Goods 
Shopping for Works 
Shopping for Goods 
Community Participation for 
Goods and Services 
(“Community”) 
Direct Contracting 
$10,000 or below 
Consulting Services 
Method 
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS)  Prior review (C01) 
Quality Based Selection (QBS) 
Comments 
None. 
Consultants’ Qualifications Selection 
(CQS) 
None.  
Least-Cost Selection (LCS) 
Prior review. (C05) 
Individual Consultants Selection (ICS)  
Single source 
Prior review. (C02) 
Prior review. (C03-C04) 
40 
2. 
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost $1 Million or More 
58. 
There are no contracts for this project estimated to cost $1 million or more. 
3. 
Consulting Services Contracts Estimated to Cost $100,000 or More 
The following table lists consulting services contracts for which the recruitment activity is 
59. 
either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.  
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Recruitment 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Type  of 
Proposal 
Comments 
C01 
C02 
Implementation 
support 
Firm/NGO/Entity 
Agronomist and 
agri-business 
specialist 
(international) 
$472,763 
QCBS 
Prior 
Q3 2018 
$145,000  
ICS 
Prior 
Q2 2019 
Firm/NGO/Entity 
engaged for 
project 
implementation 
ICS = individual consultant selection, NGO = nongovernment organization, QCBS = quality-cost based selection;  
Goods and Works Contracts Estimated to Cost Less than $1 Million and Consulting 
4. 
Services Contracts Less than $100,000 (Smaller Value Contracts) 
The following table groups smaller-value goods works and consulting services contracts 
60. 
for which the activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the next 18 months.  
1. Goods and Works 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
G01 
Agricultural 
farm inputs 
$321,194  
3 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q3 2019 
Procurement of 
goods. This is 
the first NCB 
for goods.  
3 lots: 
1. Tractors, 
equipment and 
hand tools for all 
four soums 
2. Agrochemicals 
(pesticides and 
fertilizers) for 
each group 
3. Personal 
protective gear 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
41 
CW01 
Green 
houses 
$227,861  
2 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q3 2019 
$9,861  
1 
Direct 
contracting 
Post 
Q2 2019 
$43,638  
1 
Shopping 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q1 2020 
$13,161  
1 
Direct 
contracting 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 2019 
$421,064  
2 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q1 2020 
G02 
CW02 
Soil test to 
establish 
baseline for 
soil quality 
Water tank 
and 
connection 
for seed 
farmers in 
Ulaangom  
G03 
CW03 
Provide 
mother 
seed, and 
seed to all 
groups 
Shared 
community-
storage and 
processing 
workshop 
Procurement of 
works. This is 
the first NCB 
for works.  
2 Lots: 
1. Construct 
seasonal 
greenhouses for 
vegetable 
growing and 
seed testing and 
improving 
2. Construct and 
pilot winter 
greenhouse in 1 
select soum 
Procurement of 
services. Test at 
a certified lab. 
Procurement of 
works. This is 
the first 
shopping for 
works.   
Drill water well, 
tank and install 
pipeline and 
water tanks to 
improve seed 
farmers' access 
to water in 
Gashuunii gol, 
Chandmani and 
Negdel Dundiin 
Uildver 
Procurement of 
goods. 1 
contract for the 
Seed Institute in 
Ulaangom 
Procurement of 
works.  
2 lots: 
1. Set up shared 
storage facilities 
in Orkhon, 
Yeruu and 
Ulaangom 
soums 
2. Establish 
vegetable 
processing and 
packaging 
42 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
G04 
Vegetable 
farmer 
market 
information 
system 
$17,455  
1 
Direct 
contracting 
Post 
Q1 2020 
G05 
Shared 
storage 
facility in 
Ulaanbaatar 
$81,899  
1 
Shopping 
Post 
Q2 2020 
CW04 
Vegetable 
sale points 
$66,080  
2 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 2020 
CW05 
HLT winter 
greenhouse 
$377,900 
1 
NCB 
Prior 
1S1E 
Q2 2020 
G06 
Promotional 
display, bag 
and 
packaging 
$32,729  
2 
Shopping 
Post 
1S1E 
Q2 2019 
facility in Orkhon 
(excluding 
$100,000 to be 
financed from 
RETA funding) 
Procurement of 
services. To 
engage the 
same entity that 
has developed 
design specs 
during grant 
preparation.  
Develop and 
launch web and 
mobile based 
vegetable 
farmer market 
information 
system 
Procurement of 
services. 
Rent a shared 
storage facility 
in Ulaanbaatar 
for selling 
project produce 
Procurement of 
works.  
2 lots:  
1. Set up kiosks 
in Ulaanbaatar 
city 
2. sale point(s) 
along main 
roads going to 
the East from 
Ulaanbaatar for 
selling 
vegetables 
HLT winter 
greenhouse pilot 
near 
Ulaanbaatar 
(financed by 
HLT fund) 
Procurement of 
goods. 1 
contract for 
printing 
Package 
Number 
General 
Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Number 
of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
(Prior/ 
Post) 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(quarter/year) 
Comments 
43 
G07 
Project 
transportatio
n 
G08 
PIU 
equipment 
and furniture 
$61,500  
2 
Shopping 
Post 
Q2 2019 
$32,575 
1 
Shopping 
Prior 
Q4 2018 
promotional bag 
& packaging, 
and 1 contract 
for displays 
Procurement of 
goods.  
2 lots: 
1 Project car for 
PIU 
4 Motorcycles 
for soum 
coordinators 
Procurement of 
goods.  
This is first 
shopping for 
goods. 
1. Computers, 
copiers, printers, 
GPS for the PIU 
and soum 
coordinators 
2. Office 
furniture and 
equipment 
2.  Consulting Services 
No. 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
Recruitment 
Method 
Review  
(Prior / Post) 
Advertisement Date 
(quarter/year) 
C03 
C04 
C06 
C07 
Resource person for 
greenhouse (international) 
Resource person for 
packaging and processing 
workshop (international) 
$11,000   Single 
source 
$11,000   Single 
source 
Prior 
Prior 
Q4 2019 
Q4 2019 
Specialist for HLT winter 
greenhouse technology 
(national) 
Resource person for contract 
with HLT winter greenhouse 
(national) 
$48,400  
ICS 
Prior 
$4,400  
ICS 
Post  
Q1  2020  (to  be 
financed  by  HLT 
Fund) 
Q1  2020  (to  be 
financed  by  HLT 
Fund) 
CQS = consultant qualification selection, HLT = high-level technology,  ICS = individual consultant selection; LCS = 
least cost selection, SSS = single-source selection.  
44 
(E)    National Competitive Bidding 
A.  
Regulation and Reference Documents 
The procedures to be followed for NCB shall be those set forth in the Public Procurement 
61. 
Law of Mongolia of 1 December 2005, effective 1 February 2006, as amended in February 2007; 
July  2009;  and  February,  June  and  December  2011,  with  the  clarifications  and  modifications 
described in the following paragraphs required for compliance with the provisions of the ADB’s 
Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time). 
B. 
Procurement Procedures 
1. 
Eligibility [Recommended standard provision] 
62. 
The  eligibility  of  bidders  shall  be  as  defined  under  the  Procurement  Guidelines; 
accordingly,  no  bidder  or  potential  bidder  should  be  declared  ineligible  for  reasons  other  than 
those provided in section I of the Guidelines, as amended from time to time. 
63. 
Government-owned enterprises in Mongolia shall be eligible for projects only if they can 
establish that they: (i) are legally and financially autonomous; (ii) operate under the principles of 
commercial  law;  and  (iii)  are  not  dependent  agencies  of  the  Borrower,  Beneficiary,  Recipient 
Executing Agency. 
2. 
Participation of Foreign Bidders  
International  bidders  from  eligible  countries  of  ADB  shall  be  allowed  to  participate  in 
64. 
national procurement and may not be denied participation due to nationality.  
3. 
Preferences 
No  domestic  preference  shall  be  given  for  domestic  bidders  and  for  domestically 
65. 
manufactured goods. 
4. 
Prequalification and Registration 
66. 
Prequalification  is  discouraged  for  procurement  contracts  using  NCB.  When  used, 
particularly  for  works  contracts,  an  individual  prequalification  exercise  is  acceptable  for  each 
contract as is the use of a registration system (or approved standing list) of contractors based on 
criteria  such  as  experience,  financial  capacity,  and  technical  capacity.  Foreign  bidders  from 
eligible countries must, however, be allowed to register and to bid without unreasonable cost or 
additional requirements. 
5. 
Rejection of All Bids and Rebidding 
67. 
All bids shall not be rejected, or new bids invited without ADB's prior written concurrence.  
68. 
No bid shall be rejected merely on the basis of a comparison with the estimated cost or 
budget ceiling without ADB's prior written concurrence (with specific reference to Article 30 of the 
Public Procurement Law of Mongolia). 
45 
C. 
Bidding Documents 
6. 
Use of Bidding Documents 
National  Standard  Bidding  Documents  Goods  and  Works  that  have  been  approved  for 
69. 
procurement in ADB-financed projects shall be used.  
7. 
Language 
Bidding  documents  may  be  prepared  in  other  languages,  but  a  copy  of  the  bidding 
70. 
documents must be made available in English and submitted to ADB for review.  
8. 
Bid Validity 
71. 
Bidders  shall  be  requested  to  extend  the  validity  of  their  bids  only  under  exceptional 
circumstances and the executing agency, as the case may be, shall communicate such request 
for extension to all bidders before the date of expiry of their bids. When the procurement is subject 
to ADB's prior review, the executing agency, as the case may be, shall obtain in a timely manner 
the prior written concurrence of ADB for the extension of the bid validity period. 
9. 
Bid Evaluation 
72. 
Evaluation  and  qualification  criteria,  and  submission  requirements,  to  be  used  in  each 
bidding activity shall be clearly specified in the bidding documents. The evaluation of bids shall 
be done in strict adherence to the criteria specified in the bidding documents. 
73. 
Negotiations  with  bidders  shall  not  be  undertaken  before  award  of  contract,  except  as 
provided in Paragraph 2.63 of ADB's Procurement Guidelines. A bidder shall not be required, as 
a condition for award, to undertake obligations not specified in the bidding documents or otherwise 
to modify its bid as originally submitted. 
74. 
At the same time that notification on award of contract is given to the successful bidder, the 
results  of  the  bid  evaluation  shall  be  posted  on  a  well-known  freely  accessible  website  (namely 
Mongolia's Ministry of Finance e-procurement website: https://www.tender.gov.mn) identifying the 
bid and lot numbers and providing information on the: (i) name of each bidder that submitted a bid; 
(ii) bid prices as read out at bid opening; (iii) names of bidders whose bids were rejected and the 
reasons for their rejection; and (iv) name of the winning bidder, and the price it offered, as well as 
the duration and summary scope of the contract awarded.  The Executing Agency, as the case may 
be, shall respond in writing to unsuccessful bidders who seek explanations on the grounds on which 
their bids were not selected. 
10.   ADB Policy Clauses  
75. 
A  provision  shall  be  included  in  all  NCB  works  and  goods  contracts  financed  by  ADB 
requiring suppliers and contractors to permit ADB to inspect their accounts and records and other 
documents relating to the bid submission and the performance of the contract, and to have them 
audited by auditors appointed by ADB. 
A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods contracts 
76. 
financed by ADB stating that the Borrower shall reject a proposal for award if it determines that the 
bidder recommended for award has, directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, 
46 
collusive, coercive or obstructive practices in competing for the contract in question. 
77. 
A provision shall be included in all bidding documents for NCB works and goods contracts 
financed by ADB stating that ADB will declare a firm or individual ineligible, either indefinitely or 
for a stated period, to be awarded a contract financed by ADB, if it at any time determines that 
the firm or individual has, directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, 
coercive or obstructive practices or any integrity violation in competing for, or in executing, ADB-
financed contract. 
D. 
Consultant's Terms of Reference  
D.1 
Project Implementation Support Firm/NGO/Entity 
The  Firm/NGO/Entity  shall  have  demonstrated  experience  in  implementing  community-based 
rural development projects in Mongolia or in conditions similar to those of Mongolia. Experience 
of ADB or World Bank projects would be a plus. Linkages to participants in the vegetable market 
chain, and knowledge of and contacts with those involved in organized wholesale and retail trade 
in  fruits  and  vegetables  would  also  be  an  advantage.  Knowledge  of  ADB’s  guidelines  on  use 
consultants, familiarly with the consultant management system would be a plus. Key personnel 
of the group responsible for representing  it in communications with ADB/MOFALI must have a 
good command of English (spoken and written).  
Duration of contract: 4 years, 341 person-months. 
Post  location:  Ulaanbaatar  and  Yeruu  soum  in  Selenge  aimag,  Bornuur  soum  in  Tuv  aimag, 
Orkhon soum in Darkhan-Uul aimag and Ulaangom soum in Uvs aimag. 
Expected timing: Starting in March 2018. 
The  firm/NGO/entity  must  be  registered  with  ADB  as  a  consultant  and  will  be  recruited  in 
accordance with ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time).  
Scope of work: The firm/NGO/entity will (i) implement project activities in the field; (ii) support 
project activities by providing consultants  specified in Appendix 7, (iii) help link project farmers 
groups to potential markets, including wholesale and retail trade, and established businesses in 
food processing industry, (iv) support project activities in the soums by introducing experiences 
and best practices from similar donor projects.  
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities  
Output 1: Support project marketing and branding activities. 
(i) 
Support linking project farmer groups to potential buyers such as wholesale stores, retail 
chains and established food processing businesses. 
(ii)  Support linking the project to appropriate media outlets for advertising project activities and 
help designing promotional displays.  
Output 2: Support project activities in the field. 
(i)  Conduct  research  on  best  practices  from  similar  donor  projects  in  Mongolia  and  other 
countries.   
(ii)  Share  the  best  practices  with  the  project  team  and  farmer  groups,  and  support  various 
training activities by the project. 
47 
Fifteen  national  individual  consultants  for  a  total  of  330  person-months  (pm)  will  be  engaged 
through the Implementation Support firm/NGO/entity. Input months and TORs for the consultants 
are detailed in Appendix 7.  
D.2 
Individual Consultant (International) Recruitment 
Agronomist  and  Agri-business  Specialist  -  International  (5  person-months, 
1. 
intermittent) 
Expertise: The candidate must have tertiary qualifications in agronomy or related fields with at 
least  10  years  of  experience  in  vegetable  and  fruit  farming,  especially  protection  culture,  in 
climatic conditions approximating those of Mongolia. Strong preference will be given to candidates 
having prior experience of working directly with farming communities, participating in the design 
of community-based initiatives and working on ADB or World Bank projects. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 5 person-months, intermittent. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar, project soums. 
Expected timing: Starting in May 2018. 
Scope  of  Work:  The  expert  will  (i)  consolidate  relevant  international  and  local  knowledge  on  
vegetable varieties, cultivation techniques, technologies, and  practices best suited to the climate 
and soil conditions of Mongolia’s central region, (ii) based on (i), make recommendations to the 
project  on  the  choice  of  varieties,  technologies,  and  practices  to  be  used  by  local  CGGs,  (iii) 
develop, in consultation with the national agronomist, a training program for project farmers on 
the use of existing and introduction of new vegetables varieties, technologies, and  practices, (iv) 
based  on  (iii),  train  project  national  agronomist  and  agribusiness  specialist  and  other  team 
members  in  delivering  corresponding  training  programs  to  project  farmers,  and  (v)  maintain 
regular  communications  with  the  project  team  and  update  and  revise,  as  necessary,  the 
recommendations  on  the  choice  of  vegetable  varieties,  protection  culture  technologies  and 
techniques, best horticulture practices and corresponding training program. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output 1: Make recommendations on the choice of crops, technologies, and practices. 
(i) 
In collaboration with the national agronomist, consolidate local and international knowledge 
and  experience  of  growing  vegetables  in  the  climatic  conditions  similar  to  those  of 
Mongolia’s central region. 
(ii)  Make recommendation on the choice of vegetable breeds and varieties most suitable for 
(iii) 
the Mongolia central region, and for a community farming model. 
In  collaboration  with  the  national  agronomist  and  consolidate  local  and  international 
experience  on  best  farm  practices  of  protected  horticulture  (especially  the  use  of 
greenhouses  and  tunnels)  applicable  to  the  central  region  of  Mongolia  and  suitable  for 
adoption by CGGs.  
(iv)  Conduct  field  visits  to  project  soums  to  validate  the  initial  analysis  and  make 
recommendations on the technologies and techniques of protected horticulture best suited 
to the needs of the project.  
(v)  Maintain regular communications with the project team and revise and update as necessary 
48 
the  recommendations  concerning  vegetable  breeds,  best  farm  practices,  and  protected 
horticulture technologies and operating procedures.   
Output  2:  Develop  training  program  for  project  farmers  and  support  delivery  of  the  training 
program. 
(i) 
In collaboration with national agronomist, develop training program for project farmers on 
introduction of new vegetables and application of best practices in farming. 
(ii)  Train national agronomist and other project team members in delivering in-field training of 
project farmers in improved vegetable production and post-harvest practices.   
(iii)  Maintain regular communications with the project national team and revise and update the 
training program, as necessary.   
Output 3: Consolidate the analysis and recommendations made in a report that could serve as a 
learning resource for the project communities and others beyond the confines of the project. 
Resource  Person  for  Packaging  and  Processing  Workshop  -  International  (1 
2.  
person-month) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have an advanced degree in food processing or technology, or 
other discipline relevant to packaging and processing of vegetables. He/she will preferably have 
at  least  5  to  10  years  of  experience  in  the  design  and  operation  of  small  to  medium  scale 
vegetable packaging and processing facilities in rural environment in developing countries.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: May 2019. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities 
The specialist will:  
(i)  Conduct  field  visits  to  the  project  soums  where  small-scale  vegetable  packaging  and 
processing facilities are to be established to gain understanding of current conditions and 
requirements. 
(ii)  Create a preliminary blueprint for a vegetable packaging and processing unit best suited to 
local conditions and CGG management including the choice of materials and equipment to 
be used. 
(iii)  Recommend operational procedures for the facility including required number and profile of 
employees, training needs and operational guidelines. 
3. 
Resource person for greenhouse - International (1 person-month) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  technical  diploma  in  engineering,  horticulture  or  other 
subjects  relevant  to  protected  horticulture,  or  proven  track  record  of  successfully  using 
greenhouses  to  grow  non-conventional  vegetables  in  countries  similar  to  Mongolia  in  climate 
conditions. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
49 
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: May 2018. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities 
The specialist will:  
(i) 
Visit  project  soums  and  work  closely  with  national  agronomist  and  agribusiness  expert, 
national  resource  person  for  greenhouse  technology  to  determine  farmer  communities’ 
needs and scope for greenhouses. 
(ii)  Share with the project lessons learned from building and operating greenhouses in  other 
countries. 
(iii)  Recommend the types of greenhouses of several sizes, best suited to project conditions 
under CGG management.  
(iv)  Assist the community development expert, national agronomist, and soum coordinators in 
selecting sites appropriate for constructing greenhouses. 
(v)  Create  preliminary  technical  drawings  for  greenhouses  in  cooperation  with  the  national 
resource person for greenhouse technology.  
Resource person for packaging and processing workshop - International (1 person-
4. 
month) 
Expertise:  
The  candidate  shall  have  an  advanced  degree  in  food  processing  or  technology,  or  other 
discipline relevant to packaging and processing of vegetables. He/she will preferably have at least 
5  to  10  years  of  experience  in  the  design  and  operation  of  small  to  medium  scale  vegetable 
packaging and processing facilities in rural environment in developing countries.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: May 2019. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities 
The specialist will:  
(i)  Conduct  field  visits  to  the  project  soums  where  small-scale  vegetable  packaging  and 
processing facilities are to be established to gain understanding of current conditions and 
requirements. 
(ii)  Create a preliminary blueprint for a vegetable packaging and processing unit best suited to 
local conditions and CGG management including the choice of materials and equipment to 
be used. 
(iii)  Recommend operational procedures for the facility including required number and profile of 
employees, training needs and operational guidelines. 
50 
5. 
Specialist for the HLT winter greenhouse technology - National (18 person-months) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  technical  diploma  in  engineering,  horticulture  or  other 
subjects relevant to protected horticulture, or proven track record of successfully using the HLT 
winter greenhouses to grow non-conventional vegetables in Mongolia.   
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator 
Duration of contract: 18 person-months.  
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar.  
Expected timing: January 2020  
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities 
(i) 
Visit project Ulaanbaatar (Visit 61 garam) and work closely with international and national 
agronomist  and  greenhouse  experts  to  determine  for  scope  for  high  level  technology 
greenhouse. 
(ii)  Share  with  the  project  lessons  learned  from  building  and  operating  the  HLT  winter 
greenhouses in other locations in Mongolia. 
(iii)  Recommend  the  types  of  the  HLT  winter  greenhouses  of  several  sizes  and  types  of 
technology, best suited to project conditions under MOFALI.  
(iv)  Assist  the  national  agronomist,  and  international  greenhouses  experts  in  selecting  sites 
appropriate for constructing greenhouses. 
(v)  Create preliminary technical drawings for greenhouses in cooperation with the international 
resource person for greenhouse technology, and taking into account the climate and harsh 
seasonal weather conditions, based on a wide variety of weather data.  
 Develop training materials and train the project team and MOFALI selection of crops to be 
grown  in  the  HLT  winter  greenhouses,  operating  practices,  maintenance,  and  operating 
cost. 
(vi) 
(vii)  Recommend the engineering design for the contracts to be procurement.  
(viii)  Work  closely  with  national  agronomist  resource  person  for  1a  prepare  the  detailed 
engineering design and environment safeguards due diligence. 
(ix)  Work closely with the PIU staff, MOFALI, and the HLT winter greenhouses’ implementing 
company to manage and arrange inspections of goods, works, and services being procured, 
as well as of their delivery and distribution to the final destination to ensure timely availability 
and proper reception, installation, testing, and user training. 
Resource person for the HLT winter greenhouse technology - National (1 person-
6. 
month) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a bachelor’s degree in business administration or agronomy 
related subjects with at least 3 years of experience in agricultural and greenhouse development. 
The candidate shall have experience with procurement systems of the Mongolian government, 
ADB  and  the  rules,  regulations,  and  practices  of  procurement  and  contracting  in  general, 
procurement in an ADB project and have a good command of spoken and written English.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator 
Duration of contract: 1 person-month.  
51 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar 
Expected timing: March 2020  
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities 
(i) 
Visit project Ulaanbaatar (Visit 61 garam) and work closely with international and national 
agronomist and greenhouse experts to determine BID for high level technology greenhouse. 
(ii)  Work  closely  with  PIU  procurement  specialist  to  plan  and  manage  procurement  activity 
including the preparation of FSR and bid documents and cost estimates, invitation for bids, 
bidders’  inquiries,  bid  evaluation,  preparation  of  bid  evaluation  minutes  and  reports, 
preparation  of  contract  negotiations  with  selected  bidders,  and  submissions  for  ADB’s 
review  in  accordance  with  the  project  procurement  plan  and  ADB’s  guidelines  and 
procedures.  
(iii)  Work  closely  with  PIU  procurement  specialist  to  prepare  and  translate  procurement 
documents such as bidding documents including technical specifications for goods, works 
and services to be procured through national competitive bidding (NCB) and shopping, bid 
evaluation  minutes  and  reports,  contracts,  and  other  submission  documents  for  ADB’s 
review.  
(iv)  Together with the other PIU staffs and in coordination with the MoFALI arrange inspections 
of  goods,  works  and  services  being  procured,  as  well  as  inspections  of  their  delivery, 
storage,  and  distribution  to  the  final  destination  to  ensure  timely  availability  and  proper 
reception,  installation,  testing,  and  user  training;  ensure  that  the  quality  of  the  procured 
goods are verified against the specifications before signing acceptance documents for the 
goods.  
(v)  Work  closely  with  PIU  procurement  specialist/Financial  Management  specialists,  ensure 
that  all  the  procured  goods  are  properly  labeled  and  entered  into  the  project  financial 
management/accounting system. 
52 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
78. 
Environment  (category  C).  The  project  is  categorized  as  C  for  environmental 
safeguards. Under ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS, 2009), only activities likely to have 
minimal  or  no  adverse  environmental  impacts  will  be  implemented  under  the  project.  No 
environmental  assessment  report  is  required  for  category  C  projects,  although  environmental 
aspects  will  be  considered  as  part  of  the  standard  preparatory  activities  for  each  project 
component. An environmental management checklist will be developed to monitor and mitigate 
impacts from the civil works and facilities operations.  
79. 
Involuntary  resettlement  and  indigenous  peoples  (category  C).  No  involuntary 
resettlement  or  land  acquisition  is  envisaged,  as  the  farming  activities  will  be  conducted  on 
existing farmlands owned by beneficiary households. There are no communities of distinct and 
vulnerable  indigenous  peoples  as  defined  under  ADB  SPS  living  in  the  project  soums,  as 
confirmed by due diligence and national census data. The additional financing will construct one 
greenhouse (about 30 meters by 30 meters); and it will be on unencumbered vacant state-owned 
land  in  the  current  project  area.  The  exact  location  will  be  determined  during  project 
implementation.  The  project  will  not  finance  any  activities  that  would  trigger  IR  impacts.  The 
current project and the additional financing does not trigger the SPS requirements on involuntary 
resettlement and indigenous peoples.  
80. 
Prohibited activities. Pursuant to ADB's SPS (2009), use of the ADB funds may not be 
applied  to the  activities described on the  ADB  Prohibited  Investment  Activities List  set forth at 
Appendix  5  of  the  SPS.27  All  project  activities  will  comply  with  applicable  national  laws  and 
regulations. 
VIII.  GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
Poverty and social impacts. A summary poverty reduction and social strategy has been 
81. 
prepared for the project. The project is designed for livelihood improvement and poverty reduction 
and categorized as gender equity under ADB’s project gender classification system. The project 
will  strengthen the  capacity  of  CGGs  comprising  400  smallholder  farmers  and  seed  producers 
from 180 households, including at least of 50% group members being women and 100% from 
poor and vulnerable households.28 180 households will gain access to vegetable storage facilities 
and engage in greenhouse production. 36 households of seed producers will have better access 
to  water  for  irrigation.  144  farmers’  households  will  receive  specialized  training  related  to 
vegetable  production,  including  its  processing,  packaging,  and  marketing  aspects.  Through 
improved availability of affordable produce, knock-on learning and multiplier effects, the project 
will indirectly benefit the wider community in target soums, with a population of 45,000, of which 
approximately 50% are female. 
82. 
 The formulation of the project was preceded and accompanied by extensive consultations 
with local populations. These consultations provided a better understanding of the target  soums’ 
poverty  and  gender  profiles.  They  revealed  that  women  actively  participate  in  farming,  from 
cultivating  soil  to  harvesting  and  sorting  produce,  but  the  degree  of  this  participation  varies 
considerably from soum to soum. A gender action plan (GAP) has been prepared and is attached 
to this document. It comprises 14 actions with 26 indicators, of which 18 have quantitative indicators, 
with  targets  for  enabling  mainstreaming  of  women  in  agricultural  value-chains  and  increasing 
27 Available at: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Safeguards/Safeguard-Policy-Statement-June2009.pdf  
28  Poor households in the project are defined as farming households with 1 hectare or less of land.  
53 
livelihood opportunities for women in non-traditional sectors. The formation of farming groups under 
output  1  will  ensure  a  100%  representation  of  households  classified  as  poor  and  at  least  50% 
female. 
Participatory  approach.  Project  design  is  rooted  in  strong  participation  of  local 
83. 
households.  Opportunities  to  promote  participation  in  project  activities  were  identified  during 
consultations with the communities and local governments in the target project sites. The project’s 
phased approach allows for a comprehensive and inclusive consultation early in implementation. 
This bottom-up approach minimizes possible sense of exclusion by some in the community and 
motivates  the  target  households.  The  creation  and  functioning  of  CGGs  puts  the  groups  and 
households  themselves  in  charge  of  decision-making  while  providing  for  a  degree  of  shared 
oversight  as  some  decisions  are  taken  on  behalf  of  the  entire  CGGs  rather  than  individual 
households.  
84. 
Gender. The project is classified “gender equity” under ADB’s project gender classification 
system. A GAP was prepared. Project activities are designed to be participatory and inclusive and 
will  support  the  involvement  of  poor  and  women-headed  households.  Women  already  play  an 
important role in vegetable production and sales and the success of some project activities will 
depend  on  strong  support  from  women  in  the  target  soums.  The  GAP  sets  targets  for  project 
participation, empowerment, and capacity building for women. 
85. 
The GAP (see Table 10 below) comprises 14 actions with 26 indicators, of which 18 have 
quantitative  targets  (see  table  below),  with  targets  for  enabling  mainstreaming  of  women  in 
agricultural  value-chains  and  increasing  livelihood  opportunities  for  women  in  non-traditional 
sectors. The formation of farming groups under output 1 will ensure 50% female representation. 
Table 10: Gender Action Plan 
Activity 
Output 1: Community grower groups established 
1a.  Conduct community consultations 
Targets / Indicators 
1.  Tailored outreach and at least 
and integrate findings in design and 
action plans of 30 CGGs on: (i) 
ways and degree of collaboration in 
farming activities; (ii) areas support 
is most required; (iii) prioritization of 
actions; and (iv) implementation of 
actions. 
one women-only consultation is 
held in each target sum. 
2.  At least 50% of CCGs consulted 
on ways and degree of 
collaboration and priority actions 
are women. 
1b.  Encourage women’s active 
3.  At least 50% of the members of 
participation and inclusion of 
female-headed households in 
CGGs. 
the 30 CGGs created are women  
4.  30 CGGs registered with soum 
governor (of which at least 30% 
have female leaders). 
1c.  Ensure women’s participation in 
project awareness activities and 
trainings on best farming practices, 
vegetable business and 
management of CGGs. 
5.  At least 45% of participants in all 
awareness sessions and 
trainings for target soums are 
women. 
6.  Gender-specific needs and 
priorities are assessed and 
addressed (including training 
venues and timing). 
Responsibility 
Timeframe 
Year 1  
Year 1 
Year 1–2 
Conducted by 
PIU staff, soum 
coordinators, 
international 
specialist; 
Monitored by 
PIU  
Conducted by 
PIU staff, soum 
coordinators, 
international 
specialist; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Conducted by 
PIU staff, soum 
coordinators, 
international 
specialist; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
54 
Activity 
Output 2: Sustainable climate-resilient vegetable farming practices applied 
7.  Consensus on type and location 
2a.  Ensure women are consulted on: (i) 
of greenhouses, and selected 
production inputs is signed off in 
each action plan by both spouses 
from each beneficiary household. 
type and location of greenhouses; 
(ii) crops to be grown; and (iii) 
prioritization of production inputs 
and technologies, as relevant. 
Targets / Indicators 
2b.  Increase women’s access to 
farming resources to improve 
livelihood of female CGGs 
members in all four soums. 
2c.  Ensure women are consulted on 
decisions concerning shared 
ownership of assets, responsibilities 
and tasks of group members and 
community growers’ scheme. 
2d.  Improve knowledge of women CGG 
members and female-headed 
households on the use of new types 
of crops, farm equipment, inputs 
and facilities. 
8.  At least 40% of project pilot 
greenhouses are owned by 
women. 
9.  By 2021, at least 100 farming 
households are accessing 
improved farming infrastructure 
and equipment (of which at least 
10% are female-headed 
households). 
10.  At least 50 women benefit from 
pilot green jobs of the workshop 
livelihood activities. 
11.  At least 45% of all CGG 
members consulted on farming 
assets, shared responsibilities 
and roles of groups, and 
community growers’ scheme 
aspects in each of the 4 project 
soums are women. 
12.  At least 45% of women in the 30 
CGGs participate in project 
trainings for climate 
preparedness, water saving 
technologies, best farming 
practices. 
13.  Training reports with sex-
disaggregated data 
Output 3: Farmers’ access to markets improved 
3a.  Ensure the market study and value 
chain analysis contains a gender 
section on livelihood activities and 
access to resources and markets 
14.  Market study and value chain 
analysis includes a gender 
analysis to assess gender-
differential needs and challenges 
in access to market.   
3b.  Increase women’s access to 
15.  At least 45% of the processing 
economic resources to improve 
livelihood of female CGGs 
members in Orkhon soum 
3c.  Ensure active participation of 
female members of CGGs in 
Orkhon soum on vegetable value-
addition and processing techniques. 
workshop title in Orkhon soum is 
owned by female CGG members. 
16.  24 CGGs linked with markets 
and buyers, of which 20% are led 
by women. 
17.  At least 75% of female CGG 
members in Orkhon soum are 
trained in vegetable processing 
techniques (pickling, preserves, 
sauces, frozen vegetables, 
juicing). 
18.  100% of female CGG members 
involved in the vegetable 
processing and storage facility in 
Orkhon are trained on how to use 
the facility, including hygiene and 
safety standards.  
Responsibility 
Timeframe 
Year 1–2 
Year 2–3 
Conducted by 
PIU staff, soum 
coordinators, 
international 
specialist; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Conducted by 
PIU staff and 
soum 
coordinators; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Year 1–2 
Year 2 
Conducted by 
PIU staff, soum 
coordinators 
and civil works 
contractors; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Conducted by 
PIU staff, soum 
coordinators; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Year 1 
Year 2–3 
Year 2–3 
Conducted by 
PIU staff and 
soum 
coordinators; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Conducted by 
PIU staff and 
soum 
coordinators; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Conducted by 
PIU staff, 
international 
specialist; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Activity 
3d.  Ensure female members of CGGs 
actively participate in trainings on 
value-added agricultural 
processing, packaging, selling, 
marketing and essentials of 
business. 
3e.  Actively support participation of 
female-headed CGGs in multiple 
sales and marketing channels 
piloted under the project. 
55 
Responsibility 
Timeframe 
Year 2–3 
Conducted by 
PIU staff and 
soum 
coordinators; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Year 2–3 
Conducted by 
PIU staff and 
soum 
coordinators; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Targets / Indicators 
19.  At least one women-led CGG is 
empowered to lead the Orkhon 
soum vegetable processing and 
storage facilities. 
20.  At least 75% of all 30 CGG 
female members are trained in 
vegetable grading and quality, 
waste disposal, food processing 
techniques (pickling, preserves, 
sauces, frozen vegetables, 
juicing), packaging of produce, 
marketing in the 3 farming soums 
21.  At least 144 farming households 
and 36 seed producer 
households trained in 
processing, essentials of 
vegetable business and 
marketing (of which at least 50% 
are women). 
22.  All interested women-led CGGs 
are supported by the project to 
participate in the national 
vegetable fairs. 
23.  Successful and appropriately 
qualified women-led CGGs will 
be given preference for the sales 
agreements made between 
farmer groups and buyers (agro-
industries, commercial farms, 
supermarkets, public sector 
buyers, individuals) under the 
project. 
3f.  Ensure that beneficiary women 
24.  At least 45% of participants at 
provide feedback on project results 
and share the lessons learned. 
the project completion workshop 
are women. 
3g.  Appoint a social and gender 
25.  A social and gender specialist is 
specialist at PIU. 
engaged for 6 months per year at 
PIU. 
26.  All PIU staff trained by gender 
specialist on gender-specific 
needs and priorities, and sex-
disaggregated data collection 
and reporting. 
CGG = community grower group, PIU = project implementation unit. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Year 3 
Intermittent 
throughout 
project lifetime 
Conducted by 
PIU staff, 
international 
specialist; 
Monitored by 
PIU 
Engaged by 
executing 
agency; 
Trained by 
international 
specialist;  
Monitored by 
PIU and 
executing 
agency 
56 
IX.  
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
REVISED DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Impacts the Project is Aligned with 
Current project 
Rural livelihood for smallholder vegetable farmers improveda 
Resilience and adaptation to climate change improveda  
Overall project 
Unchanged. 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Current project 
Model for 
community 
vegetable farming 
demonstrated 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Risks 
Current project 
By 2022: 
Project community farming 
model taken up and endorsed by 
MOFALI to scaling up and 
replicating (Baseline 2017: 0) 
Farming income for project 
beneficiary smallholders 
increased by 30% (for female-
headed households increased 
by 35%) (Baseline 2016: $2,400 
annually per farming household) 
Quarterly progress/ 
implementation reports 
produced by PIU 
Soum statistics  
MOFALI website data 
system as project M&E 
tool 
Changes in local 
or national political 
leadership 
disrupting 
implementation of 
vegetable farming 
actions 
Major hazard 
event in project or 
surrounding area 
Overall project 
Unchanged. 
Overall project 
Unchanged. 
Outputs 
Output 1 
Current project  
1. Community 
growers groups 
established 
Current project 
By 2019: 
1a. 30 CGGs registered with 
soum governor (of which at least 
30% have female leaders) 
(Baseline 2017: 0) 
1b. All CGGs have at least 50% 
female membership 
(Baseline 2017: 0%) 
1c. At least 20 CGGs have 
signed community farming plans 
and by laws 
(Baseline 2017: 0) 
Overall project 
Unchanged. 
Overall project 
1a‒1c. Unchanged. 
1a‒1c. Quarterly 
progress/ implementation 
reports produced by PIU 
1a‒1c. ADB review 
mission reports  
Communities’ 
limited ability to 
participate in 
project activities 
due to time 
constraints. 
Limited uptake in 
local sector/ 
development plans 
due to low levels of 
buy-in from local 
leadership. 
Turnover of bagh 
or soum 
administration 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
2a‒2e. Quarterly 
progress/ implementation 
reports produced by PIU 
2a‒2e. ADB review 
mission reports 
57 
Risks 
trained under the 
project. 
Out-migration of 
farmers from 
project areas. 
Storage structures 
or greenhouses 
used for 
unintended 
purposes. 
Severe weather 
conditions limiting 
implementation of 
project activities or 
damaging project 
infrastructure. 
Lack of know-how 
and experience 
among farmers to 
operate new 
technologies and 
applying efforts. 
3a‒3g. Final project 
completion report 
3a‒3g. Report from final 
review symposium 
Resistance by 
vested interests to 
increased 
participation of 
community groups 
in marketing their 
produce 
Uneven talent and 
capacity to master 
the business 
Output 2 
Current project 
2. Sustainable 
climate-resilient 
vegetable farming 
technology and 
practices applied  
Overall project  
Unchanged. 
Output 3 
Current project 
3. Farmers’ access 
to markets 
improved  
Current project 
By 2021: 
2a. Farming produce of project 
beneficiary smallholders 
increased by 15% 
(Baseline 2016: 7 tons per 
farming household on average) 
2b. At least 40% of project pilot 
greenhouses are owned by 
women (Baseline 2017: 0) 
2c. At least 180 farming 
households are accessing 
improved farming infrastructure 
and equipment (of which at least 
10% are female-headed 
households) 
(Baseline 2017: 0) 
2d. Seed production in UVs 
increased by at least 50% from 
current production 
(Baseline 2017: 10 tons) 
Overall project 
2a‒2d. Unchanged.  
2e. 24 CGGs will have practical 
knowledge on establishing and 
maintaining, and using high-level 
technology winter greenhouses 
(of which at least 20% are 
women-led)  
(Baseline 2017: 0) (Added) 
Current project 
By 2021: 
3a. 24 CGGs linked with 
markets and buyers (of which 
20% are women-led) 
(Baseline 2017: 0) 
3b. Wastage of farm produce in 
project soums reduced by 5% 
over the last 5 years average 
(Baseline 2017: 10%) 
Risks 
aspects of 
vegetable 
production and 
sales 
58 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with 
Targets and Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Overall project  
Unchanged. 
3c. At least 45% ownership of 
the Orkhon vegetable 
processing workshop lies with 
female CGG members (Baseline 
2017: 0)  
3d. At least 144 farming 
households and 36 seed 
producer households trained 
in processing and marketing (of 
which at least 50% are women) 
(Baselines 2017: 0, 0%) 
3e. At least two sales MOUs 
signed between grower groups 
and buyers (Baseline 2017: 0) 
3f. At least one farming 
enterprise or association formed 
in each of the 4 soums at the 
end of the project (Baseline 
2017: 0) 
Overall project 
3a‒3c. Unchanged. 
3d. At least 144 farming 
households trained in 
processing and marketing (of 
which at least 50% are women) 
(Baseline 2017: 0) 
(Unchanged, split from current 
indicator 3d) 
3e. At least 36 seed producers’ 
households trained in 
processing and marketing (of 
which at least 50% are women) 
(Baseline 2017: 0)  
(Unchanged, split from current 
indicator 3d) 
3f. At least two sales MOUs 
signed between grower groups 
and buyers (Baseline 2017: 0) 
(Unchanged, formerly 3e) 
3g. At least one farming 
enterprise or association formed 
in each of the four soums at the 
end of the project 
(Baseline 2017: 0) 
(Unchanged, formerly 3f)   
Key Activities with Milestones 
59 
Output 1: Community growers groups established 
1.1. Conduct  training  (including  gender  sensitive  training)  for  local  communities  on  best  ways  to  establish 
effective CGGs and engage in collaborative farming (Q2 2019) (unchanged). 
1.2. Form vegetable CGGs,  bringing  together around five  to  eight  farmer households per group  and  eight 
groups  in  each  vegetable  production  site  and  six  groups  in  seed  production  site  (Q2–Q4,  2019) 
(unchanged). 
1.3. Conduct the stocktaking exercise and map out all farming households in the CGGs, including plot location, 
area, vegetables grown, and farming assets (equipment, machinery, etc.) (Q2 2019) (unchanged). 
1.4. Describe the pool of resources (existing and new) available to each group and establish the rules for the 
use of this pool, its maintenance, ownership, cost-sharing, and governance (Q2–Q3, 2019) (unchanged). 
1.5. Formulate community growers action plans (Q4 2019) (unchanged). 
1.6. Establish the community growers scheme (Q4 2019) (unchanged). 
Output 2: Sustainable climate-resilient vegetable farming technology and practices applied 
2.1. Provide (where needed) farm equipment and other tools to CGGs to improve the efficiency of vegetable 
production (planting, weed control, harvesting) (Q1 2020) (unchanged). 
2.2. Set  up  greenhouses  for  diversification  of  the  vegetables  grown,  transition  to  higher-value  produce, 
extending  growing  season,  and  for  testing  improved  seed  varieties  (in  Ulaangom)  (Q2–Q3,  2020) 
(unchanged except for item (v) below). 
(i)  At least 72 greenhouses in three vegetable growing soums (Bornuur, Orkhon, Yeruu) (unchanged); 
(ii)  At least one greenhouse in Uvs for testing seed and propagating (unchanged); 
(iii)  Pilot one winter greenhouse in one soum (unchanged); 
(iv)  Training  for  best  practices  in  greenhouse  operations,  including  the  use  of  water  and  energy 
(unchanged); and 
(v)  Pilot one HLT winter greenhouse (added). 
2.3. Improve water access and usage of existing irrigation sources for seed CGGs in Ulaangom (Q1 2019) 
(unchanged).  
2.4. Train  the  CGGs  in  best  practices  in  sustainable  climate-resilient  farming;  (in  climate  preparedness, 
crop rotation, introduction of new vegetables and varieties, use of organic fertilizer and pesticide, best 
practices in water saving) (Q2‒Q4 2020) (unchanged). 
2.5. Train the CGGs on the HLT winter greenhouse operation’s best practices and climate-resilient farming 
(Q2‒Q4 2020) (added). 
Output 3: Farmers’ access to markets improved 
3.1  Conduct a market study and value chain analysis (Q1–Q2 2020) (unchanged). 
3.2  Set  up  shared  storage  facilities  in  Orkhon,  Ulaangom,  and  Yeruu  soums.  One  facility  per  site― 
ventilated, climate and disaster-resilient, low cost, built, owned and managed by CGGs (Q2–Q4 2020) 
(unchanged). 
3.3  Pilot one vegetable processing and packaging workshop for value addition in Orkhon soum (Q3 2020) 
(unchanged). 
3.4  Train CGGs in vegetable grading and quality, waste  disposal, food processing techniques (pickling, 
preserves, sauces, frozen vegetables, juicing), packaging of produce, and marketing (Q1–Q4 2020) 
(unchanged). 
3.5  Pilot and establish various sales channels in all project sites (Q3 2020–Q2 2021) (unchanged). 
(i)  Support CGGs’ participation in national vegetable trade fairs;  
(ii)  Pilot six kiosks (two for each growing soum) in Ulaanbaatar;  
(iii)  Set up a selling point along the main road axis linking the project soums with Ulaanbaatar; and   
(iv)  Pilot and make sales agreements between CGGs and buyers (agro-industries, commercial farms, 
supermarkets, public sector buyers, individuals).  
3.6  Develop  and  launch  farmer  market  information  system  (web  and  phone-based  application),  train 
farmers and local administration in its use (Q1‒Q2 2020) (unchanged). 
Project Management Activities 
Recruit consultants for project management unit by month 2 (completed). 
60 
Establish a PIU to support grant implementation and technical capacity of MOFALI by month 3 (completed). 
Screen and conduct due diligence for small infrastructure by month 18 (unchanged). 
Monitor and evaluate project impact, outcome, and outputs using the project performance management 
system; submit semiannual progress reports until year 2021 (unchanged). 
Prepare inception (Q2 2018), midterm (Q4 2019) and final (Q4 2021) reports (unchanged). 
Inputs 
Cofinanciers 
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
$3,000,000 (current) 
$40,000 (additional) 
$3,000,000 (overall) 
High-Level Technology Fund 
$0 (current) 
$500,000 (additional) 
$500,000 (overall) 
Government 
$200,000 (current) 
$0 (additional) 
$200,000 (overall) 
Note: The executing agency will provide in-kind counterpart support in the form of office space, workshop 
and training venues, and staff time for project implementation; at the soum level, staff time and desk space 
will also be made available. In-kind counterpart support will also include exemption of taxes on consultant 
and PIU staff salaries. 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Current project 
None. 
Overall project 
Unchanged. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CGG = community grower group,  HLT = high-level technology, M&E = monitoring 
and evaluation, MOFALI = Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Light Industry,  MOU = memorandum of understanding, 
PIU = project implementation unit, Q = quarter. 
a Government of Mongolia. 2016. Program of Action 2016–2020. Ulaanbaatar. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
B. 
Monitoring  
Project performance monitoring. A project performance monitoring system (PPMS) will 
86. 
be established for the project.29 The design and monitoring framework (DMF) forms the basis for 
monitoring  the  project  progress.  During  project  implementation,  the  PPMS,  through  project 
performance  report,  will  monitor  the  likelihood  that  key  milestone  dates  for  activities,  outputs, 
outcome, and impact will be achieved. The project’s impact, fully assessed 5 years after project 
completion, will be anticipated during project implementation through monitoring assumptions and 
risks.  The  DMF  will  be  reviewed  during  the  project  implementation  and if  needed,  adjusted  to 
29 ADB's  project  performance  reporting  system  is  available  at  http://www.adb.org/Documents/Slideshows/PPMS/ 
default.asp?p=evaltool. ADB’s project performance management system (PPMS) is a coherent and results-based 
approach  to  project  planning,  performance  monitoring,  and  evaluation  of  results.  The  PPMS  comprises  five 
components: (i) design and monitoring framework (DMF); (ii) project performance report (PPR); (iii) grant recipient’s 
monitoring and evaluation (at the central and executing and implementing agencies levels); (iv) project completion 
report  (PCR);  and  (v)  project  performance  evaluation  report  (PPER),  and  where  appropriate,  impact  evaluation 
studies. The DMF provides the basis upon which the PPMS operates. It does this by establishing quantified, time-
bound targets and measurable indicators, and by identifying key risks and assumptions that are used to monitor and 
evaluate performance in the PPR, PCR, and PPER. 
61 
reflect  changing  circumstances.  Following  project  completion,  the  project  will  be  subject  to  an 
assessment  of  the  outcome  along  with  recommendations  for  enhancing  and  sustaining  the 
outcome. A project completion report will also include a preliminary assessment of the impact. 
The project impact, outcome, outputs, and targets and indicators are presented the DMF. 
87. 
The  PIU  will  monitor  project  implementation  as  well  as  feedback  from  the  executing 
agency,  project  steering  committee,  project  beneficiaries,  and  other  stakeholders.  ADB  will 
monitor five aspects of project performance i.e., technical, procurement, disbursement, financial 
management, and safeguards (social and environment), through the executing agency’s semi-
annual progress reports (prepared by the PIU and endorsed by the executing agency), day-to-
day communication with the PIU, and ADB review missions. 
The  PIU  will  prepare  and  submit  semi-annual  progress  reports.  These  will  include 
88. 
compliance monitoring with any conditions and covenants stipulated in the grant agreement; DMF 
activities  and  targets;  environmental  and  social  safeguards monitoring;  and  gender  and  social 
dimensions. 
89. 
Compliance monitoring. On behalf of the executing agency, PIU will monitor compliance 
with  covenants  stipulated  in  the  grant  agreements.  ADB  will  monitor  the  compliance  status 
through the executing agency’s semi-annual progress reports, day-to-day communication with the 
PIU, and ADB review missions; and take necessary remedial measures for any non-compliance. 
90. 
Environmental  safeguards  monitoring.  No  specific  environmental  safeguards  have 
been adopted for the project that is categorized as “C”. Nevertheless, during the preparations of 
the  project  activities  relevant  environmental  aspects  will  be  considered  and  monitored  during 
implementation, as needed. The PIU will monitor and report the observations as part of the project 
performance  monitoring  and  report  on  them  in  the  semi-annual  progress  reports.  The  PIU  will 
immediately inform the executing agency and ADB of any unanticipated environmental concerns. 
Corrective actions will be developed as needed, and agreed between the executing agency, PIU, 
affected persons, and any other relevant agencies. An environmental management checklist will 
be developed to monitor and mitigate impacts from the civil works and facilities operations. 
Social safeguards monitoring. The PIU will monitor project performance, including social 
91. 
safeguards as part of the project performance monitoring and report it in the semi-annual progress 
reports. The PIU will immediately inform the executing agency and ADB of any unanticipated social 
safeguard concerns. No involuntary resettlement impacts will occur due to the project.  
92. 
Gender and social dimensions monitoring. The PIU social and gender specialist will 
record sex-disaggregated data and information on the social, gender, and participatory aspects 
of  the  project  during  the  project  activities.  Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  GAP  will  be 
incorporated into the project reporting. The social and gender specialist will prepare a semi-annual 
report on GAP implementation and progress,  as part of the semi-annual progress reports, and 
will work closely with the project communities. 
C. 
Evaluation 
93. 
Project  performance  will  be  regularly monitored and  rated  through  ADB’s  e-Operations 
project implementation module. ADB’s overall grant implementation rating will be made based on 
five performance  indicators: technical,  procurement,  disbursement, financial  management,  and 
social and environmental safeguards (Section IX.B). Such rating will be updated semi-annually 
based on executing agency’s semi-annual progress reports and/or ADB review missions. Within 
62 
6 months of physical completion of the project, MOFALI (executing agency) will submit a grant 
project completion report to ADB.30 
94. 
ADB will conduct an inception mission when the grant becomes effective. ADB and the 
government will jointly field one to two project review missions a year. The missions will (i) review 
overall implementation of the project and update, in consultation with the executing agency, the 
project  implementation  schedule,  (ii)  examine  existing  and  potential  implementation  problems, 
and  find  out  measures  with  the  executing  agency  to  resolve  them,  (iii)  review  progress  in 
procurement and disbursement, (iv) review the grant recipient's compliance with grant covenants 
and, where there is any noncompliance or delay, discuss proposed remedial measures, and (v) 
assess the likelihood of attaining the project’s outcome. 
ADB  and  the  government  will  undertake  a midterm  review  at  the  beginning  of the  third 
95. 
year of project implementation, to assess implementation status and take appropriate measures—
including  modification  of  scope  and  implementation  arrangements,  and  reallocation  of  grant 
proceeds, as appropriate—to achieve the project’s outcomes and impact. 
96. 
A final ADB review mission will take place within 6 months after physical completion of the 
project. This mission will (i) assess project performance against targets and benchmarks including 
any  revision(s)  as  agreed  during  the  midterm  review,  (ii)  identify  any  incomplete  activities,  or 
unused project funds, and (iii) determine the project satisfactory rating. A project completion report 
will be prepared, in cooperation with the government. In case the project is selected as a sample 
of projects for project performance evaluation reporting, the project will be subject to more detailed 
performance evaluation and impact assessment about 3 or more years after completion. 
D. 
Reporting  
97. 
The  PIU,  on  behalf  of  the  executing  agency,  will  provide  ADB  with:  (i)  semi-annual 
progress  reports  in  a  format  consistent  with  ADB's  project  performance  reporting  system;  (ii) 
consolidated annual reports including (a) progress achieved by output as measured through the 
indicator's  performance  targets  against  the  baseline  data,  (b)  key  implementation  issues  and 
solutions; (iii) updated procurement plan; (iv) updated implementation plan for each 12 months; 
and  (v)  a  grant  project  completion  report  within  6  months  of  physical  completion  of  the  grant 
project.  The  completion  report  will  present  the  government’s  assessment  of  the  project’s 
effectiveness and will take account of findings of the ADB’s final review. To ensure that the project 
continues  to  be  viable  and  sustainable,  project  accounts  and  the  audited  project  financial 
statements, together with the associated auditor's report, should be adequately reviewed. 
98. 
The PIU shall include the results of implementing the GAP and summary poverty reduction 
and social strategy in the semi-annual reports to be submitted by the executing agency to ADB. 
99. 
Donor visibility. All project reports, training programs, seminars, workshops, materials, 
and equipment financed by the JFPR grant will clearly indicate the funding from the Government 
of Japan and display the JFPR and Japan Official Development Assistance logos.31 All project 
press  releases  issued  by  ADB  will  refer  to  the  financial  contribution  from  the  Government  of 
Japan. The GOM, including the executing agency, are requested to ensure that JFPR-financed 
activities are well covered by local print, electronic and social media, and that all related publicity 
30  Grant  project  completion  report  format  is  available  at:  http://www.adb.org/Consulting/consultants-toolkits/PCR-
Public-  Sector-Landscape.rar 
31  ADB. 2016. Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. Guidance Note on Visibility of Japan. Manila. 
63 
materials, official notices, reports and publications explicitly acknowledge Japan as the source of 
funding  received.  The executing  agency  and  PIU  will  collect  and maintain a database  of  high-
resolution photographs of the project activities, for use in project communication activities and for 
provision to the GOM, ADB, and Embassy of Japan in Mongolia, which may use them for public 
awareness and visibility purposes. 
100.  Dissemination of project results to the Government of Japan. The PIU will provide 
the executing agency and ADB with reporting materials on the project activities, including high 
resolution photos, testimonials from project recipients and implementers, publications, and other 
knowledge products. In turn, the ADB project team will provide this information to ADB’s Partner 
Funds  Division–Japan  team,  as  well  as  back-to-office  reports,  inception,  midterm  review,  and 
completion reports.32 Information and methods for donor visibility and coordination are described 
in Appendices 1 and 2. 
E. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy  
101.  A stakeholder communication strategy has been prepared for the project (Appendix 3). By its 
design,  the  project  requires  and  benefits  from  stakeholder  participation  and  ownership.  The 
communication  strategy  prescribes  timely  and  inclusive  dissemination  of  project  progress  and  the 
opportunity for public feedback. The strategy focuses on three objectives: (i) effective communication 
with the project stakeholders to achieve informed and supportive engagement; (ii) project visibility in 
the media; and (iii) coordination and alignment of the project activities with other donor programs.  
102.  Public  disclosure  of  project  documents  and  activities  will  be  made  through  a  project 
website, to be established after project effectiveness, as well as other dissemination approaches.  
32  ADB. 2016. Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. 2016 Policy Guidelines for Project Grants. Manila. 
64 
X.  
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
103.  ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  Project.33  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  shall  include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
executing agency and all Project contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers.  
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible to participate in 
104. 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project.34 
105.  To support these efforts, relevant provisions are included in the Grant Agreements for the 
project. 
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
106.  People  who  are,  or may  in the  future  be,  adversely  affected  by the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects can 
voice,  and  seek  a  resolution  of  their  problems,  as  well  as  report  alleged  violations  of  ADB’s 
operational policies and procedures.  
107.  Before submitting a complaint to the Accountability Mechanism, affected people should 
make an effort in good faith to solve their problems by working with the concerned ADB operations 
department.  Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still  dissatisfied,  should  they  approach  the 
Accountability Mechanism. 
108.  Details of the grievance redress mechanism for the project are provided in section VII of 
this document.35 
XII. 
RECORD OF PAM CHANGES 
109.  All revisions/updates during course of implementation should be retained in this Section 
to provide a chronological history of changes to implemented arrangements recorded in the PAM. 
33  Anticorruption Policy: https://www.adb.org/documents/anticorruption-policy 
34  ADB's Integrity Office web site: https://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main 
35  Accountability Mechanism. https://www.adb.org/site/accountability-mechanism/main 
Appendix 1 
65 
JAPAN FUND FOR POVERTY REDUCTION – GUIDANCE NOTE ON VISIBILITY OF JAPAN  
I.  
Introduction 
On  6  October  2009,  the  Asian  Development  Bank  Board  of  Directors  approved  the  Revised 
Operating  Framework  for  the  Japan  Fund  for  Poverty  Reduction  (JFPR),  thereby  combining 
Japan’s project grant and technical assistance support under one umbrella, and paving the way 
for  a  more  comprehensive  approach  to  the  use  of  these  funds  towards  addressing  poverty, 
building up human resources, and empowering institutions and communities in the region. Japan 
has  been  making  generous  contributions  for  technical  assistance  activities  through  the  Japan 
Special Fund, and for poverty reduction projects through JFPR, since their establishment in 1988 
and  2000,  respectively.  It  is  but  fitting  and  proper  that  these  contributions  should  be 
acknowledged, and the recipients and general public are informed of the source of the funding 
assistance both at the Fund level and at the level of the individual technical assistance (TA) and 
project grants. The purpose of this note is to provide guidance on measures to ensure that the 
contribution of Japan in supporting JFPR is widely recognized.  
II.  
Statement on Japanese Visibility 
The JFPR Policy Guidelines provide general guidance on Japan Visibility and Coordination with 
Local Embassy of Japan Officials. More specifically, task teams are encouraged to help promote 
the visibility and local awareness of JFPR in recipient countries through the following:  
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
(e) 
(g)  
Publications, training programs, seminars and workshops financed by JFPR grants 
should clearly indicate that the activities in question have received funding from 
the Government of Japan;  
The JFPR logo (see below) should be used in publications financed by the JFPR 
program, and in banners and any other materials used in seminars and training 
programs financed by JFPR grants;  
All press releases issued by ADB with respect to JFPR grants should refer to the 
financial contribution from the Government of Japan (GOJ);  
Recipients should be encouraged to ensure that JFPR-financed activities are well 
covered by local print and electronic media, and that all related publicity materials, 
official  notices,  reports  and  publications  explicitly  acknowledge  Japan  as  the 
source of funding received;  
Grant signing ceremonies in the field should be encouraged, with the Recipients 
being encouraged to include Japanese embassy officials and to invite local and 
international press to these ceremonies; and 
Civil works, project billboards/signages, vehicles, and equipment should carry the 
JFPR and Japan Official Development Assistance (ODA) (see below) logos.  
In  addition,  Partner  Funds  Division  (SDPF)  may  promote  visibility  of  JFPR  by:  (i)  informing 
Country Directors of the importance of signing ceremonies to Japanese officials and the public to 
ensure recognition and support for JFPR funding; and (ii) continuing widespread distribution of 
the  JFPR  Annual  Report,  inclusion  of  JFPR  information  in  relevant  ADB  documents,  and 
occasional information sessions for Japanese organizations. Below are examples of other ways 
to improve visibility.  
66 
Appendix 1 
III.  
The JFPR and Japan ODA Logos 
The JFPR and Japan ODA logos will be used on the JFPR website. All grant approval notifications 
will include this guidance note and a printout of the logos. Soft copies (a pdf version and an Adobe 
Illustrator  version)  may  be  downloaded  from  the  SDPF  website  for  use  by  the  ADB  and 
transmission to grant recipients. The ADB will make every effort to ensure that: (i) publications, 
training  programs, seminars,  workshops, financed  by  the  JFPR  grants clearly  indicate  that  the 
activities in question have received funding from the Government of Japan; (ii) all press releases 
issued  by  the  ADB  with  respect  to  the  JFPR  grants  refer  to  the  financial  contribution  of 
Government of Japan; and (iii) the logos are used in publications financed by the JFPR program, 
banners and any other materials used in seminars and training programs financed by the JFPR 
grants; as well as on civil works projects, vehicles, equipment, etc.  
IV.  
Local Publicity Opportunities 
In  addition  to  the  use  of  the  logos,  ADB  staff  are  urged  to  take  all  appropriate  measures  to 
encourage Recipients to ensure that JFPR-financed activities are well covered by local print and 
electronic media, and that all related publicity materials, official notices, reports and publications 
explicitly  acknowledge  Japan  as  the  source  of  funding  received.  Below  is  a  standard  text 
suggested for use by those who prepare publicity materials: "The grant which financed this (name 
of activity) was received under the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction which is financed by the 
Government of Japan."  
Many  ADB  Resident  Missions  periodically  publish  newsletters.  New  grant  approvals,  signing 
ceremonies, and major project activities should be publicized in these newsletters. Most country 
offices have External Relations staff. Project/TA teams are encouraged to consult with them on 
ways to increase the visibility of Japan regarding JFPR grants. Opportunities to publish articles 
on high visibility projects prepared with the JFPR TA and project grants should be explored and 
utilized.  Project/TA teams  are  advised  to  brief the Country  Directors  about  the  implementation 
status  of  JFPR  grants.  Such  information  will  help  the  Resident  Missions  highlight  Japan's 
contribution, where relevant, in their meetings and presentations in seminars and workshops.  
V.  
Ceremonial Events 
Country Directors, Division Directors, and the Project/TA Officers will receive notification of grant 
approvals and will be informed of the importance of signing ceremonies to Japanese officials and 
the public. At grant signing ceremonies and other publicity events, the ADB's country-based staff 
are expected to foster the attendance and participation of country-based officials of the Embassy 
of Japan in a manner that provides due recognition of their donor status. Grant recipients should 
take the lead in organizing such ceremonies, and whenever possible, Recipients should issue the 
formal  invitation  to  attend.  Such  ceremonial  events  should  also  be  alerted  to  the  media  and 
publicity outlets referred to above.  
VI.  
Participation of Japanese Entities in Implementation 
To promote GOJ’s continued support for JFPR, it is also important to generate visibility for the 
project  within  Japan.  SDPF  will  promote  the  visibility  of  the  JFPR  by:  (i)  informing  Office  and 
Department Heads of the importance of achieving high visibility in order to garner support for the 
JFPR  from  Japanese  officials  and  taxpayers;  (ii)  encouraging  TA  components  that  involve  or 
cooperate  with  Japanese  experts,  expertise,  financial  resources  and  technologies;  and  (iii) 
continuing widespread distribution of the JFPR Annual Report, inclusion of JFPR information in 
Appendix 1 
67 
relevant  ADB  documents,  and  occasional  information  sessions  on  JFPR  for  Japanese 
organizations. In terms of enhancing the visibility of Japan, it is highly recommended that ADB 
involve and cooperate with Japanese organizations, including NGOs, civil society organizations, 
aid agencies, particularly JBIC and JICA, private sector enterprises, or academic institutions.  
VII.   Visibility at ADB Headquarters 
Country-based ADB staff are requested to forward copies of all visibility material, such as press 
releases, newspaper and magazine articles, and photographs (including descriptive captions) to 
the  following  address:  Japan  Partnerships  Team,  SDPF,  Asian  Development  Bank,  6  ADB 
Avenue, Ortigas Center Mandaluyong City 1550 Philippines. 
68 
Appendix 2 
JAPAN FUND FOR POVERTY REDUCTION – GUIDANCE NOTE ON COORDINATION WITH 
THE EMBASSY OF JAPAN AND JICA 
I.  
Introduction 
The Final Report on the Review of Japanese Official Development Assistance (ODA) underscores 
the need for strategic and effective aid. One way to ensure alignment of Japan Fund for Poverty 
Reduction  (JFPR)  projects  and  technical  assistance  (TA)  with  Government  of  Japan’s  (GOJ) 
bilateral assistance strategy for a particular developing member country (DMC) is by bringing on 
board the comments and suggestions of the Embassy of Japan (EOJ). Thus, under JFPR, project 
officers are required to consult with the local EOJ about the project proposal before submitting 
the TA Summary and Report/Grant Summary and Report and Recommendation to the President 
(RRP) to Partner Funds Division (SDPF) for processing. This Guidance Note provides detailed 
instructions regarding coordination activities with the EOJ and Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA).  
Embassy of Japan and the Japan International Cooperation Agency Contact 
II.  
Persons 
The names of EOJ and JICA contact persons and their contact details are listed in a table which 
is posted in the SDPF website. The list is provided to SDPF by Japan’s Ministry of Finance and 
is updated from time to time. It is important to confirm the details in the table before contacting 
EOJ.  
III.  
Role of the Resident Mission and the SDPF 
Communications with EOJ and JICA should be done with copy to the Resident Mission (RM) or 
the  relevant  Country  Officer  at  ADB  HQ  and  with  SDPF.  If  needed,  RM’s  assistance  may  be 
sought to arrange the meeting with EOJ and JICA.  
RM’s role is also crucial in arranging the Grant Agreement/TA letter signing event (section V) and 
in overall coordination/relationship management with EOJ and JICA.  
Consultation with Embassy of Japan and the Japan International Cooperation 
IV.  
Agency–Concept Stage  
A meeting with the EOJ and JICA contact person should be scheduled during the Fact-Finding 
Mission. During the meeting, the Grant or TA Summary, together with the Design and Monitoring 
Framework, must be explained to and discussed with the embassy officer.  
The Grant or TA Summary and the Design and Monitoring Framework should be submitted to 
EOJ and JICA at least five working days before the consultation to give EOJ time to review the 
document.  
Any comments made by EOJ and/or JICA should be reflected and a summary of the consultation 
should  be  included  in  the  final  TA  Summary  and  Report  (TSR)  or  Grant  Summary  and  RRP 
(GSR), as the case may be.  
The project officer should exert all efforts to meet with EOJ and JICA contact persons. However, 
if a meeting with EOJ and/or JICA is not possible, email exchange, telephonic discussion or any 
Appendix 2 
69 
other  form  of  inter-active  communication  may  be  used.  In  such  cases,  an  email  containing 
EOJ's/JICA’s comments on the proposal should be sought and reflected in the final proposal.  
In the case of Regional TAs, draft TSRs and DMFs should be sent by email to EOJ and JICA 
focal persons on no-objection basis.  
Coordination  Local  Embassy  of  Japan  and  the  Japan  International  Cooperation 
V.  
Agency–Upon Approval of the Proposal 
Once the proposal has been approved by ADB, the project officer should inform EOJ and JICA 
about  the  approval.  Project  officers  are  strongly  encouraged  to  stage  signing  ceremonies  or 
launching ceremonies for JFPR projects, etc., with the attendance of EOJ officials.  
In coordination with the RM, the project officer should inform EOJ as well as SDPF – which will 
alert  the  Japanese  authorities  in  Tokyo  –  at  least  10  working  days  in  advance  of  the  signing 
ceremony. The project officer should also draft news release in consultation with the Department 
of External Relations and coordinate arrangements for the RM to invite the local and international 
press to these ceremonies.  
Coordination  with  the  Local  Embassy  of  Japan  and  the  Japan  International 
VI.  
Cooperation Agency–During Project Implementation and Upon Project Completion 
From  time  to  time,  EOJ  and  JICA  should  be  informed  about  project  progress  and  milestones 
especially when major changes in scope and objectives are required. Throughout all phases of 
the project, from concept to completion, the project officers should answer inquiries from EOJ and 
JICA regarding the project and discuss where necessary. EOJ and JICA officials may also wish 
to join progress and completion review missions in order to see project results and to interact first-
hand with project recipients.  
Project officers are also required to share information on the outcomes and lessons from JFPR 
projects and TAs with EOJ and JICA in the field to enable both sides to explore and seek potential 
collaboration. 
70 
Appendix 3 
STAKEHOLDER COMMUNICATIONS STRATEGY 
Objective 
OBJECTIVE 1: EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION WITH PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS  
Audience 
Risk 
Desired 
Behavior 
Information 
Needs 
Channel / Activity 
Timing 
Respons-
ibility 
Resource 
Needs 
Expected 
Outcome 
Output 1. Community grower groups organized  
Effective 
communication 
with 
communities in 
project soums 
for informed and 
supportive 
engagement. 
Limited 
engagement 
due to poorly 
informed 
communities, 
or due to time 
limitation. 
Farming 
households of 
4 project 
soums namely 
Bornuur in Tuv 
aimag, Orkhon 
in Darkhan-
Uul, Yeruu in 
Selenge, and 
Ulaangom in 
Uvs. 
Well informed 
farmer 
households 
engage in 
community-
based 
production of 
vegetables. 
Advantages and 
potential of 
community-based 
approach to 
vegetable farming.  
The operational 
rules of CGGs and 
responsibilities of 
participating 
households. 
The project’s orientation 
program and introductory 
training 
2018 
Executing 
Agency, 
PIU 
Meeting venues in each project 
soum 
Designated information points 
in each project soum (likely the 
soum governor’s offices)  
Posters, forms in Mongolian on 
meeting locations and times 
Local media e.g. TV, radio 
PIU staff time 
Printed 
materials 
(posters, forms) 
Budget line for 
interaction with 
local media  
Engagement of 
farming 
households in 
CGGs and the 
readiness of CGGs 
to prepare action 
plans and seek 
endorsement by 
soum authorities.  
Farming 
families in 4 
project soums 
and relevant 
soum 
authorities  
Output 2. Sustainable climate-resilient vegetable farming technology and practices applied 
Effective 
communication 
with often 
remote 
households in 
project soums, 
especially poor 
households and 
households 
headed by 
women, so they 
may access and 
benefit from the 
project 
Limited 
engagement 
by poor, and 
remote 
households 
and 
households 
headed by 
women due to 
limited means 
of transport or 
communication 
CGGs 
develop and 
begin to 
implement 
their action 
plans and use 
project 
resources, 
(infrastructure, 
agro-inputs, 
equipment 
technology) 
Information on 
scope for adjusting 
action plans, ways 
of ensuring 
trouble-free use of 
shared resources 
of CGGs, financial 
aspects of CGG 
operations  
Local media 
CGG action plans 
presented in user-
friendly ways (e.g. 
posters, calendars) 
and provided to 
communities  
PIU technical specialists 
visiting project locations  
Designated information points 
in each project soum (likely the 
soum governor’s offices)  
Posters, leaflets in Mongolian 
on meeting locations and times 
2018–
2020 
Executing 
Agency, 
PIU 
CGG households 
begin to apply the 
community model, 
begin to see its 
advantages and 
are open to more 
innovation.  
PIU staff time 
Printed 
materials 
(posters, 
leaflets, 
technical 
information 
(“how to”) 
sheets, 
calendars) 
Budget line for 
interaction with 
local media  
Output 3. Farmers’ access to market improved 
 Farmers have 
better access to 
the market and 
CGGs may 
initially lack the 
business 
acumen 
CGG 
households, 
Soum 
authorities, 
CGGs willing 
to consider 
new ways of 
selling and 
Information on 
value chain 
opportunities and 
obstacles 
Specialized training in project 
soums by PIU technical 
advisers  
2018–
2020 
Executing 
Agency, 
PIU, 
farmer 
PIU staff time 
Printed 
materials 
CGG having 
reasons to be 
increasingly 
confident of their 
Objective 
can financially 
benefit from it  
Audience 
selected 
municipal 
authorities, 
consumers in 
town centers  
Desired 
Behavior 
adding value 
to their 
produce 
Soum and 
aimag 
authorities 
supportive of 
value chain 
development 
by farmer 
groups  
Risk 
required to 
succeed in the 
market  
Vested 
interests may 
not welcome 
the entry of 
farmer groups 
into areas 
(such as 
distribution of 
the produce) 
they formerly 
controlled  
Appendix 3 
71 
Information 
Needs 
Channel / Activity 
Interaction with other growers 
and participants in the 
vegetable business at national 
producers’ fairs  
Timing 
Respons-
ibility 
themselve
s through 
learning  
Resource 
Needs 
(posters, 
leaflets, 
technical 
information 
sheets) 
Expected 
Outcome 
capacity to improve 
their financial 
results by more 
fully utilizing the 
vegetable value 
chain.   
Budget line for 
CGG members 
to participate in 
trade and 
producer fairs 
OBJECTIVE 2: EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATIONS WITH DONORS, PARTNERS AND THE SOCIETY AT LARGE  
Local, national news releases; 
Informed and 
Public and 
interviews with aimag and 
supportive 
donors’ 
soum governments, 
constituency 
awareness of 
information supplied to 
at the national 
and support of 
MOFALI to “strengthen its 
level and 
the project 
hand” 
continued 
philosophy and 
support by 
objectives 
donors  
Dissemination of 
project rationale, 
its objectives and 
activities, focusing 
on results and 
impacts 
The public 
unwilling to 
consider 
vegetables 
important 
enough amid 
other 
concerns.  
General 
public, local 
and national 
media, CSOs, 
civil servants, 
donor 
organizations  
Briefings/consultations with key 
politicians, committees, CSOs 
Donor have 
doubts about 
the 
sustainability of 
the community 
model  
Grant signing ceremony with 
media with GOJ attendance 
Forming technical and 
information networks with other 
donors active in natural 
resource management and 
agriculture in Mongolia  
Public support for 
local vegetable 
producers, 
awareness of this 
activity’s potential 
and its economic 
and health 
benefits, and 
continued support 
by the international 
donor community.   
201–7-
2020 
Executing 
Agency, 
PIU,  
ADB 
project 
team, 
MNRM 
PIU staff time. –  
ADB staff time 
allocated to 
foster continued 
support of 
multiple donors 
of community-
based farming  
Budget line for 
interaction with 
local media  
JFPR and 
Japan ODA 
logos on all 
materials 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; CGG = community grower group; CSO = civil society organization; GOJ = Government of Japan; JFPR = Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction; 
MNRM = ADB Resident Mission in Mongolia; MOFALI = Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Light Industry; ODA = Official Development Assistance of Japan Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs; PIU = project implementation unit.  
Source: ADB. 
72 
Appendix 4 
NOTES FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROJECT 
Appendix 4 
73 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
These notes identify key implementation-related aspects of the project. They are intended 
to reinforce the understanding by the executing agency, and project implementation unit (PIU) of 
the intent of the main elements of the project. The notes are organized by key activities under 
each  project  output  and  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  project  design  and  monitoring 
framework (DMF), implementation schedule, budget, procurement plan, and consultant terms of 
reference (TOR). 
Output 1. Community grower groups established. 
A.   
Principles of Community Grower Groups 
2. 
The  PIU  should  apply  a  set  of  principles  in  establishing  CGGs.  These  should  apply  to 
training  project  soum  coordinators,  setting  up  CGG,  and  developing  community  group  action 
plans (CGAP). 
Principles for Training Project Soum Coordinators 
(i) 
The  PIU  should  provide  induction  training  that  includes  the  project  itself  (objectives, 
expected  results,  activities,  and  budget);  the  role  of  project  soum  coordinator,  and  key 
activities to be carried out by the project soum coordinators. 
(ii)  The  PIU  should  provide  training  in  facilitating  skills,  participatory,  and  adult  learning 
methods; working with CCGs, and conducting consultations with the local community. 
(iii)  The PIU should provide training in community farming principles and practices, including 
pooling  of  resources,  use  of  shared  resources  and  setting  up  a  community  growers’ 
scheme.    
Principles for Setting-up CGGs 
(i) 
Project  soum  coordinators  hold  consultations  in each  soum  on  the  project,  introduce the 
concept of CGGs, their potential advantages and operating principles. 
(ii)  Member of groups will be households, not individuals or companies. 
(iii)  Groups  must  consist  of  only  vegetable  growing  households  owning  plots  smaller  than  3 
hectares (ha). 
(iv)  Members should preferably have been involved in vegetable growing in previous 2 years. 
(v)  The CGGs can be formed in all baghs, including the soum center bagh. 
(vi)  Members within a group should preferably have adjacent plots. 
(vii)  Each group should include 5–10 households, depending on sizes of members’ plots. 
(viii)  Total number of CGGs in a soum should be no more than 10. 
(ix)  The  CGGs  need  to  register  with  the  soum  coordinators.  The  registration  should  provide 
information on:   
a)  a rationale for the CGGs, possible existence of other groups in the area (e.g. groups 
formed by other donor projects) and the expected relations between them and the CGG 
being registered. 
b)  The number of households involved, and their location. 
c)  The number of households in the group classified as poor 1and vulnerable according to 
the project definition of having 1 hectare or less of land.  
d)  The number of households in the group that are headed by women. 
1 Poor households in the project are classified as those having 1 or less than 1 ha of land.  
74 
Appendix 4 
(x) 
Inclusion of a CCG into the project will consider the following: 
a)  All  households  are  considered  vulnerable  and  poor  with  limited  agriculture  land 
resources, having 1 hectare or less of land.   
b)  The number of households headed by women. 
c)  The fit of the rationale provided with the project goals. 
(xi)  Project  soum  coordinators  will  present  recommendations  for  setting  up  CGGs  to  soum 
governor. 
Principles for Developing Community Group Action Plans 
(i) 
Plans should be developed by CGG members themselves, assisted by project, as needed. 
(ii)  Based on the project implementation plan, budget, PIU should estimate an average amount 
of funds that it can support each CGG for first 2 years of the project duration.  
(iii)  Given the amount of funds available, action plan for groups may need to be adjusted taking 
into account:  
a)  Current plot sizes of each household.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
Size of the plot each household intends to use for vegetable production during project 
duration. 
Types and quantities of existing pool of equipment, hand tools, and facilities (storage) 
that can be shared with other groups members. 
Types and quantities of equipment  and hand  tools  the  group  would  like to  procure 
with project support, in order of priority. 
e)  Current harvest (type, quantity) per ha. 
f) 
g) 
h)  Current revenue from vegetable growing. 
i) 
Amount of harvest per ha members expect each year during project duration. 
Types of vegetables to be planted in each plot, or segments of a plot. 
Expected revenue from vegetable growing each year during project duration. 
(iv)  Actions  in  each  action  plan  should  be  then  be  prioritized  to  make  them  compatible  with 
available budget. 
(v)  Project soum coordinators recommend to the PIU which planned activities the project can 
support.  The PIU decision is communicated to project soum coordinators, who inform the 
CGGs and then present the final CGAP to the soum governor for approval. 
(vi)  CGAPs are to be displayed graphically, for example in a calendar, showing which actions 
are expected to take place and when.  
(vii)  CGAPs are to initially cover 2 years. At the end of the second year, plans will be reviewed 
and  updated  for  the  next  2  years.  The  project  will  continue  its  support  to  groups  with 
satisfactory results and reward good results by considering the group for additional support.   
(viii)  Good examples of implementation of CGAPs are to be presented in the symposium. 
B. 
Key Training and Steps for Participatory Community Farming Planning for CGGs 
The PIU’s community development expert, and soum coordinators provide orientation to 
3. 
vegetable grower communities and soum administrations on collaborative farming, and potential 
advantages  of  CGGs.  If  the  rationale  of  CGGs  is  accepted  the  soum  coordinators  recruit  and 
register the CGGs, the soum coordinators train the CGGs on concepts of collaborative farming 
and developing the CGAPs.  
In summary, collaborative community farming⎯to be carried out by the CGGs⎯includes 
4. 
six steps, which the soum coordinator will oversee for each of the registered CGGs:  
Appendix 4 
75 
Step 1.  
Introduce  concepts  of  community-based  farming  and  obtain  support  for  the 
collaborative approach. 
Step 2.   Position the CCGs to implement community-based farming. 
Step 3.   Establish an inventory of existing resources potentially available to CGGs and 
specify the rules that are to govern the use of these resources. 
Step 4.   Develop the community farming action plans. 
Step 5. 
Step 6.   Participatory monitoring and evaluation. 
Implement the community farming action plans. 
After Step 4, the revised and finalized CGAPs are submitted to the soum administrations 
5. 
for approval. The soum coordinators with the backing of the project should provide support to the 
CGGs in implementing the CGAPs, (Step 5) and in monitoring the implementation of the CGAPs 
(Step 6). 
C.  
Example of An Input Table for the CGAP 
Following is an example of an input table for a CGAP that a CGG in Yeruu soum could 
6. 
prepare.  (CGAPs  by  CGGs  in  Bornuur,  Orkhon,  and  Ulaangom  soums  could  include  different 
actions) After the input table has been completed and approved by the soum administration (see 
principles above in Section A.3) the project could produce a graphical version of the plan, such 
as a wall calendar. 
The actual format for  both CGG input tables and the graphical version of the approved 
7. 
plan should be developed and finalized by the PIU during the first year of implementation. 
i. Existing tools and equipment available for sharing  
Member households 
Plough 
Harrow 
Cultivator 
Seeder 
Harvester 
1. XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9. 
10. 
ii. Tools and equipment to be procured with the project support 
Plough 
Harrow 
Cultivator 
Seeder 
Harvester 
Member household 
(to be responsible for 
keeping track) 
1. XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
Other & 
Hand 
tools 
Other & 
Hand 
tools 
76 
Appendix 4 
Member household 
(to be responsible for 
keeping track) 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9. 
10. 
Plough 
Harrow 
Cultivator 
Seeder 
Harvester 
Other & 
Hand 
tools 
iii. Schedule for use (and maintenance until handing over) 
of shared tool equipment for 2019 
Members ) 
Plough 
Harrow 
Cultivator 
Seeder 
Harvester 
Hand 
tools 
6/15 
9/15 
1. XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9. 
10. 
5/10/2019 
5/11 
5/12 
5/13 
5/14 
5/15 
5/16 
5/17 
Member 
household 
Requesting 
project 
support for 
greenhouses 
If yes, expected 
size of the 
requested 
greenhouse 
iv. Interests in using greenhouses to be supported by the project 
Have 
previously 
tried growing 
in a 
greenhouse? 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
50 m2 
50 m2 
30 m2 
1000 m2 
80 m2 
1. XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9. 
10. 
v. Plot size 
Can share the 
greenhouse with whom 
(name of the member)? 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
Members 
1. XXXXXXX 
in open field 
Plot size 
in 2018 
Plot size in 
2019 
Plot size in 
2020 
Plot size in 
2021 
Appendix 4 
77 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9 
10 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
vi. Vegetables to be planted in 2019, area in are (100м2) 
Cucumbe
r 
2 
0.3 
Tomato 
Carrot 
Spinach 
6 
0.2 
0.2 
… 
Turni
p 
5 
Members 
1. XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9. 
10. 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
vii. Vegetables to be harvested in 2019, in tons unless specified otherwise 
Members 
1. XXXXXXX 
Cucumber  Tomato 
Carrot 
Spinach  Turnip  … 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
2 
0.3 
6 
5 
0.2 
0.2 
78 
Appendix 4 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9. 
10. 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
viii. Area to be planted, area in are (100м2). Member name: XXXXXXX 
Year 
Cucumber  Tomato 
Carrot 
Spinach 
Turnip  … 
2 
0.3 
0.2 
6 
5 
0.2 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
in open field 
in greenhouse(s) 
ix. Vegetables to be harvested, in tons unless specified otherwise. Member name: XXXXXXX 
Year 
Cucumber  Tomato  Carrot  Spinach  Turnip 
… 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
from open field 
from greenhouse(s) 
from open field 
from greenhouse(s) 
from open field 
from greenhouse(s) 
from open field 
from greenhouse(s) 
2 
0.3 
6 
5 
0.2 
0.2 
J. Revenue from vegetable growing, in MNTs 
Member 
name: 
XXXXX 
Appendix 4 
79 
Year 
1. XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9. 
10. 
Total 
Cucumber  Tomato 
Carrot 
Spinach 
… 
Total 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
from greenhouses 
from open field 
YYYYYY 
from greenhouses  YYYYYY 
YYYYYY  YYYYYY  YYYYYY  YYYYYY  YYYYYY 
YYYYYY  YYYYYY  YYYYYY  YYYYYY  YYYYYY 
X. Contribution to the community scheme, in MNTs 
Members 
1. XXXXXXX 
2. XXXXXXX 
3. XXXXXXX 
4. XXXXXXX 
5. XXXXXXX 
6. XXXXXXX 
7. XXXXXXX 
8. XXXXXXX 
9 
10 
Total 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Total 
Year 
160000 
150000 
170000 
80000 
150000 
170000 
   25,000,000  
Signature and seal of soum governor                              
Date: ________________ 
Signature of CGG leader  
                                               Date: ________________ 
80 
Appendix 4 
Set  up  the  community  growers’  scheme  for  operation,  maintenance  and 
D. 
reinvestment 
8. 
After the CGGs are established, the project will support the creation and initial facilitation 
the  community  growers’ scheme  for  operation, maintenance and  expansion  by  contributing  an 
amount specified in the budget. Contribution to the fund from project funds will be phased during 
the  four  years  of  the  project;  for  example,  the  project  funds  will  contribute  a  100%  to  the 
community growers’ scheme in year 1, 50% in year 2 (with remaining 50% contribution from CGG 
member  households),  25%  in  year  3  (with  remaining  75%  contribution  from  CGG  member 
households), and 0% in year 4 (community will contribute 100%). Each CGG member (household 
level) will be required to contribute to the fund. The project will help communities to draft rules 
and regulations for the community growers’ scheme, including withdrawal procedures and amount 
of  contribution  by  each  member.  The  objective  of  the  fund  is  to  support  operation  and 
maintenance  of facilities and  equipment  provided  by the  project  and to create  seed capital for 
sustainable farming for project farmers by replacing and/or expanding the shared resources. 
Output  2.  Sustainable  Climate-Resilient  Vegetable  Farming  Technology  and  Practices 
Applied. 
A. 
Procurement of Infrastructure, Tools, Equipment for Community Grower Groups 
i.   
Procurement of Tractors, Equipment and Tools for Project Soums  
For  all  four  project  soums,  the  project  should  provide  each  soum  a  tractor  with  engine 
9. 
capacity  of  no  less  than  70  horse  power.  Tractors  from  producers  in  various  countries  are 
available; the project should consult with farmers to identify their preferences in terms of capacity 
and axle size. Availability of parts, fuel consumption, match with the tools that farmers already 
have or to acquire with project support, and dealership services should be considered. Suppliers 
may not have preferred tractors in stock in Mongolia, but they can import upon order. Therefore, 
lead  time  of  several  months  may  be  necessary.  The  initial  owners  of  the  tractor  will  be  soum 
administrations. Tractors will be shared among all CGGs in the soum under clear rules for sharing 
the running and maintenance cost. Soum coordinators will need to develop daily schedules for 
use  of  the  tractor.  PIU  shall  establish  an  agreement  with  soum  administration  on  the  use  of 
tractors restricting their use for project-related purposes only.  
In  all  four  project  soums,  the  project  will  provide  some  equipment  and  tools  (plough, 
10. 
harrow, cultivator, seeder, harvester, motoblock, and the like) to be shared among members of 
CGGs,  with  households  assigned  responsibility  for  their  maintenance  and  running  cost  of  the 
equipment. Procurement be made after registering and assessing existing equipment and tools 
that can be shared within the CGG. Sharing between CGGs should not be ruled out.    
11. 
PIU should only supply equipment and tools to CGSs that have specifically requested the 
equipment and tools in their approved action plan and have a rationale and actions for why they 
require the equipment and tools.  
ii.  
Set Up CGGs Greenhouses  
12. 
PIU shall manage the procurement of small-scale greenhouses to be shared among CCGs 
households  for  vegetable  growing  in  the  main  soums  and  for  seed  testing  and  improving  in 
Ulaangom soum. Several factors should be considered under this activity. 
Appendix 4 
81 
(i)  Location:  Land  for  greenhouse  should not  have  high  level  of  underground  water  to 
prevent salinization. Location with good exposure to sunlight and easy access by CGG 
households shall be preferred.  
(ii)  Shared use: Although sharing a greenhouse should be encouraged by the project, risk 
of  contamination  increases  with  the  number  of  people  that  are  allowed  in  the 
greenhouse.  This  factor  should  be  taken  into  account  in  deciding  how  many  small 
greenhouses to establish, and where.   
(iii)  Proliferation: Members who  received  project  support for  establishing  a  greenhouse 
should contribute a higher amount to the community growers’ scheme than those who 
have not yet benefitted. The size of such contribution should be clearly specified while 
the operating principles of CGGs are drafted.  
(iv)  Technology:  There  are  numerous  greenhouses  technologies  and  techniques  used 
around the world. The international agronomist and agri-business specialist, national 
agronomist, and national community development expert⎯will make recommendations 
on the most promising from among the existing options to be supported by the project.    
The project shall procure a large all-season greenhouse in one of the project soums in 
13. 
2019 to be operated by a CGG that has shown the greatest success in implementing its CGAP. 
There  are,  at  present,  few  proven  designs  and  technologies  for  all-season  greenhouses  in 
Mongolia (see the information sheet on greenhouses in the attachments to this document). The 
all-season greenhouse to be procured by the project will therefore be a pilot component designed 
to  test  existing  and  new  features  (e.g.  use  of  renewable  energy  for  heating)  of  greenhouse 
operations in Mongolian conditions climate.  Greenhouses shall be supplied only to CGGs that 
have  specifically  requested  them  in  their  action  plan,  and  provided  a  good  justification  for 
requesting this technology. 
iii.  
Provide Protective Clothes for Each CGG 
The project shall purchase and distribute protective clothing to be used by CGG members 
14. 
when applying pesticides using knapsack sprayers. It is assumed that each group will need one 
set of protective clothing.  
iv.  
Provide Agrochemicals to Each CGG 
15. 
The project shall procure agrochemicals (pesticides and fertilizers) to each CCGs in 2018 
and  2019.  It  is  expected  that  CGGs,  using the community  growers’ scheme resources,  will  be 
able  to  purchase  pesticides  and  fertilizers  without  project  support  from  2020  onwards.  Use  of 
agrochemicals should be based on soil quality tests and best farming practices in Mongolia, and 
require approval by the project agronomist.  
B.  
Support Seed Growing and Propagation in Ulaangom, Uvs 
i.  
Provide Support for Improving Water Access in Gashuunii Gol, Ulaangom 
The project shall support construction of a water well, and reticulation to improve access 
16. 
to water in seed growing fields in Gashuunii gol, Ulaangom soum. PIU should contract a firm that 
specializes in well installation.  
82 
Appendix 4 
ii.  
Provide Support for Improving Water Access in Chandmani, Ulaangom 
17. 
The project will procure an electricity line to three existing but unconnected-to-grid wells 
in Chandmani, Ulaangom. The wells are located on land owned by the Uvs Branch of the Institute 
of  Plant  and  Agriculture  Sciences  (IPAS).  The  construction  of  the  grid  connection  shall  be 
conditional on IPAS readiness to make at least 5 ha of its land available free of charge for CGGs 
for seed production for a period of at least 15 years or with nominal rent. A tri-patriate agreement 
to this effect should be signed by Uvs aimag Governor, IPAS and CGGs.  
C.  
Test Soil to Establish Baseline for Soil Quality 
The PIU should support testing of soil in 2018 in all four project soums to establish baseline 
18. 
soil quality. The laboratory to test the soil quality should be chosen in consultation with MOFALI. 
Quality of soil in Bornuur soum has already been tested in international laboratories with supports 
from JICA. Test results should be compared with this data. 
D.  
Provide Mother Seed, and Seed to All Groups 
For  all  four  project  soums,  PIU  should  organize  supply  of mother  seed  and seed to  all 
19. 
CGGs.  In  Ulaangom  soum,  Uvs  branch  of  IPAS  will  be  the  supplier  of  mother  seed  to  seed 
growing  CGGs.  In  the  first  years  of  project  implementation,  when  production  of  seed  is  not 
sufficient to meet demands in the three main soums, project shall support purchase of seed from 
Uvs branch of IPAS. It was agreed that MOFALI will serve as intermediary to obtain at-cost seed 
prices for project CGGs. If and when CGGs in Ulaangom produces enough seed to meet demands 
of farmers in the three main soums, project will support transportation of seed from Uvs to the 
three project soums. Purchase of seed from Ulaangom by CGGs should be on voluntary basis.  
E.  
Provide Training on Sustainable Farming  
The  PIU  should implement  training  program for 2018−2020  in all  four  project  soums  in 
20. 
sustainable  farming.  The  training  should  cover  topics  such  as  greenhouse  operations  efficient 
water use and water saving practices, crop rotation, seed selection, farming best practices and 
use of equipment. 
Output 3. Farmers Access to Markets Improved 
A.  
Provide Facilities Intended to Increase Farmers Access to Market 
i.  
Set Up Shared Storage Facilities 
Shared  storage  facility  with  different  capacities  (150  tons  in  Orkhon  soum,  100 tons  in 
21. 
Yeruu soum and 60 tons in Ulaangom soum) will be constructed in 2019 with project support. No 
storage  facility  will  be  built  in  Bornuur  soum.  There  is  a  large  variety  of  storage  methods  in 
Mongolia starting from traditional below-ground storage to large, modern mechanized facilities. 
MOFALI’s  current  policy  does  not  support  repair  and  construction  of  traditional  below-ground 
storage. The PIU agronomist, community development expert, and soum coordinators will identify 
the type of storage facilities most appropriate for the needs of project CGGs.  
ii.  
Establish Vegetable Processing and Packaging Facility in Orkhon 
22. 
The  project  is  likely  to  support  construction  of  a  vegetable  processing  and  packaging 
facility (VPPF) in Orkhon soum in 2019. The justification, design, and equipment for the facility 
Appendix 4 
83 
will  be  described  in  a  proposal  prepared  by  a  resource  person  engaged  during  the  project 
preparation. In additional to the amount specified in the project budget, $100,000 will be financed 
from RETA funding to establish the VPPF. 
The owner of VPPF should be any one or more CGGs established with the project support, 
23. 
or their individual members. In order to efficiently use and manage the facility the owners may 
need  to  establish  an  organizational  structure  that  is  more  formal  than  CGGs  such  as  a 
cooperative,  or  a  limited  liability  company  with  multiple  members.  To  encourage  good 
performance, PIU may restrict the membership of the formal structure only to CGG members who 
are satisfactorily implementing their CGAPs. The VPPF could purchase its inputs from any CGG 
or  individuals although  preference  should  be  given  to  produce  grown  by  VPPF  owners.  In  the 
event the available budget is insufficient to fund both construction of building for VPPF and the 
equipment. PIU shall consider the possibility of a long-term lease of a building in Orkhon soum, 
or an offer of co-ownership of VPPF to the owner of the existing building.   
iii.  
Rent a Shared, Mechanized Storage Facility 
24. 
The project will support renting of an appropriate storage facility near/in Ulaanbaatar City, 
to  be  shared  by  CGGs  from  all  three  main  project  soums  who  are  selling  their  produce  in 
Ulaanbaatar. MOFALI has recently stopped construction of new storage facilities in Ulaanbaatar 
preferring  instead  to make a more  efficient  use of these facilities including  renting  them  to  the 
project. If so, this option would be based on a tri-patriate agreement between MOFALI, the project 
and the storage manager. The project budget foresees renting of such a facility for 9−10 months 
a year for 3 years between 2019−2021 including the salaries of the warehouse staff.  
iv.  
Set Up Kiosks in Ulaanbaatar City for Selling Products 
25. 
The main objective  of the kiosks  is to  increase the  share  of the  final  price going  to the 
growers  rather  than accruing  to  existing  intermediaries.  Setting  up the  kiosks is  conditional  on 
Ulaanbaatar Municipality  granting  necessary  land  use  permit. MOFALI  has  agreed  to  assist  in 
seeking  such  an  authorization.  A  tri-patriate  agreement  among  MOFALI,  Ulaanbaatar  City 
administration  and the  project  specifying  rules for  use  land the  kiosks  would  be  required.  The 
kiosks are expected to be placed within or close to residential areas including gher areas, but not 
necessarily  in  the  city  center  where  access  to  land  is  severely  constrained.  Project  financing 
would  cover  all  activities  related  to  the  kiosks  including  design,  procurement  and  setting  up. 
Operational cost of the kiosks will be paid by CGGs selling their produce at the kiosk.  
v.  
Set Up Sale Points Along Main Roads Going to the East from Ulaanbaatar 
The project will support construction of a sale point along the road from eastern aimags to 
26. 
Ulaanbaatar to market the output of the project CGGs. MOFALI has agreed to assist in acquiring 
the necessary land. JICA is supporting construction of a sale point near Bornuur expected to be 
operational by 2018. Although this facility is much larger and complex than the sale point intended 
in this project, the project can draw on the experience of the Bornuur sale point. 
B.  
Support Farmer Groups in Participating National Vegetable Trade Fairs 
The  project  will  support  participation  of  CGGs  in  the  main  three  soums  at  national 
27. 
vegetable trade fairs twice a year in 2018−2021. The project will finance the cost of transportation 
of  vegetables to the fair,  promotional  display,  and  packaging  developed the  project’s  branding 
and marketing plan. 
84 
Appendix 4 
C.  
Develop and Launch Market Information System 
28. 
The  market  information  system,  initiated  by  MOFALI,  is  to  provide  consumers  with 
information on the origin of vegetables they are purchasing, while giving the growers data on the 
area of vegetables planted and harvested at the national level, facilitating business decisions by 
CGGs.  The  system  will  be  developed  in  2018  with  web  and  mobile  based  applications. 
Programming terms of references for the system will have been written during project preparation. 
PIU will work closely with MOFALI to develop the system.   
D.  
Provide Farmer Groups Training on Value Chain Management 
The  PIU  will  organize  training  in  2018  and  2019  aimed  to  improve  CGG  farmers’ 
29. 
awareness  and  knowledge  of  value-enhancing  aspects  of  the  vegetable  business  such  as 
vegetable grading, quality control, waste disposal and management of a value chain.  
E.  
Prepare Promotional Display, Bag, and Packaging 
30. 
The project will prepare promotional displays and other promotional items (e.g. bags) as 
part of the marketing and branding plan to be prepared by the branding and marketing expert. 
These promotional materials are to  be used by CGGs at national vegetable trade fairs, and at 
kiosks and the sale point supported by the project.  
F.   
Implement Stakeholder Communications 
The project has prepared a stakeholder communication plan to be implemented by PIU. 
31. 
Its  main  elements  are  establishment  of  a  project  website,  presence  on  selected  social  media 
sites⎯for example, Facebook⎯and development of printed materials and media communications 
to promote project activities, consultations, and training events. 
G.    
Implement Japanese Visibility 
32. 
The  project  has  a  plan  to  ensure  Japanese  visibility.  The  PIU  will  (i)  inform  the 
stakeholders  about  the  use  of  Japanese  resources  in  the  project,  and  (ii)  involve  Japanese 
officials when communicating the progress and achievements of the project. 
H.    Develop knowledge products 
33. 
During  the  last  2  quarters  of the  project,  Q2  2021  and  Q3  2021, the  PIU  shall  develop 
knowledge products that (i) summarize the key lessons learned, (ii) contain guidelines on how to 
replicate the best of the project experience elsewhere, and (iii) propose a strategy for scaling up 
community-based farming approaches to other areas of Mongolia. 
I.   
Organize an End-of-Project Symposium 
During  the  second  half  of  2021,  the  last  year  of  the  project,  the  PIU  will  organize  a 
34. 
workshop for key project participants (MOFALI, soum administrations, representatives of CGGs) 
and  other  stakeholders  (staff  of  government  ministries  and international organizations such as 
USAID,  Embassy  of  Japan  in  Mongolia,  JICA,  and  others).  The  symposium  will  review  the 
experience of the project, its achievements and weaknesses, and attempt to reach a consensus 
on the future direction of community-based vegetable farming in Mongolia.  
Appendix 4 
85 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
A.    Recruitment and Appointment of PIU Staff 
A critical task during project start-up is the recruitment of PIU staff. The positions of the 
35. 
PIU  project  coordinator,  finance  specialist,  and  procurement  specialist  are  to  be  filled.  Initial 
contracts should also be with firm/NGO/entity to support the overall implementation of the project. 
A QCBS selection mechanism as specified in the ADB guidelines on the use of consultants shall 
be  used for  that  purpose.  This  step  should  be  completed  no  later  than  the  end  of  the  second 
month  of  the  project.  The  project  director  and  coordinator  can  then  focus  on  recruiting  and 
appointing other PIU staff and consultants. 
B.    Monitoring and Evaluation and the DMF 
36. 
The M&E system monitors project performance against the DMF. In the first year of the 
project, the PIU’s M&E specialist shall review the project DMF, design the M&E system, collect 
the necessary data (from secondary sources and primary data from project sources) to establish 
the baseline for the project, and set up the format for quarterly project reports.  
37. 
The M&E specialist shall ensure that the PIU project coordinator and key PIU consultants 
are fully informed about the use the M&E system, including the entry of performance data into the 
system and producing quarterly reports on project performance.  
The M&E specialist is expected to return to the project in subsequent years to assist PIU 
38. 
in compiling mid-term and project completion reports.  
C.   
Social Safeguards and Gender Action Plan 
39. 
In the first year of the project, PIU’s social and gender specialist shall review the GAP, its 
targets and indicators; collect the necessary data (from secondary sources and primary data from 
project sources) to establish the social and gender baseline for the project, and set up the format 
for reporting on gender aspects in the quarterly project reports. The social and gender specialist 
should also identify any potential social issues that PIU needs to be aware of when implementing 
the project. The specialist should ensure that the PIU project coordinator and key PIU consultants 
are fully informed about the project’s social and gender targets, know how to track progress against 
these targets, and can report on them in the quarterly reports on project performance. 
The social and gender specialist shall return to the project in subsequent years to assist 
40. 
PIU  in  monitoring  performance  under  GAP  and  to  assist  PIU  in  completing  gender-related 
activities. 
86 
Appendix 5 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT SUMMARY 
Given the anticipated pattern of project’s environmental impacts, the project is classified as “C” 
under ADB Safeguard Policy Statement and no Environmental Management Plan is required. A 
review of anticipated impacts has been undertaken nonetheless and its results are summarized 
in table below. 
Table EMP-1: Environnemental Management Summary 
Potential Issues 
Promotion of community grower 
model likely to lead to 
intensification of farming. 
Some of the minor infrastructure 
(storage sheds, small 
greenhouses) may be 
inappropriately located. 
Implementation Phase 
Application of agrochemicals 
could pose health risks.   
Increased production likely to 
result in more agricultural waste. 
Increase in areas planted may 
result in local water scarcity. 
Introduction of new techniques of 
vegetable farming (e.g. use of 
“tunnels” or small greenhouses) 
may result in more plastic and 
glass waste  
Development of value chains 
likely to result in increased 
demand for packaging materials 
and transport (the latter with 
some adverse environmental 
impacts). 
Greater local processing of farm 
produce may create health risks 
(e.g. contamination by bacteria). 
Sales Kiosks 
Mitigation measures 
•   The project and community action plans to promote 
more efficient (rather than mainly more extensive) use of 
agricultural inputs (water, agrochemicals, farm 
equipment). 
•  Project target beneficiaries informed right from the 
project outset of the preference given to organic and 
other environmentally friendly agricultural inputs. 
Responsible body 
Executing agency 
through PIU  
•  The siting of small infrastructure to be reviewed by PIU 
and soum authorities to ensure that no sites are subject 
to waterlogging. 
PIU, project technical 
advisors and soum 
project coordinators. 
•  no sites should be within or adjacent to natural habitats 
or sensitive ecosystems 
•  The project to supply protective clothing to CGG 
members applying pesticides. The use of such clothing 
to be enforced. The intensity of pesticide use to be 
monitored. 
•  The project seeks to reduce agricultural waste by 
improving market access and promoting more complete 
use of the produce (e.g. through part-processing). 
Disposal of organic waste as well as its composting and 
reuse to be encouraged.  
•  More efficient use of water in vegetable farming to 
become one of key training topics. 
•  Provisions for storage of waste plastic and glass and 
their safe disposal to be incorporated in CGGs’ action 
plans and monitored. 
 Soum project 
coordinator and soum 
health authorities  
 PIU and project 
technical advisers 
PIU and project 
technical advisers 
•  Possible disadvantages of greater packaging (in 
disposing of it) outweighed by its health and convenience 
benefits. 
•  The intensity of transport to remain very low in rural 
Mongolia. The impact on air quality will remain negligible 
even if degradation of (grass)land through “multiple 
tracking” is likely to increase somewhat. Its adverse 
impact likely to be negligible compared to project 
benefits.    
•  All commercial processing by CGGs to be monitored by 
soum authorities for the observance of existing hygiene 
rules. 
•  Not within any environmental sensitive areas 
•  Areas will be agreed upon between MOFALI, UB City 
government and the project (documented in a MOU) 
•  Proper waste disposal will be ensured, following local 
PIU and soum health 
authorities  
PIU and project 
technical advisers 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
regulations  
Appendix 5 
87 
A record will be maintained by PIU of any project-related public consultations following a format 
given  below.  Two  public  consultations  to  be  held  both  during  the  design  stage  and  during 
operations. 
SAMPLE CONSULTATION RECORD 
Consultation Location: 
Consultation Date: 
Purpose of Consultation: 
Name and Position of Facilitator: 
Name of participant  
Organization / Occupation 
Soum/Bagh 
Gender 
Consultation Record (meeting, focus group, discussion) 
Key Issues Discussed 
Proponent (general position only required) 
Action and Deadline 
Party to implement the action 
Additional Comments 
88 
Appendix 6 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION UNIT STAFFING REQUIREMENT 
To implement the project the executing agency will establish a project implementation unit (PIU). 
The  executing  agency  will  establish  a  selection  committee  comprising  representatives  from 
MOFALI, MOF, and other concerned agencies. PIU staff will be recruited as individual consultants 
in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Procurement  Guidelines  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).  The 
appointments and dismissal of PIU staff will be subject to ADB prior approval.  
PIU Consultants Input Months 
Positions 
Input Months 
1  PIU project coordinator 
2  Finance specialist 
3  PIU procurement specialist 
4  M&E specialist 
5  Office manager 
  Total 
47 
47 
23 
8 
47 
172 
Terms of references for the PIU consultants follow below.  
1. 
PIU Project Coordinator – National (47 person-months) 
Introduction: Reporting to MOFALI’s project director, the coordinator will organize, keep track 
of, coordinate, report on, and facilitate the deployment of the resources provided for under the 
project. While keeping scrupulously to the provisions agreed between the government and ADB 
the coordinator will keep in mind the overall objective of the project that is to sustainably improve 
the  livelihoods  of  the  project’s  rural  clients  and  facilitate  a  transition  of  CGGs  from  grant-
dependent groups towards viable horticulture businesses.  
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  university  degree,  preferably  in  public  administration, 
business management, agricultural economics, or natural resources management. He/she must 
have experience in implementing a project of a multilateral development bank, preferably ADB, 
or another international development organization. Preferred candidates will have at least 8 years 
of overall work experience, of which 5 years in helping deliver the type of outputs specified below, 
including involvement in, community development, natural resources management, or horticulture 
in Mongolia. They must have led PIUs and have strong communication skills.  
The candidate must be fluent in the English language, both spoken and written. The coordinator 
will lead the PIU including five staff based in Ulaanbaatar, short-term project consultants, and field 
coordinators in 4 project soums in Darkhan-Uul, Tuv, Selenge, and Uvs aimags. 
Reporting: The position will report to MOFALI’s project director     
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar 
Duration of Contract: 47 person-months 
Expected timing: Starting in February 2018 
Appendix 6 
89 
Scope of work: Preparation of annual work plans and budgets; communicating clearly to PIU 
staff  the  activities  to  be  completed;  ensuring  that  soum-based  PIU  staff  complete  assigned 
activities; monitoring progress according to agreed protocols; maintaining regular contacts with 
the  Project  Director  to  discuss  progress  and  possible  need  for  adjustments  or  modifications, 
periodically visiting field locations to have a first-hand knowledge of the situation,  and preparing 
reports for the executing agency and the MOF and ADB. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities  
Output 1: Lead the PIU in project implementation.   
(i) 
As delegated by the project director, lead the PIU in project implementation, ensuring all 
outputs are delivered according to approved work plans and budgets. 
(ii)  Represent the project director as required for project related matters. 
(iii)  Supervise PIU project staff and contractors, ensuring that they follow the annual work plan 
and budget. 
(iv)  Assist the project director in discussing terms of reference and expected outputs of each 
PIU project staff, providing coaching where required, and review performance of PIU staff. 
(v)  Ensure  communications  among  PIU  staff  and  contractors  on  project  work  plans,  project 
issues, and project performance. 
(vi)  Conduct monthly PIU project management meetings that address the progress of the work 
plan and any impediments. 
Output 2: Prepare implementation work plans and PIU budgets.   
(i) 
Based on the project work plans and related Gantt charts for (i) assisting local communities 
in setting up CGGs, formulating CGG operating rules, and drafting  community group action 
plans  (CGAP),  (ii)  providing  small  infrastructure,  equipment  and  other  selected  inputs  to 
community groups, and (iii) training of, and other support provided to CGGs in implementing 
CGAPs, develop annual PIU work plans and budgets with detailed time bound activities and 
clear assignment of responsibilities and accountabilities and submit them for approval by 
the project director and ADB. 
(ii)  Coordinate the activities of the PIU and ensure that planned activities are carried out. 
(iii)  Adapt  the  PAM  to more  specific  needs  of  the  PIU  in  the  form  of  a  Project  Management 
Manual that contains implementation and administrative procedures not already covered by 
PAM and conduct related training of PIU staff.  
Output 3: Ensure all ADB and JFPR policies and procedures are disseminated to all project staff 
and are being complied with.  
(i)  Ensure that all PIU staff and consultants are well aware of ADB policies, including social 
financial  management, 
and  environmental  safeguards,  gender,  anti-corruption, 
procurement and disbursement.  
(ii)  Ensure that the ADB Safeguards Policy Statement is shared with all project implementing 
staff  and  consultants.  Ensure  all  project  activities  are  in  line  with  project  social  and 
the  soum  coordinators  aware  of  safeguard 
environmental  safeguards.  Make  all 
requirements and due diligence to do when starting project activities to ensure compliance.  
(iii)  Disseminate JFPR policies and procedures to all engaged with project implementation.  
(iv)  Request ADB MRNM for additional training on ADB policies and procedures when needed.  
Output 4: Enable implementation of PIU activities. 
(i) 
Ensure timely preparation of contracts with suppliers and communities for various project 
activities according to ADB procurement standards 
(ii)  Coordinate delivery of consultant work.  
90 
Appendix 6 
(iii)  Ensure linkages between soum-based PIU staff and non-PIU local government agency staff 
to ensure the latter’s input and participation in project activities  
(iv)  Ensure PIU finance specialist actively manages cash flow through the imprest account to 
enable timely implementation. 
(v)  Obtain necessary and timely approvals by the project director of work activities. 
Output  5:  Conduct  monthly  monitoring  of  PIU  activities  and  expenditures,  prepare  quarterly 
progress reports, and annual performance reviews. 
(i)  Monitoring PIU activities on a monthly basis against the annual work plan and budget, and 
report on the progress achieved to the project director. 
(ii)  Participate  in  periodic  field  reviews  of  project  preparatory  activities,  implementation  of 
CGAPs and delivery of project-funded inputs and services.  
(iii)  Based  on  the  preceding,  prepare  quarterly  reports  for  submission  to  MOFALI/MOF  and 
ADB. 
(iv)  Complete  annual  performance  reviews  of  PIU  activities  and  expenditures  highlighting 
activities outstanding and those that need to be strengthened or modified. Propose possible 
revisions of Project plans and corresponding reallocation of resources within budget limits. 
(v)  Complete timely preparation of other reports to the project director, as required. 
(vi)  Organize Project Steering Committee meetings in accordance with the work plan. 
2.  
PIU Finance Specialist – National (47 person-months) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  accounting,  finance  or  business 
administration and 5 to 10 years of proven experience in accounting in the public or private sector. 
The candidate will be familiar with accounting under ADB projects and accounting systems used 
by the Mongolian government. The candidate must have a good command of spoken and written 
English.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator. 
Duration of contract: 47 person-months.   
Expected timing: Starting in February 2018. 
Scope of Work: The finance specialist will (i) prepare quarterly and annual budgets, (ii) prepare 
quarterly and annual financial reports, (iii) track the progress of disbursement under the project, 
(iv)  perform  cash  management  and  disbursements,  (v)  maintain  a  fixed  asset  system,  (vi) 
calculate and pay personal income tax of staff contracted for the project, and (vii) prepare financial 
and disbursement documents and other financial reports. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities  
Output 1: Prepare and monitor budgets. 
(i) 
Prepare quarterly and annual budgets for the PIU 
(ii)  Monitor expenditures against budgets on a monthly basis 
(iii)  Prepare quarterly and annual financial reports of PIU activities 
Output 2: Prepare financial reports. 
(i)  Monitor expenditures against budget and prepare monthly reports of expenditures 
(ii)  Prepare bank reconciliation statements on a monthly basis 
(iii)  Prepare financial statements and financial reports 
(iv)  Maintain accounting ledgers 
(v)  Take responsibility for safe custody of accounting books, and all financial related documents 
and instruments 
Appendix 6 
91 
Initiate requisitions for payments 
Output 3: Manage cash and accounts payable. 
(i) 
(ii)  Arrange payments to suppliers 
(iii)  Pay income and other required taxes of PIU staff and its contractors 
Output 4: Request funds from ADB and prepare financial reports for ADB. 
(i) 
(ii)  Respond to queries from ADB with respect to financial aspects of the Project  
Initiate requests for project funds and submit to ADB 
Output 5: Accounting management. 
(i) 
(ii) 
Prepare and maintain a fixed asset register 
Liaise with external auditors wherever required 
3.  
PIU Procurement Specialist – National (23 person-months, intermittent) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  accounting,  finance  or  business 
administration preferably with 5‒10 years of experience as a national procurement officer under 
a  development  project; and past  experience  in procurement  in  an  ADB project.  The  candidate 
shall  be  familiar  with  procurement  systems  of  the  Mongolian  government  and  the  rules, 
regulations, and practices of procurement and contracting in general, and have a good command 
of spoken and written English. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator. 
Duration of contract: 23 person-months. 
Expected timing: Starting in February 2018. 
Scope of Work: The appointee will carry all procurement-related duties of the project based on 
ADB  and  MOF  regulations,  namely:  (i)  preparing  and  standardizing  procurement-related 
documents; and (ii) implementing, managing, and monitoring the project’s procurement. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities  
Output 1: Plan, implement, and monitor the project’s procurement activities. 
(i) 
Advise the PIU on best practices in procurement, based on the policies and guidelines for 
procurement of ADB and the Mongolian government.   
(ii)  For each package in the project procurement plan, prepare bidding documents for the goods 
or services required.  These are to include technical specifications for the good or service 
required,  contract  conditions  that  each  bidder  must  accept,  and  formats/templates  for 
bidders to use in preparing their bids.   
(iii)  Submit the draft bidding documents for each procurement package to the PIU and ADB for 
approval, according to the timelines in the project work plan. 
(iv)  Advertise the request for bids for the goods or services as required. 
(v)  Prepare a list of qualified bids submitted in response to the request for bids. 
(vi)  Evaluate the bid proposals for technical compliance and financial criteria and rank the bids. 
(vii)  Prepare and submit an evaluation report on the bids to the PIU and ADB for approval, as 
92 
Appendix 6 
necessary. 
(viii)  Provide advice to the PIU on the bids and evaluation as required.  Provide information to 
the Project Steering Committee, as appropriate. 
(ix)  Assist the PIU in finalizing a contract with the first-ranked firm.  
Output 2: Review and periodically revise, as required by ADB and the PIU, the procurement plan 
negotiated between ADB and the executing agency under the grant contract. Submit revisions to 
the PIU and ADB for approval. 
Output 3: Regularly monitor progress on procurement and prepare reports for the PIU and ADB. 
Report progress of the procurement program on a monthly basis to the PIU project coordinator 
and complete quarterly and annual procurement reports. 
4.  
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist – National (8 person-months, intermittent) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a university degree in business or other discipline to relevant 
to monitoring and evaluation (M&E). He/she will have at least 5 years of experience with rural 
development projects. Experience of ADB or World Bank projects is required. The candidate must 
have a good command of spoken and written English. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator. 
Duration of contract: 8 person-months intermittent, tentatively 3 months between March - May 
2018, 1 month each in 2019, 2020, and 3 months in 2021. 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: Starting in March 2018.  
Scope of work: The expert will (i) establish an M&E system for the project, using the project DMF 
as a guide, that meets the requirements of the Government of Mongolia and ADB, (ii) propose a 
monitoring plan to be used by the PIU, (iii) complete an M&E baseline report for the project, (iv) 
train PIU staff in compiling monitoring reports based on the project DMF and approved monitoring 
plan, and (v) produce a midterm M&E report and a final M&E report against DMF targets. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output 1: Establish an M&E system for the project that meets the requirements of the government 
of Mongolia and ADB. 
Output 2: Develop a monitoring plan to be used by PIU for approval by the project director.  
Output 3: Complete an M&E baseline report for the project. This should include targets spelled 
out  in  the  DMF,  indicators,  and  data  collected  for  the  baseline  including  data  required  by  the 
project’s GAP. 
Output  4:  Train  PIU  staff  in  generating  data  for  regular  monitoring  reports,  according  to  the 
approved monitoring plan. 
Output 5: Produce a midterm M&E report and a final M&E report on the project. 
Appendix 6 
93 
5.  
Office manager – National (47 person-months) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a bachelor’s degree or equivalent in business administration, 
secretarial or other related fields and at least 2 years of relevant experience in the public or private 
sector.  The  candidate  shall  be  proficient  in  main  office  software  applications  and  be  fluent  in 
spoken and written English.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 47 person-months. 
Expected timing: Starting between November and February 2018. 
Scope  of  Work:  The  specialist  will  support  the  PIU  project  coordinator,  the  community 
development expert, the PIU finance specialist, and the PIU procurement specialist in information-
related needs and in ensuring smooth functioning of office equipment.  
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities  
Output 1: Administrative management support. 
(i)  Maintain project files and records. 
(ii)  Assist in preparing reports, as required. 
(iii)  Arrange external and internal meetings, and workshops.  
(iv)  Prepare minutes of external and internal meetings. 
(v)  Make logistic arrangements for project activities. 
Translate documents from Mongolian into English and vice versa, as required. 
Output 2: Technical support.  
(i) 
(ii)  Ensure smooth functioning of office equipment and security of project-related information. 
(iii)  Undertake other IT-information-related tasks on an ad hoc basis. 
94 
Appendix 7 
PROJECT IMPLEMENENTATION SUPPORT FIRM/NGO/ENTITY STAFFING 
REQUIREMENT 
Input  months  for  consultants  to  be  engaged  through  the  project  implementation  support 
Firm/NGO/Entity are summarized in the table below.  
Input  Months  of  Consultants  to  be  Recruited  Through  Project  Implementation  Support 
Firm/NGO/Entity 
Positions 
1  Community development expert - deputy project coordinator 
2  Soum coordinator in Yeruu 
3  Soum coordinator in Orkhon 
4  Soum coordinator in Bornuur 
5  Soum coordinator in Ulaangom 
6  Agronomist & agri-business specialist 
7  Branding and marketing expert 
8  Social and gender experta 
9  Resource person for greenhouse technology  
10  Resource person for packaging and processing workshop 
Pool of Agriculture Extension Specialists  
11  Vegetable Processing/Value-Added Agriculture Specialist  
12  Water Management and irrigation Specialist  
13  Soil Sciences Specialist  
14  Entomologist / Pest Management Specialist  
15  Seed Management Specialist  
Input 
months 
46 
46 
46 
46 
46 
34 
30 
24 
4 
3 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
  Total 
341 
a   12 of the 24 months of the social and gender specialist will be covered through grant funds as part of the consulting 
firm/NGO contract; 12 of the 14 months will be covered from piggy-back funding support under the SDCC KSTA 
REG (50042): Strengthening Women's Resilience to Climate Change and Disaster Risk in Asia and the 
Pacific.  
Terms of references for the consultants to be engaged through the Firm/NGO/Entity follow below.  
Community  Development  Expert  -  Deputy  Project  Coordinator  –  National  (46 
1.  
person-months) 
Introduction: Reporting to the PIU coordinator, the expert will be principally responsible for PIU 
support  given  to  local  communities  in  organizing  and making  functional  the  CGGs  engaged in 
vegetable production and for the delivery of technical inputs to them. The expert will concurrently 
act as deputy PIU project coordinator acting on the project coordinator’s behalf and carrying out 
his/her functions in the event of the project coordinator’s temporary inability to perform them.  
Expertise: The candidate shall have a university degree in social or environmental sciences, or 
other discipline relevant to community farming, experience of horticulture considered a plus. The 
candidate must have at least 5 years of experience working with rural communities under a project 
of  an  international  organization  such  as  ADB,  World  Bank,  a  United  Nations  affiliate  or  an 
international NGO. The candidate must be fluent in English, both spoken and written.  
Reporting: The position will report to PIU project coordinator. 
Appendix 7 
95 
Duration of contract: 46 person-months. 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: starting in March 2018. 
Scope of work: The appointee will (i) coordinate the process of forming CGGs  and preparing 
CGAPs, (ii) work with the project coordinator, soum coordinators, and other team members and 
consultants  to  deliver  the  technical    aspects  of  community  vegetable  farming  and  training 
programs, (iii) technically and administratively oversee project soum coordinators, (iv)  perform  
PIU project coordinator’s tasks in the event of the coordinators temporary inability to do so, and 
(v) contribute to the development of knowledge products and dissemination of project activities 
and results. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output  1:  Oversee,  and  directly  contribute  to  the  process  of  setting  up  new  collaborative 
structures for vegetable production by smallholders (the CGGs) and developing such structures’ 
operating rules.  
(i) 
For  the  above  purpose,  procure  or  develop  suitable  teaching  aids  (visual  presentations, 
video clips, examples of similar initiatives elsewhere in Mongolia and in other countries) that 
help the target communities embrace the concept.  
(ii)  Design and deliver a training program for project soum coordinators and target communities 
on community farming and its organizational and management principles. 
(iii)  Be prepared to present a vision that goes beyond a passive implementation of CGAPs and 
introduces innovations all along the vegetable value chain and the prospect of turning the 
CGGs, over time, into true and financially viable horticulture businesses. Procure or develop 
material (photos, video clips, reports etc.) that helps illustrate that vision. 
(iv)  Ensure that the operating rules of CGGs are adequately explained to target households and 
that  the  soum  project  coordinators  too  fully  understand  them.  Pay  particular  attention  to 
specifying clearly the roles and responsibilities of the parties (the participating households, 
the PIU and its inputs, local government officials) including the financial aspects.  
(v)  Ensure that CGG members understand and support the principle of gradually re-investing 
some of the expected profits into further modernization of own facilities and skills. Design, 
in  collaboration  with  the  PIU  project  coordinator  and  soum  coordinators,  a  community 
growers’ scheme and incorporate the concept into CGG operating rules. 
Output 2. Provide advice and assistance on the preparation of CGAPs.  
(i)  Directly and/or through soum coordinators help the newly formed CGGs develop CGAPs 
and make them ready for approval by local governments and the PIU.  
(ii)  Ensure that all project soum coordinators and soum governors have a chance to comment 
on CGAPs under preparation and that the plans are then reconciled with the broader soum 
development plans following procedures specifically developed for this purpose. Develop 
such  procedures  for  approval  by  PIU  project  coordinator  and  project  director,  after 
consultation with soum governors, and organize related training, if necessary. 
Output  3.  Coordinate  the  delivery  of  inputs  and  technical  support  for  the  implementation  of 
CGAPs. 
(i)  Design and deliver a training program for project soum coordinators on best practices in 
community farming to guide them in overseeing the implementation of CGAPs. 
(ii)  Design and deliver a training program for CGG members on best practices in community 
96 
Appendix 7 
farming covering production and management aspects. 
(iii)  Design the rules and regulations for  access and use by CGGs of seed fund, equipment, 
shared storage facilities and greenhouses provided by the project.  
(v) 
(iv)  Design and deliver training of project soum coordinators and CGG members on operating 
and maintaining tractors and other equipment provided to CGGs and initially managed by 
the relevant soum authority. 
In consultation with the project resource person on greenhouse technology, deliver training 
of  project  soum  coordinators  and  CGG  members  in  constructing  and  operating 
greenhouses,  and  using  other  protection  cultivation  technologies  and  shared  storage 
facilities. 
(vi)  Monitor the progress of implementation of CGAPs directly in the field or through monthly 
reports submitted by soum coordinators.  
(vii)  Ensure that project soum coordinators complete their assigned tasks in line with the PIU 
plan. 
Output 4. Ensure all project activities are in line with project social and environmental safeguards. 
Make all the soum coordinators aware of safeguard requirements and due diligence to do when 
starting project activities to ensure compliance.  
Output  5.  Represent  the  PIU  project  coordinator,  when  required,  and  perform  PIU  project 
coordinator’s tasks in the event of the coordinator’s temporary inability to do so. 
Output  6:  Work  with  the  PIU  project  coordinator  and  the  international  agronomist  and 
agribusiness specialist on other assignments, as required. 
2.  
Soum Coordinators – National (4 position, 46 person-months each)  
Introduction: Reporting to the PIU deputy director, soum coordinators stationed in the project’s 
soums  will  be  PIU’s  local  facilitators,  helping  organize  the  local  growers  into  CGGs,  prepare 
CGAPs, deliver material inputs and training to CGGs, monitor field performance and liaising with 
the local authorities.  
Expertise:    The  candidates  shall  have  a  university  degree  in  business,  agriculture,  or  other 
discipline  relevant  to  community  horticulture  with  at  least  3  years  of  involvement  in  rural 
community development projects. The candidate shall have prior experience in the soum to which 
he/she is to be assigned. 
Reporting: The position will report to the community development expert / PIU deputy project 
coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 46 person-months. 
Post Location: One of four project soums in Darkhan-Uul, Selenge, Tuv, and Uvs aimags. 
Expected timing: Starting in March 2018. 
Scope of work: The soum coordinator will (i) help organize and participate in all relevant project 
trainings, (ii) working with the soum administration and the target farming households and guided 
by the community development expert, help establish CGGs in the soum concerned, (iii) assist 
the community development expert in training the CGGs in developing and updating CGAPs, (iv) 
Appendix 7 
97 
help  develop  procedures  for  reconciling  CGAPs  with  soums’  broader  development  plans,  (v)  
advise directly or organize assistance by technical consultants on implementing CGAPs and best 
ways of overcoming possible obstacles, (vi) monitor implementation progress and report on it to 
PIU deputy coordinator; and (vii) contribute to the project’s awareness-raising, and dissemination 
activities. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output 1: Help establish CGGs in the soum concerned. 
(i) 
Ensure  that  suitable  venues  exist  for  initial  discussions  with  local  households  and  soum 
administrations  on  the  principles  of  community  farming  and  its  organizational  and 
management basics. 
(ii)  Assist the community  development  expert  in preparing  and  using teaching  tools  (videos, 
posters,  etc.)  to  better  illustrate  the  potential  of  community  horticulture  in  the  soum  and 
present a broader vision of this activity.  
(iii)  Assist  the  community  development  expert  in  developing  CGG  operating  rules  and  their 
acceptance by target project beneficiaries.  
Inform the soum administration on all aspects of CGG formation. 
(iv) 
Output 2: Help develop and update CGAPs. 
(i) 
Facilitate and participate in the training on CGAPs preparation conducted by the community 
development expert or a PIU technical consultant.  
(ii)  Work  alongside  CGGs  in drafting the  CGAPs  and  ensure that  CGAPs are completed  on 
time to the standard required. 
Output 3: Help reconcile CGGs with the soum’s broader development plans. 
Obtain  opinions  of  soum  administration  on  best  ways  of  integrating  CGAPs  into  the  soum’s 
broader  development  plans.  Taking  these  opinions  into  account,  help the  central  PIU  develop 
procedures of reconciling CGGs with soums’ broader development plans and help obtain local 
administration’s approval of these procedures. 
Output 4: Help implement CGAPs. 
(i)  Work  alongside  project  supported  CGGs  to  help  them  implement  CGAPs.  Monitor  the 
delivery  of  project  inputs  and  services  and  alert  the  central  PIU  to  any  impediments  to 
implementation linked to procurement.  
(ii)  Deliver or help deliver training of CGGs on best horticultural practices and the operation of 
project-supplied facilities such as greenhouses or share storage. 
(iii)  Deliver  of  help  deliver  training  of  CGGs,  as  required,  in  operation  and  maintenance  of 
(iv) 
tractors and other equipment provided by the project. 
In  collaboration  with  the  branding  and  marketing  expert,  help  deliver  training  of  CGG 
members  in  selected  value-added  activities  such  as  part-processing  of  produce,  quality 
control, packaging, distribution, or sales promotion. 
(v)  Help identify any unexpected technical or governance-related obstacles to implementation 
and  alert  the  community  development  expert  and  other  PIU  team  members  to  their 
existence. Seek advice and support of PIU and offer solutions to CGGs. 
Output 5: Monitor the implementation progress and report on it. 
(i)  Monitor  CGG  implementation  progress  and  report  to  the  central  PIU  on  a  monthly  basis 
highlighting any departure from work plans and budgets together with proposed remedial 
action.  
(ii)  Provide inputs to the central PIU for the preparation of consolidated annual work plans and 
98 
Appendix 7 
budgets. 
Output 6: Contribute to the project’s awareness-raising and dissemination activities. 
(i)  Help  ensure  that suitable  information  on  technical  and management  aspect  of  vegetable 
farming can be accessed by CGG members. Coordinate with the central PIU the preparation 
of such information and its availability to CGGs. 
(ii)  Help ensure exchange of technical and practical information among the soum’s CGGs as 
well  as  exchange  of  information  and  learning  outside  the  soum,  for  instance  by  CGG 
members’ participation in trade fairs and similar events.   
(iii)  Encourage publicity given to CGG activities, both as a means of finding new markets for 
CGGs’ produce as well as to consolidate political support for the sub-sector. 
3.  
Agronomist and Agribusiness Specialist – National (34 person-months) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a university degree in agronomy or related subjects with at 
least 5 years of experience in agricultural and rural development, especially in horticulture. The 
candidate must have a good command of spoken and written English. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 34 person-months, intermittent. 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar, with frequent trips to project soums. 
Expected timing: Starting in April 2018. 
Scope of Work: The expert will (i) in collaboration with international agronomist and agribusiness 
specialist, consolidate local experience with vegetable breeds and cultivation practices best suited 
to Mongolian climate and soil conditions, (ii) summarize local experience of protected horticulture, 
especially the use of greenhouses to supplement a review of relevant international experience in 
this domain prepared by the international counterpart,  (iii) train CGG members in applying best 
cultivation  and protected horticulture practices, (iv) develop rules and operating procedures for 
the  use  of  shared  storage  facilities  and  greenhouses  by  CGG  members,  and  (v)  monitor  the 
progress of and report on CGGs’ adoption of best practices, and use of project-financed facilities. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output  1:  Contribute  to  the  identification  of  crops,  crop  breeds  and  varieties,  technologies, 
techniques and practices most suitable for adoption by the project CGGs.  
(i)  Consolidate the results of available local research on vegetable crops and varieties best 
suited for the climatic conditions of Mongolia’s central region.  
(ii)  Consolidate local experience of protected horticulture, in particular, the use of greenhouses 
and tunnels, to be combined with a similar review of international experience in the domain 
by the agronomist’s international counterpart.  
In  collaboration  with  the  international  agronomist  and  agribusiness  specialist  and  the 
national greenhouse technology specialist, develop training program for project farmers on 
introduction  of  improved  vegetable  varieties,  best  cultivation  practices,  post-harvest 
operations, and practices of protected horticulture.  
(iii) 
Output 2: Help ensure that the technical recommendations made are incorporated in CGAPs.  
(i)  Conduct  field  consultations  with  project  community  farmer  groups  to  understand  their 
Appendix 7 
99 
current situation and perceived needs. 
(ii)  Working  closely  with  the  community  development  expert,  provide  technical  support  to 
CGGs  during the  process  of  CGAP  preparation to  ensure that  CGAPs (a)  have  a  sound 
technical basis and incorporate the best of local and international horticulture experience, 
and (b) embody realistic targets.  
Output 3: Assist CGGs in implementing CGAPs. 
(i)  Deliver in-field training to project farmers on the topics listed under Output 1.  
(ii)  Train the CGGs in the operation and maintenance of equipment provided to the group by 
the project. 
(iii)  Provide refresher training during the project. 
(iv) 
In collaboration with the community development expert, the international agronomist and 
agribusiness  specialist  and  the  greenhouse  technology  expert,  determine  the  types  of 
greenhouses and storage facilities to be constructed with project support. 
(v)  Develop  rules  and  operating  procedures  for  the  use  of  shared  storage  facilities  and 
(vi) 
greenhouses by CGG members and train CGGs on their use. 
In collaboration with the soum coordinators, monitor CGGs’ observance of the technical and 
management  recommendations  made  and  suggest  remedial  steps  when  such  steps  are 
considered necessary.  
4.  
Branding and Marketing Expert – National (30 person-months) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  university  degree  in  business,  commerce,  agriculture 
economics/marketing  or  related  fields,  with  at  least  5  years  of  experience  in  communication, 
product promotion, brand development and marketing. Good access to the media and existing 
contacts in wholesale and retail agri-business would be considered a plus. The candidate must 
have a good command of spoken and written English. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 30 person-months, intermittent. 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar.  
Expected timing: Starting in May 2018. 
Scope of Work: The expert will (i) develop and implement branding and marketing plan for the 
produce grown by CGGs, (ii) develop and deliver training programs for soum coordinators and 
CGG households  on selling, marketing, and branding of CGG output, (iii) arrange for a design 
and  development  of  a  logo,  promotional  displays,  and  bags  for  CGG  produce,  (iv)  coordinate 
establishment of sale points in and near Ulaanbaatar City for some of CGG output, (v) develop 
and deliver training programs on web and mobile based market information systems to community 
farmer groups, and (vi) organize participation of some CGG members at national trade fairs. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output 1: Develop a branding and marketing plan for produce grown by CGGs. 
(i)  Consult  with  community  farmer  groups  in  all  project  soums  and  soum  coordinators  on 
perceived need for training on branding and marketing. 
(ii)  Consolidate the best of relevant international and local experience of selling and marketing 
of vegetables and the role of branding in the process. 
100 
Appendix 7 
(iii)  Deliver information and training sessions for CGGs in all project soums on existing structure 
of  wholesale  and retail  trade  in vegetables in Central  Mongolia,  existing  pattern of agro-
processing of relevance to the project and the principal buyers/consumers of CGG produce. 
Focus on the changing nature of demand for fresh or packaged produce. 
(iv)  Based  on  the  preceding,  develop  branding  and  marketing  plans  for  each  project  soum’s 
CGGs  with  specific  target  markets,  locations,  target  sales,  dates,  and  other  relevant 
information.  
Output 2: Help implement the branding and marketing plans.  
(i) 
Arrange for a design and development of a project logo, promotional displays, and bags for 
CGG produce.  
(ii)  Develop and deliver training programs to community farmer groups in each of project soums 
on  implementing  the  relevant  branding  and  marketing  plan  dealing  with  both  fresh  and 
packaged produce. 
(iii)  Make  recommendation  to  CGGs  on  most  promising  new  sales  channels  and  participate 
directly (accompanying CGG members) in piloting such new links.  
Output 3: Coordinate establishment of sale points in and near Ulaanbaatar City for selling CGG-
grown vegetables. 
(i) 
Assist and coordinate with MOFALI and Ulaanbaatar City Governor’s office in acquiring land 
for kiosks in Ulaanbaatar City to sell CGG produce. 
(ii)  Assist and coordinate with MOFALI and Ulaanbaatar City Governor’s office in acquiring land 
for sale point(s) along the major road to Ulaanbaatar City to sell CGG produce.  
(iii)  Commission the design of kiosks and sale points and ensure that the design meets existing 
environmental, hygiene, and safety standards. 
Output 4: Develop and deliver training programs on web and mobile based market information 
system to community farmer groups. 
Output 5: Support project farmers in participating at national trade fairs.  
(i) 
In  collaboration  with  soum  project  coordinators,  determine  the  extent  of  such  support 
compatible  with  project  resources,  and  identify  the  fairs  and  other  events  offering  the 
greatest promise.    
(ii)  Organize equitable participation of CGG farmers at fairs and similar events. 
5.  
Social and Gender Expert – National (12 person-months, intermittent) 
Expertise:  The candidate shall have a university degree in sociology, social anthropology, or 
other discipline relevant to social and gender development. The candidate will preferably have at 
least 5 years of experience with rural development projects. Experience of ADB or other foreign-
funded projects is required. The candidate must have a good command of spoken and written 
English. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator. 
Duration of contract: 12 person-months, intermittent. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: Starting in April 2018.  
Appendix 7 
101 
Scope of work: The expert  will (i) lead the analysis of social issues relevant to the project, (ii) 
ensure that the formation of CGGs is in line with the stated pro-poor, participatory and gender-
sensitive  priorities  and  meet  the  targets  presented  in  GAR,  (iii)  support  the  community 
development expert in guiding the CGGs in developing CGAPs and ensure that the CGAPs are 
in  line  with  the  project’s  stated  social  priorities,  (iv)  work  closely  with  other  PIU  specialists  in 
helping the CGGs  achieve the objectives of GAPs, (v) advise the PIU, MOFALI, and soums on 
social issues and recommend appropriate actions, (vi) monitor the project's performance against 
the GAP. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output 1: Review ADB documentation on social and poverty analysis (SPRSS, GAP) and due 
diligence conducted during project preparation and prepare a two-page summary of the essential 
findings and requirements for easy reference by PIU staff and soum administrations. 
Output 2: Carry out consultations with communities and the government to orient them on the 
social aspects of the project. 
(i)  Orient  and  advise  staff  of  the  PIU,  MOFALI,  and  soums  administrations  on  anticipated 
poverty  and social  impacts,  participatory  approaches,  and  gender mainstreaming  via  the 
GAP developed for the project. 
(ii)  Ensure that a shared understanding exists in project locations of the social criteria to be 
used in establishing CGGs.  
(iii)  Assess  training  needs,  including  training  that  specifically  targets  women  beneficiaries. 
Design  such  training  anticipating  its  evolution  and  modifications  in  the  course  of 
implementation.  
Output  3:  Directly  or  through  soum  coordinators,  provide  advice  to  CGGs  on  how  best  to 
incorporate social concerns into CGAPs.  
Output 4: Periodically conduct a field review of the extent to which the social priorities and targets 
CGGs are being achieved and ensure that the assessment is incorporated into regular project 
monitoring reports. Based on the field review, recommend possible modification of the GAP.  
Output 5: Train PIU staff on effective gender mainstreaming and reporting sex-aggregated data. 
6.  
Resource Person for Greenhouse Technology – National (4 person-months) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  technical  diploma  in  engineering,  horticulture  or  other 
subjects  relevant  to  protected  horticulture,  or  proven  track  record  of  successfully  using 
greenhouses to grow non-conventional vegetables in Mongolia.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 2 person-months. 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: May 2018. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities 
(i) 
Visit  project  soums  and  work  closely  with  international  and  national  agronomist  and 
102 
Appendix 7 
agribusiness experts to determine farmer communities’ needs and scope for greenhouses. 
(ii)  Share with the project lessons learned from building and operating greenhouses in  other 
locations in Mongolia. 
(iii)  Recommend the types of greenhouses of several sizes, best suited to project conditions 
under CGG management.  
(iv)  Assist the community development expert, national agronomist, and soum coordinators in 
selecting sites appropriate for constructing greenhouses. 
(v)  Create preliminary technical drawings for greenhouses in cooperation with the international 
resource person for greenhouse technology  
(vi)  Train the project team and CGGs in the selection of crops to be grown in the greenhouses, 
operating practices, greenhouse maintenance, and operating costs.   
6.  
Resource person for packaging and processing workshop – (3 person-months) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a technical diploma in engineering, food processing or other 
subjects relevant to packaging and processing vegetables, or proven track record of successfully 
designing small-to-medium scale food processing facilities in Mongolia.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 3 person-months. 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar. 
Expected timing: May 2018. 
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities 
(i) 
Visit  project  soums  and work  closely  with international  a  resource person  for  packaging 
and processing workshop to determine farmer communities’ needs and scope for vegetable 
processing workshop. 
Share  with  the  project  lessons  learned  from  building  and  operating  food  and  vegetable 
processing workshops in other locations in Mongolia. 
(ii) 
(iii)  Recommend the types of workshops best suited to project conditions.  
(iv)  Create  preliminary  blueprint  for  the  vegetable processing  workshop  in collaboration  with 
the international resource person for packaging and processing workshop.  
7.  
Pool of Agriculture Extension Specialists – National (5 positions) 
The prospects of smooth implementation of the project improve further if a measure of flexibility 
in delivering technical support and solutions can be built into the design. This will be achieved by 
creating  a  pool  of  agriculture  extension  specialists  that  can  be  called  upon  to  tackle  specific 
technical  and  management  problems  experienced  by  CGGs  and  their  members  during 
implementation. This resource will complement the administrative and technical staff of PIU and 
core technical consultants. The most likely areas of the stand-by expertise include soil science, 
seed  management,  pest  control,  water  management  (including  water  saving  technologies), 
protection horticulture and vegetable processing and value-added activities more generally1.  
1   The  composition  of  the  agriculture  technical  pool  is  deliberately  specified  only  in  part,  leaving  room  for  reacting 
flexibly to unexpected implementation challenges. 
Appendix 7 
103 
A  pool  of  agriculture  extension  specialists  will  be  established  to  provide  technical  advice  and 
problem solving for CGGs on an as-needed basis. 
(i) 
Vegetable  Processing/Value-Added  Agriculture  Specialist  –  Nationally 
recruited2 (4 person-months) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  technical  diploma  in food  processing  or  other  subjects 
relevant to processing, packaging or otherwise adding value to agricultural produce, or proven 
track record of successfully processing such activities in Mongolia or similar conditions. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar and project field locations 
Expected timing: 2019. 
Tasks and activities: The specialist will train and advise CGG members (project farmers and 
workers at the vegetable processing unit) on vegetable processing and packaging issues on an 
as-needed basis. 
(ii)  Water  Management  and  Irrigation  Specialist  –  Nationally  recruited  (3  person-
months) 
Expertise:  The  candidate  shall  have  a  degree  in  agriculture  water  management,  irrigation 
engineering other relevant fields and at least 10 years of experience in agricultural irrigation in 
Mongolia or in growing conditions similar to those of Mongolia. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar and project field locations 
Expected timing: 2018. 
Tasks and activities: The specialist will train and advise CGG members on water and irrigation 
issues on an as-needed basis. 
(iii) Soil Sciences Specialist – Nationally recruited (3 person-months) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a degree in soil and crop sciences or other relevant fields 
and at least 10 years of experience in soil analysis and vegetable production in Mongolia or in 
growing conditions similar to those of Mongolia. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
2 The TOR should be open to national specialists and international specialists recruited locally. Many international NGO 
technicians and international (highly skilled) experts (well, almost-volunteers) are prepared to work at local specialist 
salaries and have a lot to offer. This area may benefit from international know-how.  
104 
Appendix 7 
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar and project field locations 
Expected timing: 2018. 
Tasks and activities: The specialist will train and advise CGG members on soil improvement 
and the use of fertilizers on an as-needed basis.  
(iv)  Entomologist  /  Pest  Management  Specialist  –  Nationally  recruited  (3  person-
months) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a degree in entomology, agricultural pest management or 
other  relevant  fields,  and  at  least  10  years  of  experience  in  agricultural  pest  management  in 
Mongolia or in conditions similar to those of Mongolia. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar and project field locations. 
Expected timing: 2018. 
Tasks and activities: The specialist will train and advise CGG members on entomology and pest 
management on an as-needed basis. 
(v)  Seed Management Specialist – Nationally recruited (3 person-months) 
Expertise: The candidate shall have a degree in seed technology, agricultural biotechnology, or 
other relevant fields and at least 10 years of experience in vegetable seed management (grading, 
quality control, sorting, etc.) in Mongolia or in growing conditions similar to those of Mongolia.  
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator.  
Duration of contract: 1 person-month. 
Post Location: Ulaanbaatar and project field locations. 
Expected timing: 2018. 
Tasks  and  activities:  The  specialist  will  train  and  advise  CGG  members  on  seed  selection, 
grading, and sorting on an as-needed basis. 
Appendix 8 
105 
SOUM PROFILES 
Main Characteristics of the Four Project Soums 
1. 
Background 
Bornuur  and  Orkhon  soums  has  historically  been  some  of  the  largest  vegetable  producers  in 
Mongolia.  Bornuur  soum  has  traditionally  been  one  of  the  main  potato  growers  while  Orkhon 
soum has been the largest producer of vegetables other than potato. All four major producers of 
pickled vegetables in Ulaanbaatar get at least some of their vegetables from Orkhon soum. The 
trend continues to date; Orkhon and Bornuur soums still tend to specialize in growing vegetables 
they have traditional knowledge and experience.  
Ulaangom  soum  has traditionally  been  one of the main seed  producers  in Mongolia.  Although 
seed  production  has  declined  significantly  in  recent  years  compared  with  its  peak,  vegetable 
growing households still mainly specialize in seed production.  
Yeruu soum does not have a traditional large-scale vegetable growing sector. 
Table 1: Soum Vegetable Production, in Tons, 2016 
Potato 
Other vegetables 
Source: Soum Governor’s Office data. 
2. 
Vegetable growing land 
Ulaangom 
Orkhon 
Bornuur 
Yeruu 
2.119.0 
3,731.0 
2.137.0 
10,500.0 
6,600.0 
2,234.0 
653.7 
410.2 
According to data from soum administrations, among the four project soums, Bornuur soum has 
the highest number of vegetable-growing plots owned by households (549 plots with area of 976.5 
Ha) while Orkhon has the largest total area of plots owned by households.   
Table 2: Plots Owned by Households 
Total  number  of  plots  owned  by 
households 
Total area of plots owned by households 
(ha) 
Source: Soum Governor’s Office data. 
Ulaangom 
Orkhon 
Bornuur 
Yeruu 
                 163  
        282  
        549  
        283  
240 
1,633.0 
976.5 
133.5 
Yeruu soum is characterized by very high portion (74%) of vegetable growers owning plots less 
than  0.6  Ha.  Most  of  the  vegetable  growers  are  people  who  grow  for  their  own  household 
consumption  (with  excesses  are  sold)  within  their  household  fences  instead  of  designated 
planting areas. On the contrary, almost a half of vegetable growing households in Orkhon soum 
have plots larger than 2 Ha. Own consumption growing is the next largest group in Orkhon where 
22% of plots are less than 0.5 Ha. In the other two soums, plots owned by households are evenly 
distributed in small, medium and large sizes. Tables 3 and 4 present this in detail.  
106 
Appendix 8 
Table 3: No. of Vegetable Grower Households by Plot Sizes Owned 
up to 0.5 Ha 
0.51 - 1.0 Ha  
1.01 - 1.5 Ha 
1.5 - 2.0 Ha 
Above 2 Ha 
No. of 
individual 
vegetable 
growers 
Total 
Ulaangom 
 9  
 48  
 49  
 26  
 31  
 163  
Orkhon 
 63  
 38  
 24  
 23  
 134  
 282  
Bornuur 
 174  
 143  
 43  
 74  
 115  
 549  
Table 4: % of Vegetable Grower Households by Plot Sizes Owned 
Bornuur 
Ulaangom 
Orkhon 
No. of 
individual 
vegetable 
growers 
up to 0.5 Ha 
0.51 - 1.0 Ha  
1.01 - 1.5 Ha 
1.5 - 2.0 Ha 
Above 2 Ha 
6% 
29% 
30% 
16% 
19% 
22% 
13% 
9% 
8% 
48% 
Yeruu 
32% 
26% 
8% 
13% 
21% 
Yeruu 
 209  
 32  
 19  
 6  
 17  
 283  
74% 
11% 
7% 
2% 
6% 
Total 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Availability of Resources 
Because  of  their  long  tradition  of  vegetable  growing  in  large  scales,  growers  in  Bornuur  and 
Orkhon  soums  are  relatively  well  equipped  with  hand  tools  compared  those  in  Yeruu  and 
Ulaangom soums do not have much tools. In general, vegetable growing is highly labor-intensive 
in Mongolia. Hand tools that the vegetable growers currently have only complement labor input.   
Smallholders in all four soums rent tractors to plough their fields. Lack of tractors with appropriate 
capacity in the soums is one of the major constraints faced by smallholders. Harvesting of potato 
is one of the time- and labor-consuming work. For improving efficacy of this work, growers need 
potato-harvesting machine that is a lack. Some of other equipment, such as plough, harrows and 
cultivators  hand made  by  smallholders  and  their  increased  availability  will  improve  productivity 
significantly.  
1.  
Bornuur soum, Tuv aimag 
1.1    Summary Socio-Economic Statistics 
No. 
Information 
1. 
  Territory (hectare)  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
  Population* 
  Male 
h
c
h
w
i
Female 
f
o
% of female in population 
  No. of baghs 
  No. of livestock (heads) 
  Unemployment rate for population 25-59 
Year of 
data 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
Value 
114,687.0 
     5,161  
    2,591  
     2,570  
49.8% 
           4  
114,073 
31.5% 
No. 
Information 
9. 
  Employment rate for population 15-59 
10.    Poverty rate 
11.    Distance from UB, km 
12.    No. of households 
13.   
  Women headed households 
i
h
c
h
w
14.   
f
o
Households under the poverty line 
15.    No. of vegetable grower households 
16.   
  Women headed households 
h
c
h
w
i
17.   
f
o
Households under the poverty line  
18.    Number of grower household groups 
19.    No. of vegetable growers 
20.    No. of women in vegetable growers 
21.    Total area planted by vegetable grower households (hectares) 
22.   
23.   
  vegetable 
h
c
h
w
i
f
o
potato  
24.    Total production (tons) 
25.   
26.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Vegetable production (tons) 
Potato production (tons) 
Appendix 8 
107 
Year of 
data 
Value 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
41% 
2.5% 
       105  
    1,581 
       117  
         40  
     232 
47 
- 
1 
       447  
264 
976.5 
189.5 
787.0 
8,835.0 
2,235.0 
6,600.0 
27.    Average household revenue of vegetable grower households  
₮8.0million 
28.   
29.   
30.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
with plots of 0.5 Ha 
with plots of 1.0 Ha 
with plots of 1.5 Ha 
31.    Total number / capacity (tons) of storages in soum  
32.   
Total  number  /  capacity  (tons)  of  storages  owned  by  vegetable  grower 
households 
33.    Number / capacity (sq. m) of greenhouses in soum 
2016 
₮4.0 million 
2016 
₮8.0 million 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
₮12.0 
million 
656 / 
13,252.0  
652 / 
9,252.0 
         40 / 
5,200.0  
34.   
Number  /  capacity  (sq.  m)  of  greenhouses  owned  by  vegetable  grower 
households 
2016 
30 / 4,200.0 
Data sources: Bornuur soum Governor’s Office and a Report of D. Nyamdorj, National Consultant. 
108 
Appendix 8 
Bornuur soum. Water reservoir and vegetable fields. (Source: Google Map. 2016) 
1.2.    Main Problems Faced by Vegetable Growing Households 
Most of Bornuur soums vegetable growers have plots along the 8 (with additional 6 km from the 
reservoir to the fields) km irrigation scheme located near the soum center. The scheme was built 
in 1966 and has been in use since 1967. Due to usage over a long period, the irrigation scheme 
started to malfunction.  Leakages appeared in the dam holding reservoir, which cannot be filled 
up because of potential risk of dam breaking.  This coupled with uncoordinated use of water by 
farmers, results in water shortage for plots located towards the end of the scheme (Sections ХА 
-1 & ХА-2). The pumping station that was supposed to pump water upslope towards the end of 
the scheme is not fully functional due to two reasons: a) farmers do not have money to pay for 
electricity; b) there is not enough water to pump at the station.  
Second, farmers currently protect their vegetable with fences made with wood pillars connected 
by wires separating some plots individually. Such fences do not provide reliable protection, and 
there  are  regular  conflicts  between  herders  and  vegetable  growers  over  animals  eating 
vegetables. Growers must stay near by the plots day and nights during growing season to protect 
their vegetables. 
1.3.    Main Actions Taken by The Government to Tackle with the Problems 
In recent years, Government had spent approximately MNT 4 billion (~USD 2 million) for repairing 
/  rehabilitating  the  two  sections  (ХА  -1  &  ХА-2)  of  dam,  but  the  leakage  problem  was  not 
addressed during the rehabilitation.  Technical drawings for repairing the leakage have not been 
made and is expected that solution of the problem will require significant amount of fund.   
1.4.    Requests from the Soum Administration and Farmers to the Project 
The soum administration and farmers have expressed their interests to implement the project in 
their soum. Their most pressing need is to repair the leakages in the reservoir dam in the irrigation 
scheme,  and to  improve  protection  of  their fields  by  building  fences  around  the field along  the 
irrigation scheme.  
2.  
Orkhon soum, Darkhan-Uuul aimag 
2.1.    Summary Socio-Economic Statistics 
Appendix 8 
109 
Information 
Year of data 
Value 
No. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Territory (hectare) 
Population 
  Male 
h
c
h
w
i
Female 
f
o
% of female in population 
6. 
  No. of bhags 
7. 
  No. of livestock (heads) 
8. 
  Unemployment rate for population 25-59 
9. 
  Employment rate for population 15-59 
10.    Poverty rate  
11.    Distance from UB, km 
12.    No. of households 
13.   
  Women headed households 
h
c
h
w
i
14.   
f
o
Households under the poverty line 
15.    No. of vegetable grower households 
16.   
17.   
f
o
  Women headed households 
h
c
h
w
i
Households under the poverty line 
18.    Number of grower household groups 
19.    No. of vegetable growers 
20.    No. of women in vegetable growers 
21.    Total area planted by vegetable farmer households (hectares) 
22.   
23.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
vegetable 
potato  
24.    Total production (tons) 
25.   
26.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Vegetable production (tons) 
Potato production (tons) 
27.    Average household revenue of vegetable grower households  
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
44,177.0 
   3,226  
   1,657  
  1,567  
48.6% 
          2  
41,465.0 
10% 
Not available 
0.60% 
270 
     965  
       49  
       18  
     742  
Not available 
Not available 
Not available 
     1,279  
549 
1,633.0 
1,336.0 
297.0 
14,231.0 
10,500.0 
3,731.0 
 ₮4.5 million 
110 
Appendix 8 
No. 
28.   
29.   
30.   
with plots of 0.5 Ha 
with plots of 1.0 Ha 
with plots of 1.5 Ha 
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Information 
Year of data 
Value 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
₮2.0 million  
₮4.0 million 
₮6.0 million 
108 / 7,656.0  
108 / 7,656.0 
   23 / 2,760 
   23 / 2,760 
31.    Total number / capacity (tons) of soum storages  
32.   
Total  number  /  capacity  (tons)  of  storages  owned  by  vegetable 
grower households 
33.    Number / capacity (sq. m) of greenhouses in soum 
Number  /  capacity  (sq.  m)  of  greenhouses  owned  by  vegetable 
grower households 
34.   
35.   
Data sources: Orkhon soum Governor’s Office and a Report of D. Nyamdorj, National Consultant. 
Orkhon soum. Vegetable fields. (Source: Google Map. 2016) 
2.2.    Main Problems Faced by Vegetable Growing Households 
The irrigation scheme of Orkhon soum is owned by a private company, ‘Khurtai’ LLC. No major 
repair has been done for the scheme since its construction, and maintenance has been minimal, 
and current condition of the scheme is not good. Canal brackets and head construction of the 
scheme are aged and broken, and the concrete canals cracked with leakages. The owner ‘Khurtai’ 
LLC  has  not  made  any  investment  to  address  the  problems.  However,  the  company  allows 
farmers with fields along the scheme to use water without requiring any payment.  
Appendix 8 
111 
Soil  in  some  parts  of  irrigated  vegetable  fields  has  been  depleted  /  eroded  and  affected  by 
diseases. Few of the growers use fertilizers to improve production. 
2.3.    Main Actions Taken by the Government to Tackle the Problems 
Soum Administration is concerned about the current situation of the scheme and spends some 
fund when necessary to prevent floodwater from creating more damages to the scheme. 
2.4.    Requests from the Soum Administration and Farmers to the Project 
The soum administration and farmers have expressed their interests to implement the project in 
their  soum.  There  is  a  vital  need  to  repair  the  entire  irrigation  scheme  –  head  construction, 
brackets of the canals etc. in the future. In addition,  soum requests the project’s assistance in 
improving soil quality and in fighting with weeds such as wheat grass, dog grass and others that 
negatively affect vegetable production.   
If  and  when  the  project  is  implemented,  the  soum  administration  will  be  willing  to  encourage 
collaboration among vegetable growers by forming growers’ groups to improve their livelihood. 
The soum is also planning to increase size of fields for growing fruits.      
3.  
Yeruu soum, Selenge aimag 
3.1.    Summary Socio-Economic Statistics 
No. 
Information 
Year of data 
Value 
1. 
  Territory (hectare) 
2. 
  Population 
3. 
4. 
5. 
  Male 
h
c
h
w
i
Female 
f
o
% of female in population 
6. 
  No. of baghs 
7. 
  No. of livestock (heads) 
8. 
  Unemployment rate for population 25-59 
9. 
  Employment rate for population 15-59 
10.    Poverty rate 
11.    Distance from UB, km 
12.    No. of households 
13.   
  Women headed households 
h
c
h
w
i
14.   
f
o
Households under the poverty line 
15.    No. of vegetable farmer households 
16.   
  Women headed households 
h
c
h
w
i
17.   
f
o
Households under the poverty line 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
837,993.0 
   6,631  
   3,384  
  3,247  
48% 
         3  
76,419.0 
29.7% 
62.9% 
25% 
     320  
  1,816  
       113  
51 
     267  
58 
48 
112 
Appendix 8 
18.    Number of grower household groups 
19.    No. of vegetable growers 
20.    No. of women in vegetable growing households 
21.    Total area planted by vegetable farmer households (hectares) 
22.   
23.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
of which vegetable 
of which potato  
24.    Total production (tons) 
25.   
26.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Vegetable production (tons) 
Potato production (tons) 
27.    Average household revenue of vegetable farmer households  
28.   
29.   
30.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
with plots of 0.5 Ha 
with plots of 1.0 Ha 
with plots of 1.5 Ha 
31.    Total number / capacity (tons) of storages in soum  
32.   
Total number / capacity (tons) of storages owned by vegetable grower 
households 
33.    Number / capacity (sq. m) of greenhouses in soum 
34.   
Number  /  capacity  (sq.  m)  of  greenhouses  owned  by  vegetable 
grower households 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
2016 
Data sources: Yeruu soum Governor’s Office and a Report of D. Nyamdorj, National Consultant. 
5  
500        
358 
133.4 
68.6 
64.8 
1,063.9                                                                                                                                           
410.2 
653.7 
₮600,000.0 
₮1.0 million 
₮1.5 million 
₮2,0 million 
  15 / 450.0  
14 / 300.0 
18 / 460.0          
17 / 100.0  
Yeruu soum. Soum center and vegetable / crop fields. (Source: Google Map. 2016) 
Appendix 8 
113 
3.2.   Main Problems Faced by Vegetable Growing Households 
Compared  with  other  soums,  Yeruu soum  has  high  proportion  of vegetable  growers that  grow 
vegetables  for  their  own  household  consumption  with  intention  to  sell  the  excess  in  their 
household fences. About 30% of the plots is smaller than 0.05 Ha (500m2), 50% of the plots are 
smaller than 0.2 Ha (2000m2).   
The  soum  has  a  vegetable  growers’  association  established  in  2010  to  implement  a  project 
implemented  by  a Parliament member  supporting smallholders.  Nominally  the  association  has 
membership of 70 households (283 members) divided into 22 grower groups, but the association 
has been largely inactive until last year. The association resumed its activity to some extent last 
year to sell vegetables grown by its members to two large mines operating in the soum territory.   
The soum administration and farmers have expressed their interests to implement the project in 
their  soum,  and  recognize  the  need  to  reactivate  grower  groups,  and  combine  their  efforts  in 
vegetable production, selling, marketing and ultimately improving their livelihood.  
Major constraints faced by smallholders is lack of storages and equipment. Lack of storages force 
farmers to sell most of their product during harvesting season where prices are low. Because of 
their small-scale operation, most farmers are not able to afford tools and equipment and perform 
most  of  the  task  manually.  As  Yeruu  soum  is  located  along  a  river,  farmers  do  not  face  any 
problem with irrigation.  
3.3.    Main Actions Taken by the Government to Tackle the Problems 
Soum government is plans to establish and vegetable processing workshop. However, the plan 
is  in  early  stage  with  no  concrete  for  funding,  design  and  management  structure.  Soum 
administration  also  transferred  some  equipment  from  the  Agricultural  Centre  to  the  Growers 
Association.  
3.4.    Requests from the Soum Administration and Farmers to the Project 
The soum administration and farmers have expressed their interests to implement the project in 
their soum.  The soum governor understands that successful implementation of the project is a 
guarantee for improving the livelihood of growers and get more support from donor organizations 
like ADB/JFPR and others. The soum and growers’ requests to the project include:   
o  Various training for strengthening the existing grower groups, seed and new technology  
o  Equipment for vegetable growing (tractor, seeder, cultivator, digger, plough, etc.)  
o  Greenhouses for grower households (if possible, winter greenhouse) 
o  Storage (100 tons capacity) 
o  Vegetable processing workshop  
4.  
Ulaangom soum, Uvs aimag 
4.1.    Summary Socio-Economic Statistics 
No. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Territory (hectare) 
Population 
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Male 
Female 
Information 
Year of data 
Value 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
260,433.2 
      30,270  
      15,408  
     14,862  
Information 
Year of data 
Value 
114 
Appendix 8 
No. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
% of female in population 
No. of baghs 
No. of livestock (heads) 
Unemployment rate for population 25-59 
Employment rate for population 15-59 
10.   
Poverty rate 
11.   
Distance from UB, km 
12.   
No. of households 
13.   
14.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Women headed households 
Households under the poverty line 
15.   
No. of vegetable growing households 
16.   
17.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Women headed households 
Households under the poverty line 
18.   
No. of vegetable growers 
19.   
No. of women in vegetable growers 
20.   
Total area planted by vegetable grower households (hectares) 
21.   
22.   
23.   
24.   
25.   
  vegetable 
h
c
h
w
i
f
o
potato  
Total production (tons) 
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
Vegetable production (tons) 
Potato production (tons) 
26.   
Average household revenue of vegetable grower households  
27.   
28.   
29.   
i
h
c
h
w
f
o
with plots of 0.5 Ha 
with plots of 1.0 Ha 
with plots of 1.5 Ha 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
2015 
49% 
            12  
137,666.0 
12.70% 
Not available 
Not available 
       1,456  
       8,312  
      1,221  
          740  
                258  
      Not available 
      Not available 
          620  
Not available 
240 
155.0 
145.0 
4,256.0 
2,137.0 
2,119.0 
Not available 
Not available 
Not available 
Not available 
30.   
Total number / capacity (tons) of storages in soum 
2015 
74 / 1,520 
31.   
Total number / capacity (tons) of storages owned by vegetable 
grower households 
Not available 
Appendix 8 
115 
No. 
Information 
Year of data 
Value 
32.   
Number / capacity (sq. m) of greenhouses in soum 
2015 
161 / 13,820 
Number  /  capacity  (sqm)  of  greenhouses  owned  by  vegetable 
grower households 
Not available 
33.   
34.   
Data sources: Ulaangom soum Governor’s Office and a Report of D. Nyamdorj, National Consultant. 
Ulaangom  soum.  Vegetable 
seed fields. Chandmani (IPAS) 
(Source: Google Map. 2016) 
Ulaangom  soum.  Vegetable 
seed fields. Gashuunii gol.  
(Source: Google Map. 2016) 
116 
Appendix 8 
4.2.    Main Problems in Seed Production Faced by the Aimag Recently 
Ulaangom soum of Uvs aimag is has favorable climate condition for seed growing, and farmers 
have traditionally grown seeds for several decades. This area produces 95-98 percent of seeds 
of  root  crops  namely  turnip,  beet,  carrots.  As  Mongolia  aims  to  increase  domestic  vegetable 
production, demand for seeds produced in Ulaangom is expected to be increased further.  
In Gashuunii gol   area, where around 1/3 of seed farmers are produced, farmers face limited 
supply of water. Main source of water is wells, but there are not enough wells to provide water to 
all fields.  
In Chandmani area, where the branch of the Institute for Plant and Agricultural Science (IPAS) 
owns a large field, three wells that have already been constructed in 2011 is not fully functional 
due to lack of electricity. Providing electricity to these well will help increase seed production by 
the  IPAS  branch.  In return, IPAS  branch  is  willing to  make some  of  its  land  available for  seed 
production by smallholder growers.  
Currently, electricity line reached to these farmers in comparatively close distance. Ground water 
well should be established in the middle of farmers plot together with water reservoir, which will 
use  electricity.  An  electricity  transformer  should  also  be  installed  to  operate  water  well(s). 
Reservoir and irrigation scheme should be installed for demonstration purpose among farmers. 
The  branch  of  the  Institute  for  Plant  and  Agricultural  Science  (IPAS)  started  to  suffer  from  a 
problem with water during May and September (vegetation period), so that installed three water 
wells in 2011 to use for field irrigation, but they have not yet connected with electricity. The IPAS 
also need storage for seed.  
4.3.   Main Actions Taken by the Government to Tackle the Problems 
Soum  administration  plans  to  deliver  electricity  to  the  ‘Gashuunii  gol’  area  using  the  public 
development fund (government support). Aimag government is planning to increase land areas 
for improving the seed production. 
4.4.    Requests from the Soum Administration and Farmers to the Project 
The soum administration and farmers have expressed their interests to implement the project in 
their soum.  The Deputy Governor of the Uvs aimag expressed his interest in implementing the 
project  in  Ulaangom  and  confirmed  to  provide  full  support  to  the  project  in  every  stage  of  its 
implementation. If the project is to be implemented in Ulaangom, aimag administration promised 
to make new fields available for seed production by including the issue in aimag’s land use plan 
in 2017.  The soum administration and farmers need project support in the following areas:  
(i)  Purchase of farming equipment and tractor. 
(ii)  Purchase  of  agrochemicals.  Budget  might  be  around  10  percent  of  the  equipment 
support to seed producers. 
(iii)  Water well and reservoir (tank) and irrigation pipes in Gashuunii gol.    
(iv)  Soft loan (revolving fund) for operation.  
(v)  Connecting water wells Chandmani area to the electricity line. 
(vi)  Mother crop storages (IPAS branch). 
(vii)  Make land available for research and for local seed producers.  
(viii)  Training to seed farmers. 
Appendix 9 
117 
9057-REG: Building Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security in Asia and the Pacific 
(Phase 1) 
Request for Funding Support for a Sub-Component Focusing on Creating Livelihood 
Opportunities for Women 
The Project 
The Community Vegetable Farming for Livelihood Improvement project is a pilot initiative aiming to 
improve the livelihood of smallholders involved in vegetable production in selected soums of four of 
Mongolia’s  aimags:  Bornuur  in  Tuv,  Orkhon  in  Darkhan-Uul,  Ulaangom  in  Uvs,  and  Yeruu  in 
Selenge.  This  is  to  be  achieved  by  introducing  a  community  farming  model,  applying  improved 
climate-resilient farming practices, strengthening farm-to-market linkages, and integrating farming 
groups into inclusive agriculture value chains. Project beneficiaries will be vegetable growers, seed 
producers, and household-based food processers across the four sites. The project has strong pro-
poor, women empowerment and participatory features and will directly benefit some 180 farming 
households (many of them female-headed) representing about 400 farmers and seed producers. 
Indirect benefit will accrue to the wider community in target soums with a total population of about 
45,000 and beyond. 
Impact, Outcome and Outputs 
The impacts will be: (i) income generation and enterprise support for smallholder vegetable farmers 
increased and agricultural productivity based on a value chain approach improved; and (ii) resilience 
and adaptation to climate change improved. The outcome will be rural livelihoods for smallholder 
vegetable farmers in project areas improved. The project will have three outputs: Community grower 
groups established; Sustainable climate-resilient vegetable farming practices applied; and farmers’ 
access to markets improved. Please see attached project draft GAR and GAP for more details.  
Support Requested  
Support from the RETA is being requested to support a sub-component under Output 3 – setting 
up  a  vegetable  food  processing  workshop  in  Orkhon  soum  to  create  livelihood  opportunities  for 
women  CGG  members,  and  gender-targeted  training  in  food  processing,  packaging,  labeling, 
marketing, and selling will be conducted.  
The  current  JFPR  grant  budget  is  covering  activities  in  4  project  soums  across  the  entire  value 
chain.  Given  the  limited  budget  and  breath  of  activities  to  be  conducted,  curtail  work  under  the 
project to focus on building and setting up of the processing workshop and some training activities. 
In order to achieve maximum benefits and have more impact, additional funds are required to: (i) 
put in place small-scale equipment (tools and appliances) for the value-addition and processing of 
fruits and vegetables, such as graters, blenders, juicers, etc, for women to be able to pickle, make 
jams, sauces, juices etc. Also, some small-scale equipment for freezing and drying of fresh produce; 
and (ii) provide skills training to a large number of women on value-added agri-processing, sorting, 
packaging, selling, and marketing knowledge. 
Within  the  current  project  scope  funded  by  JFPR,  around  50  women  could  benefit  from  this  sub-
component. If additional support was provided through the RETA, there is a potential to upgrade this 
project to GEM with the potential direct benefits for women in non-traditional "green" livelihood activities 
tippling to almost 150 women (around 10% of the entire female population in Orkhon soum).  
The  potential  increase  in benefits  to  women  in  the  Orkhon  project  site  and  impact  for  livelihood 
overall will be significantly greater if RETA funding $100,000 is be tapped into.  
118 
Appendix 9 
Terms of Reference 
Social  and  Gender  Expert  –  National (24  person-months, intermittent) *  12 months  from 
grant via firm/NGO/entity, 12 months from gender RETA 
Expertise:  The candidate shall have a university degree in sociology, social anthropology, or 
other discipline relevant to social and gender development. The candidate will preferably have at 
least 5 years of experience with rural development projects. Experience of ADB or other foreign-
funded projects is required. The candidate must have a good command of spoken and written 
English. 
Reporting: The position will report to the PIU project coordinator. 
Duration of contract: 24 person-months, intermittent. 
Post location: Ulaanbaatar with field visits as required. 
Expected timing: Starting around April 2018.  
Scope of work: The expert  will (i) lead the analysis of social and gender issues relevant to the 
project, (ii) ensure that the formation of CGGs is in line with the stated pro-poor, participatory and 
gender-sensitive priorities and meet  the  targets presented  in GAR, (iii)  support the community 
development expert in guiding the CGGs in developing CGAPs and ensure that the CGAPs are 
in  line  with  the  project’s  stated  social  and  gender  priorities,  (iv)  work  closely  with  other  PIU 
specialists in helping the CGGs  achieve the objectives of GAPs, (v) advise the PIU, MOFALI, 
and soums on social and gender issues and recommend appropriate actions, (vi) ensure progress 
together actions and activities in GAP and monitor the project's performance against the GAP, 
(vii) conduct gender sensitive and gender targeted training, and (viii) work closely with the project 
and beneficiaries on the women targeted vegetable processing workshop.  
Expected Outputs - Tasks and Activities   
Output  1:  Review  ADB  documentation  on social  and poverty  analysis  and  gender  action  plan 
(SPRSS, GAP) and due diligence conducted during project preparation and prepare a two-page 
summary of the essential findings and requirements for easy reference by PIU staff and  soum 
administrations. 
Output 2: Carry out consultations with communities and the government to orient them on the 
social and gender aspects of the project. 
(i)  Orient  and  advise  staff  of  the  PIU,  MOFALI,  and  soums  administrations  on  anticipated 
poverty  and  social  impacts,  participatory  approaches,  and  gender mainstreaming  via the 
GAP developed for the project. 
(ii)  Ensure that a shared understanding exists in project locations of the social criteria to be 
used in establishing CGGs.  
(iii)  Assess  training  needs,  including  training  that  specifically  targets  women  beneficiaries. 
Design  such  training  anticipating  its  evolution  and  modifications  in  the  course  of 
implementation.  
Output 3: Work closely on the vegetable processing workshop subcomponent of Output 3 that 
will be targeted particularly and solely for women project beneficiaries. Responsible for training 
related to vegetable processing, packaging and marketing targeted to women.  
Appendix 9 
119 
Output  4:  Directly  or  through  soum  coordinators,  provide  advice  to  CGGs  on  how  best  to 
incorporate social and gender concerns into CGAPs.  
Output 5: Periodically conduct a field review of the extent to which the social priorities and targets 
CGGs are being achieved and ensure that the assessment is incorporated into regular project 
monitoring reports. Based on the field review, recommend possible modification of the GAP.  
Output 6: Train PIU staff on effective gender mainstreaming and reporting sex-aggregated data.
120 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
121 
122 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
123 
124 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
125 
126 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
127 
128 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
129 
130 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
131 
132 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
133 
134 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
135 
136 
Appendix 9 
Appendix 9 
137 
