Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection                            
and Green Development Project (RRP PRC 52026) 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 52026-001 
Loan and Numbers: {LXXXX} 
November 2019 
People’s Republic of China:  Anhui Huangshan Xin’an 
River Ecological Protection and Green Development 
Project 
ABBREVIATIONS 
AC 
ADB 
AP 
APDOF 
BOF 
BTP 
CQS 
CSC 
DMF 
DMS 
EA 
EHS 
EIA 
EM 
EMP 
ESMS 
EUROIBOR 
FCUP 
FEOR 
FGD 
FMA 
FSR 
FTP 
GAP 
GIF 
GRM 
HD 
HDRC 
HMG 
HMBOF 
HPMO 
HSDG 
HZDG 
HTIC 
HXIC 
KfW 
IA 
ICS 
IEE 
LAR 
LIEC 
LP 
LURT 
MIS 
MOF 
NDRC 
NPS 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Advanced Contracting 
Asian Development Bank 
Affected Person 
Anhui Provincial Department of Finance 
Bureau of Finance 
Biodata Technical Proposal 
Consultant’s Qualification Selection 
Construction Supervision Company 
Design and Monitoring Framework 
Detailed Measurement Survey 
Executing Agency 
Environmental, Health and Safety 
Environment Impact Assessment 
Ethnic Minority 
Environmental Management Plan 
Environmental and Social Management System 
EURO-interbank offered rate 
Foreign Capital Utilization Plan  
Financial Evaluation Opinion Report  
Focused Group Discussion 
Financial Management Assessment 
Feasibility Study Report 
Full Technical Proposal 
Gender Action Plan 
Green Investment Fund 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
House Demolishing 
Huangshan Development and Reform Commission 
Huangshan Municipal Government 
Huangshan Municipal Bureau of Finance 
Huangshan Municipal Project Management Office 
Huangshan District Government 
Huizhou District Government 
Huangshan Trust and Investment Corporation 
Huangshan Xintou Investment Corporation 
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau 
Implementing Agency 
Individual Consultant Selection 
Initial Environmental Examination 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement 
Loan Implementation Environment Consultant 
Limited Partner 
Land Use Right Transfer 
Management Information System 
Ministry of Finance 
National Development and Reform Commission 
Non-point Source 
OCB 
O&M 
PAM 
PLG 
PMO 
PPMS 
PRC 
QBS 
QCBS 
QCG 
RF 
RP 
RWW 
PIA 
PRC 
SCG 
SDAP 
SGE 
SOE 
SPMO 
STP 
TA 
TDG 
TN 
TP 
TPA 
WA 
XCG 
YCG 
YREB 
1S1E 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Open Competitive Bidding 
Operation and Maintenance 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Leading Group, 
Project Management Office 
Project Performance Management System 
People’s Republic of China 
Quality-Based Selection 
Quality and Cost Based Selection 
Qimen County Government 
Retroactive Financing 
Resettlement Plan 
Rural Wastewater 
Project Impacted Area 
People’s Republic of China 
She County Government 
Social Development Action Plan 
Some Gender Element 
Statement of Expenditure 
Sub-Project Management Office 
Simplified Technical Proposal 
Technical Assistance 
Tunxi District Government 
Total Nitrogen 
Total Phosphorus 
Targeted Poverty Alleviation 
Withdrawal Application 
Xiuning County Government 
Yi County Government 
Yangtze River Economic Belt 
Single-stage one-envelop 
CONTENTS 
I.  
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Rationale 
Impact and outcome 
Outputs 
II. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Project Readiness Activities 
Overall Project Implementation Plan 
Implementation Plan for GIF 
III.  PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Project Organization Structure 
Implementation Arrangement and Procedures of Green Investment Fund 
IV.  COSTS AND FINANCING 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions 
Key Assumptions 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
Fund Flow Diagram 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
VI.  PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
Procurement Plan 
Consultant's Terms of Reference 
D. 
VII.  SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
Environment 
Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement 
Ethnic Minorities/Indigenous Peoples Safeguard 
Environmental and Social Management System 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Other 
VIII.   GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
A. 
B. 
General 
For Green Investment Fund 
1 
1 
3 
3 
5 
5 
6 
9 
10 
10 
13 
15 
16 
19 
20 
20 
21 
23 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
32 
32 
33 
36 
36 
38 
38 
38 
40 
45 
45 
45 
47 
50 
50 
51 
52 
52 
52 
53 
IX.  PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND COMMUNICATION 
                                                                                                                               59 
59 
62 
65 
65 
65 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework 
Monitoring 
Evaluation 
Reporting 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
XI.  ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
XII.  RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
APPENDIX 1: DETAILED ACTIVITIES OF ALL SUBPROJECTS 
APPENDIX 2: OUTLINE TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR CONSULTING SERVICES 
APPENDIX 3: ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT PLAN (EMP) 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
Objectives 
Organizations and Their Responsibilities for EMP Implementation 
Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
Environmental Monitoring, Inspection and Reporting 
Training and Capacity Building 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Public Consultation and Awareness Raising 
Cost Estimates 
Mechanisms for Feedback and Adjustment 
APPENDIX 4-A: POTENTIAL SUBPROJECT LIST 
APPENDIX 4-B: DRAFT TERM SHEETS 
APPENDIX 4-C: SUBPROJECT SELECTION CRITERIA 
APPEDNIX 4-D: SAMPLE STATEMENT OF UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
APPENDIX 4-E: PROCUREMENT MANNUAL 
APPENDIX 4-F: ADB LIST OF PROHIBITED INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES 
APPENDIX 4-G: TEMPLATE OF SEMI-ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT 
APPENDIX 4-H: EXAMPLE OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT 
71 
71 
71 
72 
77 
123 
123 
123 
127 
137 
140 
141 
144 
144 
147 
157 
158 
160 
163 
164 
170 
171 
175 
APPENDIX 5: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM                                    
FOR THE GREEN INVESTMENT FUND 
201 
Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection                            
and Green Development Project (RRP PRC 52026) 
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process 
1.  The  project  administration  manual  (PAM)  describes  the  essential  administrative  and 
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance 
with the policies and procedures of the Government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The 
PAM should include references to all available templates and instructions either through linkages 
to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM. 
2.  The  Huangshan  Municipal  Government  (HMG),  as  the  project  executing  agency,  and 
Huangshan District Government (HSDG), Huizhou District Government (HZDG), Tunxi District 
Government  (TDG),  She  County  Government  (SCG),  Yi  County  Government  (YCG),  Qimen 
County  Government  (QCG),  Xiuning  County  Government  (XCG),  and  Huangshan  Trust 
Investment Company (HTIC) as the project implementing agencies, are wholly responsible for 
the  implementation  of  the  project,  as  agreed  jointly  between  the  borrower  and  ADB;  and  in 
accordance  with  the  policies  and  procedures  of  the  government  and  ADB.  ADB  staff  is 
responsible  for  supporting  implementation  including  compliance  by  the  HMG,  HSDG,  HZDG, 
TDG,  SCG,  YCG,  QCG,  XCG,  and  HTIC  of  their  obligations  and  responsibilities  for  project 
implementation in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. 
3.  At loan negotiations, the borrower and ADB shall agree to the PAM and ensure consistency with 
the loan and project agreements. Such agreement shall be reflected in the minutes of the loan 
negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the loan 
and project agreements, the provisions of the loan and project agreements shall prevail. 
4.  After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP), 
changes in implementation arrangements are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to 
relevant  government  and ADB  administrative  procedures  (including the  project  administration 
instructions) and upon such approval they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM. 
1 
I.  
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Rationale 
The  Yangtze  River  Economic  Belt  (YREB)  is  one  of  the  three  key  economic  growth 
1. 
engines  in  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC).  Its  nine  provinces  and  two  specially 
administered  municipalities  account  for  more  than  40%  of  the  population,  40%  of  freshwater 
resources,  and  about  45%  of  the  country’s  economic  output.  While  having  benefited  from 
extensive growth since the late 1980s, the YREB is facing significant development challenges as 
a result of (i) increasing pollution and pressure on natural resources; (ii) slow transformation into 
green economic development; (iii) limited integration of waterways, ports, and intermodal logistics; 
and (iv) weak institutional coordination for strategic planning. To manage these challenges, the 
Government of the PRC formulated the YREB Development Plan 2016–2030,1 which stipulates 
the  prioritization  of  ecological  protection  and  promotion  of  green  development  as  the  guiding 
principle for the YREB’s future growth. In this context, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and 
the Government  of the PRC  have agreed to adopt  a framework  approach  which prioritizes:  (i) 
ecosystem  restoration,  environmental  protection,  and  management  of  water  resources;  (ii) 
inclusive green industrial transformation; (iii) construction of an integrated multimodal transport 
corridor;  and  (iv)  institutional  and  policy  reform.  The  project  is  included  as  part  of  the  YREB 
framework. 
2. 
The Xin’an River is an independent river system located within the YREB, originating from 
Huangshan  Municipality  (Huangshan)2 in  Anhui  Province  and  passing  through  Hangzhou,  the 
capital city of Zhejiang Province, before entering the East China Sea. The river is the main source 
of drinking water for 10 million residents living in the urban and rural areas surrounding Qiandao 
Lake and Hangzhou. Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality located in the southern part of 
Anhui Province, comprising three urban districts and four counties with a population of 1.5 million 
and a land area of 9,807 square kilometers. HMG recognizes the great importance of protecting 
the ecological system of the Xin’an River, not only in preserving a sound living environment for its 
residents, but also in achieving water security for the people living downstream of the river basin. 
3. 
In 2012, the government introduced a pilot cross-provincial ecological compensation (eco-
compensation)  scheme3 between  Anhui  and  Zhejiang  provinces  as  a  new  mechanism  to  help 
Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG) address cross-provincial water quality concerns in the 
Xin’an River Basin. In the first two phases (2012–2017) of the pilot scheme, an eco-compensation 
fund amounting to CNY3.7 billion was mobilized with the support of the central government and 
the two provincial governments. Majority of the resources mobilized were invested in Huangshan 
for  the  control  of  industrial  wastewater  pollution,  improvement  of  wastewater  collection  and 
treatment capacity, and restoration of the ecosystem along the river. Through the scheme, HMG 
made significant progress in industrial and point source pollution control; with the discharge of 
chemical  oxygen  demand  reduced  by  28%and  the  water  quality  at  the  interprovincial  section 
achieving  the  agreed  standard.  However,  with  rapid  urbanization,  intensified  agriculture 
production, and tourism growth, maintaining the level of water quality at the upstream of the Xin’an 
1   Government of the PRC. 2016. Outline of the Yangtze River Economic Belt Development Plan, 2016–2030. Beijing. 
2   Huangshan Municipality is named after a local mountain range (“yellow mountain”). “Huangshan” in this report refers 
to the municipality only unless otherwise specified. 
3   Under the scheme, the central government and two provincial governments set up an eco-compensation fund with 
water  quality  subjected  to  periodic  assessment  at  the  interprovincial  section  to  determine  whether:  (i)  Zhejiang 
Province should compensate Anhui Province to defray the ecological protection cost; or (ii) Anhui Province  should 
compensate Zhejiang Province to pay for additional water treatment cost, in case water quality fails to meet agreed 
standards.  From  2012–2017,  the  phosphorus  index  (measured  by  total  phosphorus,  total  nitrogen,  ammoniacal 
nitrogen, and permanganate indices) for water quality compensation index in Xin’an River was 0.833-0.880. 
2 
River  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult.  HMG  requested  ADB  for  support  to  help  design  and 
implement a project that will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their efforts to manage 
the point source pollution from urban and rural areas, and the non-point source pollution from the 
agriculture sector in rural areas to support the ecological protection and green development. 
4. 
Urban point source pollution. As a result of continued investments in the control of water 
pollution,  90%  of  urban wastewater  in  Huangshan  is  being  collected  and  treated.  Despite  this 
achievement,  a  significant  part  of  the  urban  wastewater  collection  system  requires  upgrading. 
Many of the existing sewerage systems were not been systematically planned nor designed to 
cope with the pace of urbanization. The existing obsolete sewerage systems in Huangshan were 
designed  as  a  combined  stormwater  and  sewerage  system.  As  a  result,  sewerage  overflows 
occurring  during  storm  season  are  directly discharged into streams  and waterways.  Due to its 
mountainous terrain, Huangshan is also vulnerable to flooding during storm season. The eroded 
urban embankment and revetment sections of the river system pose another concern, not only 
for flood management but also for water pollution control. The exposure of the river system to 
storm water run-off has contributed to the seasonal fluctuation of water quality. 
5. 
Rural point and non-point source pollution. Rural areas in Huangshan, as in the YREB 
and much of the PRC, face relatively greater challenges compared to urban areas. Poor public 
infrastructure and sanitation service coverage is a major concern in rural Huangshan, affecting 
the  people’s  living  conditions  and  resulting  in  long-lasting  point  source pollution  in  rural  areas. 
Around  75%  of  Huangshan’s  889  administrative  villages  lack  wastewater  treatment  facilities. 
Despite the effective control of industrial pollution, Huangshan’s water bodies are still degraded 
due  to  non-point  source  pollution,  85%  of  which  are  derived  from  rural  sources,  particularly 
discharge of pollutants such as total nitrogen and total phosphorus from agricultural activities. The 
dispersed nature of agricultural activities also makes the control of agricultural non-point source 
pollution a challenge. In addition to agricultural activities, the resilience of the river ecosystem is 
impacted by poor forest management and pest attacks, undermining forest capacity to control soil 
erosion. 
6. 
Green Financing Mechanisms. In view of the prevailing impact of agriculture non-point 
source  pollution  in  Huangshan,  a  Green  Incentive  Fund  to  complement  the  ongoing  cross-
provincial  eco-compensation  scheme  is  needed.  Such  a  fund  would  serve  as  a  rewarding 
mechanism, through which HMG can provide cash grants as financial incentives to farmers who 
have  achieved  pollution  control  targets  through  adoption  of  sustainable  farming  practices,  in 
accordance with a well-designed pollution control plan. In parallel, introducing a green investment 
fund to provide financing to support small- and medium-sized enterprises (SME) involved in green 
business  development  would  give  further  impetus  to  venture  into  and  expand  ecological 
agriculture,  eco-tourism,  and  pollution  control.  These  new  financing  mechanisms  will  be 
introduced on a small-scale pilot basis under the project, in comparison with the traditional input-
based  and  infrastructure-oriented  public  interventions  in  the  PRC.  Effective  and  innovative 
interventions are envisaged to have wider implications beyond the project scope. 
7. 
Institutional and environmental management capacity. HMG has developed a series 
of online monitoring and management information systems (MIS) in the areas of water resources 
management,  environmental  monitoring,  forestry  management,  and  agriculture  production. 
However,  these  systems  are  not  integrated,  which  hinders  the  information  sharing  and 
collaboration among line agencies and other stakeholders. HMG needs urgent action to integrate 
these  systems  to  strengthen  its  capacity  in  environmental  monitoring,  pollution  control,  and 
disaster risk management. Special support is required to further improve the information sharing 
with downstream cities in Zhejiang Province to further strengthen cross-provincial collaboration 
3 
established  under  the  existing  eco-compensation  scheme.  Operational  research  is  also 
necessary to enhance HMG’s planning capacity for green development, economic valuation of 
natural resources, sustainable operation and maintenance (O&M) of sanitation facilities in rural 
areas, and detailed design of operational mechanisms for the green incentive fund. 
8. 
Strategic  fit.  The  project  will  (i)  address  Huangshan’s  urban  and  rural  environmental 
degradation  issues;  (ii)  improve  water  quality  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin;  and  (iii)  strengthen 
financing  mechanisms,  environmental  management,  and  water  quality  monitoring  capacities, 
improving the quality of life for the people. The project is consistent with the (i) PRC’s Thirteenth 
Five-Year Plan, 2016–2020;4 (ii) Outline of the YREB Development Plan, 2016–2030 (footnote 
1), (iii) PRC National New-Type Urbanization Plan, 2014–2020;5 (iv) PRC National Strategy for 
Rural Vitalization, 2018-2022;6 (v) ADB’s Strategy 2030’s operational priorities;7 and (vi) ADB’s 
country partnership strategy for the PRC, 2016–2020.8 The project is aligned with the guidelines 
on the YREB’s economic development issued by the State Council in 2014 to promote inclusive 
green development, environmental protection, and sustainable water resources management. 
Lessons.  The  project  design  incorporates  key  lessons  from  previous  ADB  and 
9. 
development partner projects as well as international best practices and innovative approaches. 
These include (i) the importance of inclusive green development for sustainable growth; (ii) the 
need  for  innovative  technology  (information  and  communication  technology-based  and  smart 
systems) and standards to address urban and rural environmental degradation; and (iii) the need 
to provide effective water resource management and monitoring systems, improved agricultural 
practices and stakeholder participation, and enhanced green development and financing. 
Impact and outcome 
10. 
The  project  is  aligned  with  the  following  impact:  sustainable  economic  growth  and 
environmental improvement in the YREB achieved (footnote 1). The project will have the following 
outcome: economic and environmental conditions in the upstream of Xin’an River improved.9 
Outputs 
Output 1: Urban point source pollution management facilities upgraded. This output 
11. 
will include (i) sewage and stormwater management through upgrading the existing centralized 
sewerage  systems  in  Huangshan's  central  district  and  four  county  urban  areas;  and  (ii)  river 
rehabilitation and flood control through river embankment. 
12. 
Output 2: Rural point and non-point source pollution control facilities and systems 
enhanced. Innovative approaches supporting green agricultural and ecological practices will be 
adopted.  This  includes  point  and  non-point  source  pollution  controls  through  (i)  decentralized 
sewage  and  on-site  treatment  system  and  environment  management  in  rural  villages;  (ii) 
changing  fertilizer  application  practices,  including  the  improved  use  of  organic  fertilizer  and 
4   Government  of  the  PRC.  2015.  Outline  of  the  Thirteenth  Five-Year  Plan  on  National  Economic  and  Social 
Development, 2016–2020. Beijing. 
5   Government of the PRC. 2013. National New-Type Urbanization Plan, 2014–2020. Beijing.  
6   Government of the PRC. 2018. National Strategy on Rural Vitalization, 2018-2022. Beijing. 
7   ADB.  2018.  Strategy  2030:  Achieving  a  Prosperous,  Inclusive,  Resilient,  and  Sustainable  Asia  and  the  Pacific. 
Manila. 
8   ADB.  2016.  Country  Partnership  Strategy:  Transforming  Partnership:  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  Asian 
Development Bank, 2016–2020. Manila. 
9  The design and monitoring framework is in Section IX. A. 
4 
biological  pesticides  with  low  toxicity  at  agricultural  and forestry  sites;  and (iii)  improvement  of 
pine forest conditions through disease monitoring and prevention. 
13. 
Output  3:  Green  financing  mechanisms  piloted.  This  includes  the  establishment, 
piloting  and  operationalization  of  a  (i)  Green  Incentive  Fund  to  encourage  farmers  to  adopt 
sustainable  farm  management  practices  to  address  agricultural  non-point  source  pollution  in 
Huangshan; and (ii) green investment fund to invest in SMEs involved in green business.  
Output  4:  Capacity  for  ecological  system  and project  management  strengthened. 
14. 
This will enhance HMG’s capacity in water resources and flood forecasting management in the 
Xin'an River Basin. This includes (i) establishing environmental, health, and safety management 
systems to strengthen its industrial and urban environmental monitoring and emergency response 
capacity; (ii) integrated smart10 MIS; (iii) studies on Huangshan city green development strategy, 
eco-compensation  mechanisms,  rural  wastewater  discharge  standards,  and  green  farming 
certification; and (iv) HMG implementation support and capacity development. 
15. 
Detailed activities of all the subprojects are provided in Appendix 1. 
16. 
Value addition of ADB assistance. The project will bring about innovation at the policy, 
operation, and technical levels. In particular, the project will introduce a green incentive financing 
mechanism  to  address  agricultural  non-point  source  pollution,  which  will  be  designed  through 
participatory approaches via direct engagement of farmers and farmer cooperatives. This green 
incentive  mechanism  will  introduce  a  new  model  in  managing  agriculture  non-point  source 
pollution, including establishment of green farming and farm management standards, introducing 
an  independent  third-party  verification  system,  and  implementing  a  results-based  incentive 
payment mechanism. The green investment fund will create a new avenue to support SMEs in 
the  green  business  who  suffer  from  lack  of  access  to  long-term  financing  due  to  the  general 
perception  of  low  financial  returns from  their  investments  in  ecological  agriculture,  eco-tourism 
and  pollution  control.  The  project  will  harness  state-of-the-art  information  and  communication 
technology  elements  to  develop  comprehensive  and  integrated  smart  MIS  for  water  resource 
management, pollution control, environmental health and safety, emergency response, disaster 
prevention, and monitoring. Other special value additions include introducing an environmental 
and social management system (ESMS) for green financing in Huangshan. Moreover, ADB has 
leveraged and mobilized co-financing from Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) for the project 
and  has  created  a  platform  for  collaboration  between  HMG  and  the  Nature  Conservancy  to 
address agriculture non-point source pollution in the Xin’an River Basin. The Nature Conservancy 
will leverage the funds for complementary support  to further enhance the green incentive fund 
mechanism implementation under the project. 
17. 
Green Investment Fund (GIF). The GIF will target SMEs involved in green business in 
Huangshan, which need capital for investing in subprojects supporting the green agenda of HMG, 
the  executing  agency  of  the  project.  HMG  selected  the  Huangshan  Trust  and  Investment 
Corporation (HTIC), a state-owned enterprise wholly owned by HMG, as the implementing agency 
of  the  GIF  component  in  the  project.  Huangshan  Xintou  Investment  Company  (HXIC),  one  of 
HTIC’s wholly owned subsidiary companies, will be the fund manager of the GIF. The GIF will 
provide  equity  financing  to  qualified  investees  to  implement  the  subprojects  that  protect  the 
ecological  environment  and  promote  the  green  development  in  the  upstream  of  Xin’an  River. 
Appendix  4-A  provides  a  list  of  potential  subprojects  and  Appendix  4-B  provides  a  draft  term 
sheets of GIF.  
10  Smart  systems  incorporate  functions  of  sensing,  actuation,  and  control  in  order  to  analyze  a  situation  and  make 
decisions based on the available data in a predictive or adaptive manner, thereby performing smart actions. 
Project Readiness Activities 
II. 
MPLEMENTATION PLANS 
Table 1: Project Readiness Activities 
Indicative Activities 
2019 
2020 
Responsibilities 
7 
8 
9  10  11  12  1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
5 
Recruitment of procurement agent 
Advance contracting actions 
Retroactive financing actions 
Establish project implementation arrangements 
ADB management review meeting 
FSR submission and approval 
FCUP and FEOR preparation and submission 
FCUP approval 
ADB management review meeting 
ADB Board approval 
Loan signing 
Government legal opinion provided 
Government budget inclusion 
Loan effectiveness 
HMG, HPMO 
HPMO, IAs 
HPMO, IAs 
HPMO, IAs 
ADB 
HDRC, HMG, HPMO 
HMG 
NDRC 
ADB 
ADB 
ADB, HMG, MOF 
HMG, MOF 
HMG 
ADB, MOF 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, FCUP = foreign capital utilization plan, FEOR = financial evaluation opinion report, FSR = feasibility study 
report, IA = implementing agency, HDRC = Huangshan Development and Reform Commission, HMG = Huangshan Municipal Government, 
HPMO = Huangshan project management office, MOF = Ministry of Finance, NDRC = National Development and Reform Commission 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
6 
Overall Project Implementation Plan  
A Gantt chart recording outputs with key implementation activities (on a quarterly basis) that is updated annually and submitted 
18. 
to ADB with contract and disbursement projections from 2020 to 2026 is presented in Table 2. 
Activities 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Q1 
Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
Output 1: Urban point source pollution management facilities upgraded 
Table 2: Project Implementation Plan 
Activity 1.1: Conduct 
stakeholder consultations 
Activity 1.2: Undertake full 
analysis of the other sources 
of pollution, including their 
transport to the river and 
their effects to the river, to 
determine impact on water 
quality objectives to be 
calculated for pollution 
source 
Activity 1.3: Develop designs 
and bidding documents; 
conduct tenders; and carry 
out construction of sewage 
collection systems and a 
centralized treatment system 
in the urban areas 
Output 2: Rural point and non-point source pollution control facilities and systems enhanced  
Activity 2.1: Conduct 
stakeholder consultations  
Activity 2.2: Recruit 
consultants; design and 
implement a comprehensive 
system for managing non-
point source pollution in rural 
areas 
Activity 2.3: Develop 
designs, bidding documents; 
conduct tenders; and carry 
out construction of 
decentralized sewage 
treatment systems and green 
infrastructure facilities in 
rural towns and villages 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Q1 
Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
7 
Activities 
Activity 2.4: Promote 
environmentally friendly 
(clean) agricultural 
production practices  
Activity 2.5: Plan, design, 
procure, and install forest 
preventive  
Output 3: Green financing mechanisms piloted  
Activity 3.1: Define and 
establish green investment 
fund 
Activity 3.2: Define and 
establish eco-compensation 
fund within Huangshan 
Municipality  
Activity 3.3: Examine and 
enhance as required, the 
eco-compensation 
mechanism of Xin’an inter-
basin watershed, and 
establish this as a 
demonstration project of 
ecological protection and 
green development  
Activity 3.4: Promote eco-
tourism, including village-
based  
Output 4: Capacity for ecological system and project management strengthened 
Activity 4.1: Develop and 
install improved Xin'an River 
basin water resource 
management system, 
including software and 
hardware acquisition  
Activity 4.2: Develop and 
install smart EHS 
management system for 
industrial parks, including 
software and hardware 
acquisition 
Activity 4.3: Improve the 
capacity to implement the 
above systems  
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Q1 
Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
8 
Activities 
Activity 4.4: Improve the 
capacity to implement the 
project  
Management Activities 
Engage project management 
consultants 
Design a smart project 
management, monitoring, 
and reporting system 
Monitor and evaluate project 
performance using the smart 
project management system, 
and submit project progress 
reports 
Implement social activities 
based on gender and social 
development action plans 
Implement safeguard 
activities based on 
environment management 
plan and resettlement plans, 
and submit required 
monitoring reports 
Submit the project 
completion report 
EHS = environmental, health, and safety. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
9 
Implementation Plan for Green Incentive Fund  
19. 
Green  Incentive  Fund  is  a  result-based  compensation  scheme  to  the  participating  tea 
gardens after the third party’s verification of their adoption of green farming practice on a yearly 
basis.  The  compensation  criteria  and  amounts  will  be  developed  by  the  feasibility  study  and 
certification system study, whose terms of reference (TOR) are outlined in the Appendix 2. When 
the loan becomes effective, the HPMO will select consultants to undertake the studies and identify 
interested tea gardens. The tea gardens will sign incentive payment agreements with the HPMO 
on their measurable green farming efforts and quantitative compensation. The third party engaged 
by the HPMO will verify the tea gardens’ annual achievements; the HPMO will request Huangshan 
Municipal Bureau of Finance (HMBOF) to make payments to the certified tea gardens based on 
the verified achievements.    
Implementation Plan for Green Investment Fund 
20. 
The main activities of GIF in the implementation period are presented below:  
a)  ADB will enter into a Loan Agreement with the PRC, acting through the Ministry of 
Finance  (MOF);  MOF  will  re-lend  the  ADB  loan  to  Anhui  Provincial  Government 
(APG); APG will on-lend the ADB loan to HMG; HMG will enter into an onlending 
agreement with HTIC, and all the on-lending will be arranged on the same terms as 
the loan from ADB to the PRC. 
b)  HTIC will enter into a Framework Cooperation Agreement (FCA) with the Account 
Bank for the operation of GIF Revolving Fund Account (RFA); 
c)  Huangshan Xintou Investment Company (HXIC) as the General Partner will enter 
into a Limited Partnership Agreement (LPA) (sample LPA is in Appendix H). The 
final  LPA  will  need  to  be  prepared  based  on  the  loan  agreement  and  project 
agreement) with HTIC as Limited Partner to create and set-up GIF (An example 
LPA provided in Appendix 4-H); 
d)  HTIC  will  apply  for  the  utilization  of  Xin’an  River  Eco-Compensation  Fund  from 
Huangshan Municipal Xin’an River Protection Bureau of HMG; 
e)  GIF  will  enter  into  Equity  Investment  Agreements  with  each  of  its  investees  for 
equity investments; 
f)  ADB  loan proceeds  will  be  disbursed  from  advance  account  to  HTIC’s GIF  RFA 
maintained at the Account Bank. 
21. 
The project implementation plan for GIF includes following preliminary defined activities: 
Step 1: Set up GIF including moving into a Limited Partnership structure with a formulized Limited 
Partnership  Agreement  (after  loan  signing);  Step  2:  Obtain  management  company  license  by 
regulatory board on PE funds for opening up to external investors (within 1 year after loan signing); 
Step 3: Obtain approval for LP from the Administration Bureau for Industry and Commerce (within 
3 months after management company license has been obtained); Step 4: Potentially mobilize 
external investors to GIF (after step 3). 
22. 
The  HXIC  will  develop  a  comprehensive  investment  manual  describing  in  detail  the 
criteria, procedures and processes for selection, appraisal, approval, compliance requirements 
and  standards,  and  required  due  diligence  to  incorporate  as  disbursement  condition  in 
accordance with ADB requirements and subject to ADB’s no objection (within 3 months after loan 
signing). The investment manual will include integrity due diligence procedures which cover anti-
money  laundering  internal  control  system  and  compliance  requirements  matching  the 
requirements of national law and regulations as well as international standard as an operational 
level.   
10 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Table 3: Project Implementation Organization 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Executing Agency 
Huangshan Municipal 
Government (HMG) 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
• 
Take overall responsibility for project implementation 
Anhui Provincial Department 
of Finance 
•  Relending the loan to HMG 
•  Manage the advance account 
Project leading group 
•  Chaired by the executive vice mayor of HMG 
•  Oversee the preparation and implementation of the overall 
project and provide overall guidance 
•  Meet regularly, discuss and take actions, if necessary, to ensure 
• 
smooth overall project implementation 
Supervise day-to-day activities of the project and provide 
coordination support for the preparation and implementation of 
project components of each project implementing agency 
•  Report the progress of project implementation and compliance 
Huangshan project 
management office (HPMO) 
Subproject management 
offices (SPMO) 
in four counties and three 
districts of Huangshan 
Implementing Agencies 
Huangshan District 
Government;  
Huizhou District Government;  
Tunxi District Government;  
She County Government;  
Yi County Government; 
Qimen County Government;  
Xiuning County Government; 
Huangshan Trust and 
Investment Corporation (HTIC) 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
monitoring to ADB 
Submit required annual audit reports and financial statements of 
project account of HMG and project implementing agencies to 
ADB 
Engage project management consulting services 
Implement and monitor social and safeguard plans and submit 
monitoring reports 
Implement output 4 in collaboration with the concerned line 
agencies, as applicable. 
Engage external environmental and resettlement monitors 
Submit bidding documents, bid evaluation reports, and other 
necessary documentation to ADB for necessary approval 
Submit withdrawal applications 
• 
•  Responsible for project coordination and implementation of each 
subproject 
•  Overall financial supervision of the subproject within their 
• 
• 
jurisdiction 
Take overall responsibility for the implementation of the 
subproject, including provision of counterpart funding and 
repayment of the loan 
Implement subproject and be a focal point for liaison with the 
HPMO 
•  Recruit design, construction supervision, and required 
monitoring institutes 
•  Conduct procurement and contract management with the 
support of the procurement agent) 
Implement capacity building activities for implementing agencies 
Project accounting and financial management 
Ensure quality in project activities necessary to meet objectives 
• 
• 
• 
•  Coordinate EMP implementation relating to their subproject 
Prepare withdrawal applications for submission to the local 
• 
finance department and HPMO 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
11 
• 
• 
• 
Take actions as needed to implement social safeguards 
Take actions as needed to implement the agreed gender and 
social action plans 
Establish and maintain implementing agencies level project 
monitoring systems and reporting to HPMO 
Arrange necessary counterpart funding 
• 
•  HTIC will prepare and submitted audited entity financial 
Huangshan  Xintou  Investment 
Company (HXIC) 
The Account Bank 
Qualified Investees of Green 
Investment Fund 
• 
• 
statement 
Act as fund manager of GIF and assume the responsibility for 
day-to-day project implementation of GIF; 
Provide staff resources with competence in technical, social, 
environmental, and financial issues pertaining to GIF 
implementation; 
As general partner, enter into Limited Partnership Agreements 
with HTIC and other limited partners (should there be any other 
entity wanting to join the partnership as a funder) for GIF; 
•  Review and assess subproject applications according to the 
selection criteria for subprojects described in this PAM; 
• 
•  Recommend subprojects to be financed by GIF to the 
Investment Decision Committee; 
•  Obtain ADB’s no objection where required; 
•  On behalf of GIF, sign Equality Investment Agreements with 
• 
• 
• 
Qualified Investees; 
Establish a credit risk management mechanism to monitor the 
Fund’ credit risk and interest rate risk in connection with the 
project; 
• 
Ensure implementation of social safeguards 
• 
Ensure implementation of the ESMS 
Establish and implement GRM at GIF and subproject level; 
• 
•  Monitor the implementation progress of GIF, and subprojects, 
including compliance with the terms and conditions of the 
Onlending Agreement. Require remedial actions in the event of 
noncompliance with the obligations; 
Prepare the supporting documents for ADB loan withdrawal 
described in the disbursement section of this PAM; 
Prepare and submit (i) semi-annual project progress report; (ii) 
semi-annual ESMS implementation reports during the 
implementation stage (first 5 years after loan effectiveness) and 
annual reports in the following 10 years; (iii) consolidated 
audited statement of utilization of funds; and (iv) a completion 
report on the utilization of GIF, the execution of the Subprojects, 
their costs, the performance by HTIC and HXIC of the 
obligations under or referenced in the Project Agreement within 
6 months after the completion date of the project or as ADB 
otherwise specified; and 
Liaise with ADB, the Account Bank, limited partners of GIF, 
Qualified Equity Investees and other stakeholders. 
Enter into FCA with HTIC; 
• 
•  Manage Revolving Fund Account (GIF RFA); 
•  Disburse the Equity Financing to GIF and Qualified Investees. 
• 
Implement subprojects in accordance with the Equity Investment 
Agreement (EIA); 
• 
12 
Project Implementation 
Organizations 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Comply with the requirements assigned under the ESMS, 
including providing information and reports required to HXIC; 
Establish GRM at subprojects level; 
• 
•  Get approvals from relevant authorities such as local 
environmental protection bureaus and the development and 
reform commissions; 
•  Undertake the procurement of goods and works in compliance 
• 
with the procurement regulations (appendix 4-E); and 
Provide monitoring and evaluation information and participate in 
the completion review of the subproject. 
•  Support  the  executing  and  implementing  agencies,  HPMO,  and 
SPMOs  to  learn  about  ADB’s  policies,  including  procurement 
guidelines, financial management, loan disbursement, safeguards, 
and preparation of progress reports 
•  Provide  guidance  to  ensure  compliance  with  loan  and  project 
agreements 
•  Conduct  inception  mission,  annual  loan  review  missions,  a 
midterm review mission, and a project completion review mission 
•  Review and/or approve procurement actions for the ADB-financed 
ADB 
contract packages 
•  Process withdrawal applications and release loan funds 
•  Monitor project implementation progress 
•  Review  annual  audit 
reports  and 
recommendations 
follow  up  on  audit 
•  Update regularly the project performance review reports with the 
assistance of the executing and implementing agencies; 
•  Update  regularly  the  project  information  documents  for  public 
disclosure at ADB website, including safeguard documents 
•  Monitor implementation of ADB’s anticorruption policies. 
KfW 
•  Co-financer 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EMP = Environmental Management Plan, HMG = Huangshan Municipal Government, 
HPMO  =  Huangshan  project  management  office,  HTIC  =  Huangshan  Trust  and  Investment  Corporation,  HXIC  = 
Huangshan  Xintou  Investment  Company,  KfW  =  Kreditanstalt  für  Wiederaufbau,  SPMO  =  subproject  management 
office. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
23. 
Upon the signing of the loan agreement between ADB and the Ministry of Finance (MOF), 
ADB,  KfW  and  the  government  have  reached  in  an  agreement  that  all  procurement  of  goods, 
works and services including consulting services funded from ADB and KfW financing will follow 
ADB procurement rules and regulations and there is no KfW review and approval requirement for 
EA/IAs procurement documents and decisions in addition to ADB no-objections. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation  
13 
Executing Agency  
Huangshan Municipal 
Government (HMG) 
Huangshan municipal project 
management office (HPMO) 
Implementing Agencies 
Huangshan District Government 
(HSDG) 
Huizhou District Government 
(HZDG) 
Tunxi District Government (TDG) 
She County Government (SCG) 
Officer's Name: Xiaohua Liu 
Position: Executive Deputy Mayor 
Telephone: 05592355169 
Email address: hsshxm@126.com 
Office Address: Floor 16, No. 1 Tiandu Road, 
Huangshan Municipal Government Building, Anhui 
Province, PRC 
Officer's Name: Weidong Wang 
Position: HPMO Director 
Telephone: 05592351621 
Email address: hsshxm@126.com 
Office Address: Floor 4, No.1 Tiandu Road, Huangshan 
Municipal Government Building, Anhui Province, PRC 
Officer's Name: Wusi Du 
Position: SPMO Director 
Telephone: 05598500397 
Email address: 648501352@qq.com 
Office Address: Floor 4, Huangshan District 
Government Building, Anhui Province, PRC 
Officer's Name: Yuguang Hu 
Position: SPMO Director 
Telephone: 05593582798 
Email address: 1298920236@qq.com 
Office Address: Floor 4, No.86 Yinbin Road, Huizhou 
District, Huangshan City, Anhui Province, PRC 
Officer's Name: Housong Liu 
Position: SPMO Director 
Telephone: 13955987504 
Email address: 292781314@qq.com 
Office Address: No. 7 Xingyu Road, Yanghu Town, 
Tunxi District, Huangshan City, Anhui Province, PRC 
Officer's Name: Ning Xu 
Position: SPMO Director 
Telephone: 05596575029 
Email address: hssxshb@126.com; 
Office Address: Floor 2, No. 18 Ziyang Road, Huicheng 
Town, She County, Huangshan City, Anhui Province, 
PRC 
14 
Yi County Government (YCG) 
Qimen County Government 
(YCG) 
Xiuning County Government 
(YCG) 
Huangshan Trust Investment 
Company 
Asian Development Bank 
East Asia Department  
Environment, Natural  
Resources, and Agriculture  
Division 
Mission Leader 
KfW 
KfW Office 
Beijing, PRC 
Officer's Name: Hui Hu 
Position: SPMO Director 
Telephone: 05595551190 
Email address: 532670531@qq.com 
Office Address: No. 54 Zhi Street, Yi County, 
Huangshan District, Anhui Province, PRC  
Officer's Name: Jianping Fang  
Position: SPMO Director  
Telephone: 05594513724 
Email address: 38579111@qq.com 
Office Address: No. 3 Xueqian Street, Qimen County, 
Huangshan City, Anhui Province, PCR  
Officer's Name: Wenli Zhou  
Position: SPMO Director  
Telephone: 05597516889 
Email address: 1793536176@qq.com 
Office Address: Room 909, No.9 Shuyuan Road, 
Xiuning County, Huangshan City, Anhui Province, PRC  
Officer's Name: Xu Wang 
Position: Deputy President 
Telephone: 05592588128 
Email address: admin@hsxtjt.com 
Office Address: Yudong Building 19F, Shewuqian Road, 
Tunxi District, Huangshan City, Anhui Province, PRC 
Staff Name: Mr. Qingfeng Zhang  
Position: Director  
Telephone No.: +63 2 632 6769  
Fax No.: +63 2 636 2534/2444  
Email address: qingfengzhang@adb.org 
Name: Mingyuan Fan 
Position: Senior Water Resources Specialist 
Telephone No.: +63 2 632 1763 
Fax No.: +63 2 636 2534  
Email address: mfan@adb.org 
Staff Name: Mr. Wolfram Erhardt 
Position: Director  
Telephone No.: +86 10 8527 5171  
Fax No.:   
Email address: wolfram.erhardt@kfw.de 
15 
Project Organization Structure  
24. 
Upon the signing of the loan agreement between ADB and the Ministry of Finance (MOF), 
MOF  will  sign  the  relending  agreement  with  the  Anhui  Provincial  Government,  and  the  Anhui 
Provincial Government will in turn sign the onlending agreement with HMG. HMG will then relend 
to  the  participating  district  and  county  governments,  and  to  Huangshan  Trust  and  Investment 
Corporation (HTIC) for the green investment fund component of the loan. The loan agreements 
will follow the same terms and conditions.  
25. 
Upon effectiveness of the loan, withdrawal applications will be initiated from the district or 
county level Bureau of Finance (BOF) based on ADB’s share of the estimated expenditures for 
the  next  six  months  and  send  to  Anhui  Provincial  Finance  Department  through  Huangshan 
Municipal BOF. The loan proceeds disbursement and fund flow are described in greater detail in 
Section I.   
HMG, as the executing agency, has established a project leading group11 and a project 
26. 
management office (PMO). The participating district and county governments, as implementing 
agencies, will implement the project through their respective district- or county-level SPMOs under 
the  PMO’s  leadership.  For  the  green  investment  fund  component  of  the  loan,  the  Green 
Investment  Fund  (GIF)  under  Output  3,  HTIC  will  be  the  implementing  agency.  The  detailed 
arrangements  of  the  GIF  component  will  be  elaborated  in  the  separate  project  administration 
manual (PAM) for GIF.  
ADB 
MOF 
Loan  
agreement 
Anhui Provincial Government 
Relend 
APDOF 
Relend 
Withdrawal Application 
EA 
Huangshan Municipal Government 
PMO 
HMBOF 
Relend 
Withdrawal Application 
IAs 
District/county Governments 
HTIC 
SPMOs 
District/County BOFs 
Finance  
Department 
HXIC 
Loan agreement 
Withdrawal Application 
ADB =  Asian  Development Bank,  APDOF =  Anhui  Provincial  Department of Finance, BOF = Bureau  of 
Finance,  HMBOF  =  Huangshan  Municipal  Bureau  of  Finance,    HTIC  =  Huangshan  Trust  Investment 
Company,  HXIC  =  Huangshan  Xintou  Investment  Corporation,  MOF  =  Ministry  of  Finance,  PMO  = 
Huangshan  Municipal  Project  Management  Office,  SPMO  =  Subproject  Project  Management  Office 
(District/County Project Management Office). 
11 Chaired by the executive vice mayor of HMG and comprised of officers from Huangshan Municipal Development and 
Reform Commission, Huangshan Finance Bureau, and other municipality bureaus. 
16 
Implementation Arrangement and Procedures of Green Investment Fund 
1. 
General  
The Green Investment Fund will be jointly funded by ADB, KfW, and HMG. The GIF fund 
27. 
size is CNY200 million in which ADB loan contributes 50%, KfW loan provides 25%, and HMG 
provides the remaining balance of 25%. GIF will be established as a focused mechanism under 
the project to finance deployment of green investments in key sectors.  
28. 
HMG acts as the executing agency, and HTIC acts as the implementation agency for the 
GIF  component.  HTIC’s subsidiary  HXIC  will  serve as the  equity  investment  manager  and  the 
general  partner  in  charge  of  the  governance  and  the  implementation  as  per  the  principles, 
objectives, covenants and guidelines set in the Loan and Project Agreements signed with ADB 
and KfW. 
29. 
HXIC is an existing entity with expertise in operating equity investments. The staff of HXIC 
hold diverse backgrounds and expertise in financial and technical disciplines. Current staffing is 
9 professionals with qualifications and suitable experience to implement and manage GIF, all with 
academic backgrounds and Qualification Diploma issued by the China Security Association. Key 
staff’s replacements in the first six years of operation are subject to ADB’s no objection. 
30. 
 GIF will focus on investing in SMEs in green business in Huangshan that need small to 
medium  sized  investment  for  development  assessed  against  the  eligibility  criteria  for  pollution 
control, green economy development, and climate change adaptation and/or mitigation. GIF will 
see  a majority  of  its  investment  benefitting  rural  population  within (i)  ecological  agriculture,  (ii) 
ecotourism, and (iii) pollution control. 
31. 
HXIC  will  identify  investments  with  appropriate  business  models  for  expansion  green 
development and will provide financing that addresses the potentials identified. HXIC, as the fund 
manager, provides GIF with the following activities, but not limited to: fund raising, implementation 
of  investment  selection  and  appraisal,  administration  and  investment  advisory  services  and 
investment  governance.  The  investment  review  and  approval  process  will  include  investment 
structuring  to  mitigate  all  risks  and  appraisal  of  environmental  impact  and  risk  under  the 
environmental and ESMS. An ESMS is developed and will be adopted and implemented by HTIC 
and  HXIC  in  accordance  with  national  policies  and  regulations,  and  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy 
Statement (2009).12 Prior to recommending an investment to the Investment Decision Committee 
of GIF, HXIC will conduct integrity, financial, technical, environmental and social due diligence to 
confirm  compliance  with  the  subproject  selection  criteria,13 ESMS,  and  national  environment, 
health and safety law and regulations. HXIC will also monitor the implementation performance of 
investments, including measurement and verification of green improvements, and preparation of 
periodic progress reports on investment implementation to be submitted to ADB. 
2. 
Investment Selection 
Detailed  investee  and  subproject  selection  criteria  are  attached  in  Appendix  4-C.  This 
32. 
section includes a resume of the selection criteria and the selection decision. 
33. 
All  investments  by  GIF will  contribute  to  at  least  one  of  the  green  investment  eligibility 
criteria (presented Figure 1.) in terms of pollution source control, green economy development 
12  ADB. 2009. Safeguard Policy Statement. Manila. 
13 The subproject selection criteria can be accessed in Appendix 4-C. 
and  climate  change  adaptation/mitigation,  and  without  imposing  adverse  impact  on  the  other 
criteria.  GIF  can  solely  participate  in  investments  that  conform  to  the  detailed  principles  as 
presented  in  Appendix  4-C.  The  individual  investments  will  be  evaluated  and  selected  by  the 
Investment Decision Committee based on a risk assessment and credit rating proposed by HXIC.  
17 
Figure 1: Investments’ Green Selection Criteria 
34. 
The subprojects for potential investments will be appraised against the selection criteria 
without compromising financial returns making the investment profitable. After investments being 
made the green criteria are used for follow-up and results reporting e.g. at project completion and 
investment exit.  
35. 
As a general guidance but not strict requirements, GIF’s investment portfolio will target 
40%  in  ecological  agriculture,  30%  in  ecotourism  and  30%  in  pollution  control.  The  individual 
investments will be of no one more than 30% of the fund size (CNY60 million), and not above 
50% of the share of the qualified investee. Investment exit is expected between four and seven 
years after the investment is made.  
36. 
HXIC shall keep a record of the results of its due diligence activities to be made available 
for inspection by ADB upon request. HXIC is required to prepare subproject appraisal reports to 
verify compliance with the applicable selection criteria. 
3. 
Specific Implementation Arrangements for Investments 
37. 
GIF  will  not  make  any  investment  which  is  on  ADB  SPS  Prohibited  Investment  and 
Activities  List.  GIF  shall  adopt  the  ESMS  prepared  for  the  investments  and  shall  carry  out 
environmental and social due diligence of the investments to be financed by GIF.  
38. 
Prior to providing or committing to provide any proceeds for the first equity investment or 
18 
equity investment above the free limit of CNY60 million, GIF shall submit through HMG for ADB’s 
prior review and approval documentation related to proposed investments, including description 
and appraisal of the investment, the investee, due diligence report, the proposed exit strategy, in 
such form and detail as ADB may request, describing the proposed investment, the terms and 
conditions of the proposed investment, and drafts of equity investment agreement. 
39.  Whenever GIF proposes to make any investment, HXIC shall before GIF enters into or 
agrees to the related investment, submit to HMG a “no objection” application for approval of the 
related  investment.  Such  application  shall  satisfy  the  terms  and  conditions  specified  in  the 
onlending agreement between HMG and HTIC and shall contain a description and appraisal of 
the  investment,  the  investee,  due  diligence  report,  the  proposed  exit  strategy,  and  such  other 
information as HMG shall reasonably request. Upon HMG’s approval, the proposal is submitted 
to the Investment Decision Committee for is endorsement. 
40. 
HXIC shall ensure that each Qualified Investee, prior to receiving any financial assistance 
from GIF, enters into an Equity Investment Agreement, in each case in a form acceptable to ADB 
and that reflects the applicable requirements of the Loan Agreement, the Project Agreement, the 
established Project Administration Manual and the ESMS, in addition to any other provisions a 
prudent financier would request for equity financing.  
4. 
Fund organization 
41. 
HTIC,  limited  partner  for  the  GIF,  is  a  state-owned  enterprise  wholly  owned  by  HMG 
through its Asset Management Office. Through its subsidiaries, HTIC is engaged in a wide range 
of  financial  businesses:  financial  guarantee,  capital  leasing,  industrial  investment,  forest 
exchange, and private equity investment. As of August 2019, it owns seven subcompanies for 
business  operation  and  seven  supporting  departments  –  General,  Legal,  Human  Resource, 
Appraisal, Risk, Finance and Information Technology.  
42. 
HXIC, a subsidiary of HTIC, functions as fund manager and general partner of the GIF. 
HXIC  has  a  dedicated  full-time  Office  with  around  9  experienced  staff  with  qualifications  and 
experience in technical and financial disciplines responsible for implementation and management 
of the project. Currently, there are no staff with qualifications or experience in environmental or 
social safeguards. The environment and social officers are required to be appointed for the ESMS 
establishment, operation, and reporting, at least three months before the first equity investment 
is made. HTIC will provide staff resources to HXIC and maintain the positions shown in figure 2.  
Figure 2: Organization Chart of HXIC 
19 
43. 
A team of experts and project managers in HXIC will provide the following expertise: (i) 
assessing the risk profile of the potential investments; (ii) evaluating the technology and business 
model;  (iii)  assessing  capacity  of  the  potential  investees;  (iv)  reviewing  and  assessing  due 
diligence  according  to  the  selection  criteria  and  approval  process  for  investments;  (v) 
recommending approval of the investment to GIF’s Investment Decision Committee; (vi) obtaining 
ADB’s  no  objection  where  required;  (vii)  operate  the  risk  management  mechanism  to  monitor 
GIF’s risk in connection with the investment; (viii) monitoring the implementation progress of the 
investment, including compliance with the terms and conditions of the investment implementation 
contracts;  (ix)  taking  remedial  actions  in  the  event  of  noncompliance  with  the  obligations;  (x) 
supporting HTIC for the preparation of the ADB loan withdrawal applications; (xi) participating in 
the external audit of investments’ accounts by providing ADB access to auditors; (xii) monitoring 
return from investment; (xiii) monitoring the performance of the Account Bank; and (xiv) prepare 
and  submit  semi-annual  project  progress  report,  semi-annual  ESMS  implementation  reports 
during the implementation stage and annual reports in the following 10 years; audited statement 
of utilization of funds; and a project completion report. 
44. 
The Investment Decision Committee is staffed with 2 representatives from the HPMO; 2 
representatives  of  the  Xin’an  River  Protection  Bureau  (the  manager  of  Xin’an  River  Eco 
Compensation Fund), and 1 representative of HXIC. The directors of HPMO and the Xin’an River 
Protection  Bureau  jointly  have  one  vote  veto.  The  decision-making  setup  of  the  Investment 
Decision Committee will be approved by the HMG with no-objection from ADB. 
IV. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
45. 
The project is estimated to cost EUR190.06 million. The project investment costs include 
(i)  goods,  works,  and  consulting  services  to  support  the  development  of  comprehensive 
information services and management platforms; (ii) a Green Incentive Fund (eco-compensation 
mechanism)  to  promote  green  farming  practices  through  economic  incentives;  (iii)  a  Green 
Investment  Fund  to  invest  companies  implementing  green  projects;  (i)  modernization  of 
agricultural production; and (v) project management. 
The government has requested a regular loan of EUR90.09 million from ADB’s ordinary 
46. 
capital resources and EUR50 million from KfW to help finance the project. The ADB loan will have 
a  25-year  term,  including  a  grace  period  of  6  years;  an  annual  interest  rate  determined  in 
accordance  with  ADB’s  EURO-interbank  offered  rate  (EURIBOR)-based  lending  facility;  a 
maturity premium of 0.1% per annum (based on an average loan mutuality of 15.75 years under 
the straight-line method; a commitment charge of 0.15% per year on undisbursed amount; and 
such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and project agreements. The KfW loan 
will have a 15-year term, including a grace period of 5 years; an annual interest rate determined 
in accordance with 6-month EURIBOR-based lending facility; a commitment charge of 0.25% per 
year on undisbursed amount; an upfront fee of 0.35% on total loan amount; and such other terms 
and conditions set forth in the draft loan and project agreements. 
The government will make the loan proceeds available  through APG to HMG, which in 
47. 
turn will make the loan proceeds available to the district and county level governments on terms 
and conditions acceptable to ADB. HMG will bear the foreign exchange and interest rate variation 
risk of the loan proceeds. 
48. 
The ADB loan will finance 47.4% of the total project costs, including expenditures relating 
to civil works, goods, and consulting services for eligible ADB-financed expenditures including the 
20 
Green Investment Fund. KfW will contribute 26.3% of the total project costs, including the balance 
of  expenditures  relating  to  civil  works  and  goods,  capacity  building  at  the  subproject  level, 
subproject management and the green investment fund. The municipal government will contribute 
26.3%,  including  contingencies  and  financial  charge  during  development  that  is  not  to  be 
capitalized. 
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions  
Preparation.  The  cost  estimates  were  prepared  jointly  by  the  design  institute,  HPMO, 
49. 
district  and  county  SPMOs,  HTIC,  KfW,  and  ADB  with  support  from  the  transaction  technical 
assistance  (TA)  consultants.  The  sources  and  basis  of  cost  estimates  were  reviewed  during 
project preparation and confirmed by related parties. The process was facilitated by a model in 
excel software which enabled easy updating or revision, if necessary. The model is maintained 
by both the HPMO and ADB. 
50. 
Revision. Revision of cost estimates will be conducted when deemed necessary during 
implementation. The HPMO will be responsible in proposing and drafting the revision which will 
be subject to ADB’s approval. 
Key Assumptions 
51. 
The following key assumptions underpin the cost estimates and financing plan: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Exchange rate: ¥6.8987 = $1.00, CNY7.6576=€1.00 (as of 2 August 2019).  
inflation  over 
Price  contingencies  based  on  expected  cumulative 
implementation period are as follows: 
the 
Item 
Foreign rate of price inflation 
Domestic rate of price inflation 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Table 4: Escalation Rates for Price Contingency Calculation 
2022 
2021 
2020 
2025  Average 
2023 
1.50%  1.60%  1.60%  1.60% 
1.80%  2.00%  2.00%  2.00% 
2024 
1.60% 
2.00% 
1.60% 
2.00% 
1.58% 
1.97% 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
The ADB loan has loan term of 25-year including a 6-year grace period; the KfW 
loan has a tenor of 15 years with a 5-year grace period. 
Financing costs for the ADB loan include interest during implementation (IDC) and 
commitment fee charges. The IDC is computed at a 5-year fixed EURO swap rate 
of  0.066%  plus an  ADB spread of  0.50%  and  a maturity  premium  of  0.1%.  The 
commitment  fee  is  levied  at  0.15%  against  the  undisbursed  amount  of  the  loan 
each year. KfW loan’s IDC is computed at a 5-year fixed EURO swap rate plus a 
spread of 0.55%. The commitment fee is levied at 0.25% annually on undisbursed 
amount. An upfront fee of 0.35% at the beginning of the loan also applies to the 
total amount of the loan. 
The  executing  and  implementing  agencies  have  assured  ADB  that  counterpart 
funding  will  be  provided or  secured  in a timely manner,  including  any  additional 
counterpart funding required for any shortfall of funds or cost overruns 
The cost of preparing sufficient due diligence of investment opportunities for GIF 
will be held by HXIC. HTIC will provide management fee to HXIC of 3% annually 
of  the  capital  committed  and  not  yet  returned  to  Limited  Partners.  The 
Management Fee is paid up-front on a half yearly basis. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category  
Table 5-1: Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category for the Project 
CNY Million 
$ million 
€ million 
21 
 Foreign 
Exchange  
Local 
Currency 
 Total 
Cost  
 Foreign 
Exchange  
Local 
Currency 
 Total 
Cost  
 Foreign 
Exchange  
Local 
Currency 
 Total 
Cost  
% of Base 
Cost 
Item 
A. Investment Costs 
1. Civil works 
1A. Civil works for Xin'an 
River Basin a 
1B. Civil works for Yangzi 
River Basin b 
 -    
 783.17  
 783.17  
 -    
 113.52  
 -    
 657.03  
 657.03  
 -    
 95.24  
113.52  
 95.24  
 -    
 126.14  
 126.14  
 -    
 18.29  
 18.29  
 102.27  
 85.80  
102.27  
 85.80  
60.0% 
50.3% 
 16.47  
 16.47  
9.7% 
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
2. Mechanical and equipment 
 -    
 150.58  
 150.58  
 -    
 21.83  
 21.83  
 19.66  
 19.66  
3. Project management and 
capacity development 
4. Project preparation 
5. Land acquisition and 
resettlement 
 51.64  
 -    
 51.64  
 7.49  
 -    
 7.49  
 6.74  
 -    
 6.74  
 -    
 -    
 2.38  
 3.70  
 2.38  
 3.70  
 -    
 -    
 0.34  
 0.54  
 0.34  
 0.54  
 -    
 -    
 0.31  
 0.48  
 0.31  
 0.48  
6. Consulting services for 
 1.15  
 -    
 1.15  
 0.17  
 -    
 0.17  
 0.15  
 -    
 0.15  
start-up 
7. Survey, design, 
consultancy and 
supervision 
8. Green Incentive Fund 
9. Green Investment Fund 
 -    
 60.14  
 60.14  
 -    
 8.72  
 8.72  
 -    
 7.85  
 7.85  
 -    
 -    
 52.80  
 52.80  
 200.00  
 200.00  
 -    
 -    
 7.65  
 7.65  
 28.99  
 28.99  
 -    
 -    
 6.90  
 6.90  
 26.12  
 26.12  
Subtotal A 
 52.79  
2,035.94   1,305.57  
 7.65  
 295.12  
 6.89  
 265.87  
B. Contingencies 
C. Financial Charges during 
Implementation 
Total Project Cost (A+B+C+D) 
 7.53  
 0.70  
 127.66  
 135.19  
 13.98  
 14.68  
 1.09  
 0.10  
 18.51  
189.25  
 19.60  
 2.03  
 2.13  
 0.98  
 0.09  
 16.67  
170.49  
 17.65  
 1.83  
 1.92  
 61.02  
 2,177.59  
 1,455.43  
 8.84  
 315.65  
 7.97  
 284.37  
210.97  
190.06  
a Xin'an River Basin includes Huizhou District, Xiuning County, Tunxi District, She County, and Yi County.  
b Yangzi River Basin includes Qimen County and Huangshan District. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
11.5% 
4.0% 
0.2% 
0.3% 
0.1% 
4.6% 
4.0% 
15.3% 
100.0% 
10.4% 
1.1% 
111.5% 
22 
The  detailed  cost  estimates  for  appraised  investments  by  expenditure  category  together  is  provided  in  Table  5-2.  The  cost 
52. 
estimates by expenditure category for the subsequent batch of investments will be prepared during project implementation. 
Table 5-2: Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category for Green Investment Fund 
CNY Million 
$ million 
€ million 
Item 
 Foreign 
Exchange  
Local 
Currency 
 Total 
Cost  
 Foreign 
Exchange  
Local 
Currency 
 Total 
Cost  
 Foreign 
Exchange  
Local 
Currency 
 Total 
Cost  
 197.04  
 197.04  
 2.96  
 2.96  
200.00 
 200.00  
 -    
 -    
 2.79  
 2.08  
 2.79  
 2.08  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 28.56  
 28.56  
 0.43  
 0.43  
 28.99  
 28.99  
 -    
 -    
 0.40  
 0.30  
 0.40  
 0.30  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
25.73  
 0.39  
 25.73  
 0.39  
 26.12  
26.12  
 -    
 -    
 0.36  
 0.36  
 0.36  
 0.27  
 204.87  
 204.87  
 -    
 29.70  
 29.70  
 -    
 26.75  
102.4% 
26.75  
% of 
Base 
Cost 
98.5% 
1.5% 
100.0% 
0.0% 
1.4% 
1.0% 
A. Investment Costs 
1. Capital committed 
2. Management 
Expenses of HXIC 
Subtotal A 
B. Recurrent Costs 
C. Contingencies 
D. Financial Charges 
during Implementation a 
Total Project Cost 
(A+B+C+D+E) 
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
HXIC-Huangshan Xintou Investment Company. 
a Including financial charges during construction.  
Sources: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
23 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds  
Table 6A: Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds (Summary) 
Number 
Item 
1 
2 
3 
Works, Goods and 
Services** 
Green Incentive 
Fund*** 
Green Investment 
Fund**** 
Total 
Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 
Financing (€ million) 
Category 
73.58 
Percentage and Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account 
Up to 100% of total expenditures claimeda 
3.45 
100% of total expenditures claimed 
13.06 
100% of total expenditures claimed 
90.09 
ADB = Asian Development Bank. 
a Detailed category amounts and disbursement percentages to be used during disbursement are in Table 6b of the PAM. 
** Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 (a) of Schedule 3 of the Loan Agreement. 
*** Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 (a) and (b) of Schedule 3 of the Loan Agreement. 
**** Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 (a) and (c) of Schedule 3 of the Loan Agreement. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
24 
Category 
No. 
Item 
Table 6B: Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds (Detailed) 
1 
1A 
1B 
1C 
1D 
2 
3 
Works, Goods, and Services 
Works for Xin'an River Basina,c 
Works for Yangzi River Basinb,c 
Goods, Servicesc 
Consulting Services for Start-upc 
Green Incentive Fundc,d 
Green Investment Fundc,e 
Total 
Amount Allocated 
(€ million) 
Category  Subcategory 
 73.58  
ADB Financing 
Percentage and Basis for 
Withdrawal from the Loan Account 
 51.99  
 8.24  
13,20 
0.15 
60.6% of total expenditure claimed 
50.0% of total expenditure claimed 
50.0% of total expenditure claimed 
100% of total expenditure claimed 
100% of total expenditure claimed 
100% of total expenditure claimed 
3.45 
13.06 
 90.09     
a Xin'an River Basin includes Huizhou District, Xiuning County, Tunxi District, She County, and Yi County.  
b Yangzi River Basin includes Qimen County and Huangshan District. 
c Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 (a) of Schedule 3 of the Loan Agreement.   
d Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 (a) and (b) of Schedule 3 of the Loan Agreement. 
e Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 7 (a) and (c) of Schedule 3 of the Loan Agreement.  
Source = Asian Development Bank estimates.  
Detailed Cost Estimates by Financier 
25 
Category 
A. Investment Costs 
1. Civil works 
1A. Civil works for Xin'an River Basin a 
1B. Civil works for Yangzi River Basin b 
2. Mechanical and equipment 
3. Project management and capacity 
development 
4. Project preparation 
5. Land acquisition and resettlement 
Table 7: Cost Estimates by Financier 
(€ million) 
Asian Development Bank 
KfW 
Government  
Amount  
(A) 
% of 
Cost 
Category 
(A/D) 
Tax 
and 
Duty d 
Amount  
(A) 
% of Cost 
Category 
(A/D) 
Tax 
and 
Duty 
Amount  
(B) 
% of Cost 
Category 
(B/D) 
Tax 
and 
Duty 
Total 
Cost  
(D) 
 60.23  
 51.99  
 8.24  
 9.83  
 3.37  
58.9% 
60.60% 
50% 
50.0% 
50.0% 
6.08 
5.28 
0.81 
0.59 
0.20 
 28.54  
 20.31  
 8.24  
 9.83  
 3.37  
27.9% 
23.67% 
50.00% 
50.0% 
50.0% 
2.40 
1.69 
0.72 
0.59 
0.20 
 13.50  
 13.50  
 -    
 -    
 -    
13.2% 
15.74% 
0.00% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
1.03 
1.03 
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
 102.27  
 85.80  
 16.47  
 19.66  
 6.74  
 0.31  
 0.48  
 0.15  
 7.85  
6. Consulting services for start-up 
 0.15  
100.0% 
0.01 
 -    
 -    
0.0% 
0.0% 
 -    
 -    
7. Survey, design, consultancy and 
supervision 
8. Green Incentive Fundc 
9. Green Investment Fundc 
Subtotal A 
B. Contingencies 
C. Financial Charges during 
Implementation 
          Total Project Cost (A+B+C) 
          % Total Project Cost 
 -    
0.0% 
 3.45  
 13.06  
 90.09  
 -    
 -    
 90.09  
47.4% 
50.0% 
50.0% 
52.8% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
47.3% 
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 1.72  
 6.53  
 -    
 -    
 -    
6.89 
 50.00  
-    
-    
 -    
 -    
 50.00  
26.3% 
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
3.19 
-    
-    
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
25.0% 
25.0% 
29.3% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
26.3% 
 0.31  
 0.48  
100.0% 
100.0% 
 -    
0.0% 
 7.85  
100.0% 
0.47 
 1.72  
 6.53  
 30.40  
 17.65  
25.0% 
25.0% 
17.8% 
100.0% 
 1.92  
100.0% 
 49.97  
26.3% 
26.3% 
-    
-    
 6.90  
 26.12  
1.50 
 170.49  
-    
-    
 17.65  
 1.92  
 190.06  
100.0% 
a Xin'an River Basin includes Huizhou District, Xiuning County, Tunxi District, She County, and Yi County.  
b Yangzi River Basin includes Qimen County and Huangshan District. 
c 100% of total expenditure claimed for these two funds 
d Tax and duty are included in the estimate of investment cost. The government will finance taxes and duties of 1.5 million Euros through exemption, pertaining to 
items 1A and 7. ADB will finances taxes and duties of 6.89 million for items 1A, 1B, 2, 3, and 6. KfW will  finance  taxes and duties of 3.19 million for items  1A, 1B, 
2, 3, and 6. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
26 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Outputs and/or Components 
Table 8: Cost Estimates by Output  
(€ million) 
Item 
Total Cost 
Output 1 
Output 2 
Output 3 
Output 4 
Amount  
% of Cost 
Category   Amount  
% of Cost 
Category   Amount  
% of Cost 
Category  Amount  
% of Cost 
Category 
A. Investment Costs 
1. Civil works 
1A. Civil works for Xin'an 
River Basin a 
1B. Civil works for Yangzi 
River Basin b 
2. Mechanical and equipment 
3. Project management and 
capacity development 
4. Project preparation 
5. Land acquisition and 
resettlement 
 102.27  
 85.80  
 60.41  
 46.78  
59.1% 
54.5% 
 41.86  
 39.03  
40.9% 
45.5% 
 16.47  
 13.64  
82.8% 
 2.83  
17.2% 
 19.66  
 6.74  
 0.31  
 0.48  
 -    
 -    
0.0% 
0.0% 
 11.74  
 -    
59.7% 
0.0% 
 0.18  
 -    
 -    
59.1% 
0.0% 
 0.13  
 0.48  
40.9% 
100.0% 
0.0% 
 -    
0.0% 
6. Consulting services for start-
 0.15  
up 
7. Survey, design, consultancy 
 7.85  
 4.54  
57.8% 
 3.31  
42.2% 
and supervision 
8. Green Incentive Fund 
9. Green Investment Fund 
Subtotal A 
B. Contingencies 
C. Financial Charges during 
Implementation 
Total Project Cost (A+B+C+D) 
% Total Project Cost 
 6.90  
 26.12  
 170.49  
 17.65  
 1.92  
 190.06  
100.0% 
 -    
 -    
 65.14  
 7.95  
 0.73  
 73.82  
73.82 
0.0% 
0.0% 
38.2% 
45.0% 
38.0% 
38.8% 
38.8% 
 -    
 -    
 57.52  
 7.07  
 0.65  
 65.24  
65.24 
0.0% 
0.0% 
33.7% 
40.0% 
33.9% 
34.3% 
34.3% 
 6.90  
 26.12  
 33.01  
 0.91  
 0.34  
 34.26  
34.26 
a Xin'an River Basin includes Huizhou District, Xiuning County, Tunxi District, She County, and Yi County.  
b Yangzi River Basin includes Qimen County and Huangshan District. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
 -    
 -    
 -    
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
 7.92  
 6.74  
40.3% 
100.0% 
 -    
 -    
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
 0.15  
100.0% 
0.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
19.4% 
5.1% 
17.8% 
 -    
 -    
 -    
 14.82  
 1.73  
 0.20  
18.0% 
18.0% 
 16.74  
16.74 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
8.7% 
9.8% 
10.3% 
8.8% 
8.8% 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Item 
A. Investment Costs 
1. Civil works 
1A. Civil works for Xin'an River Basin a 
1B. Civil works for Yangzi River Basin b 
2. Mechanical and equipment 
3. Project management and capacity 
development 
4. Project preparation 
5. Land acquisition and resettlement 
6. Consulting services for start-up 
7. Survey, design, consultancy and 
supervision 
8. Green Incentive Fund 
9. Green Investment Fund 
Subtotal A 
B. Contingencies 
C. Financial Charges during Implementation 
          Total Project Cost (A+B+C+D) 
          % Total Project Cost 
Table 9: Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
(€ million) 
Year 1 
2020 
Year 2 
2021 
Total Cost 
Year 3 
2022 
27 
Year 4 
2023 
Year 5 
2024 
Year 6 
2025 
 102.27  
 85.80  
 16.47  
 19.66  
 6.74  
 0.31  
 0.48  
 0.15  
 7.85  
 6.90  
 26.12  
 102.27  
 17.65  
 1.92  
 190.06  
100.0% 
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 0.31  
 0.48  
 -    
 6.46  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 0.52  
 0.24  
 8.01  
4.2% 
 14.14  
 11.65  
 2.49  
 6.40  
 1.81  
 -    
 -    
 0.15  
 0.28  
 0.43  
 26.12  
 14.14  
 2.53  
 0.34  
 52.18  
27.5% 
 46.85  
 39.60  
 7.25  
 6.32  
 1.48  
 30.88  
 26.23  
 4.65  
 2.64  
 1.38  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 9.02  
 7.09  
 1.93  
 2.15  
 1.13  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 1.39  
 1.24  
 0.16  
 2.15  
 0.95  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 0.28  
 0.28  
 0.28  
 0.28  
 1.72  
 1.72  
 1.72  
 1.29  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 46.85  
 6.34  
 0.34  
 63.33  
33.3% 
 30.88  
 4.97  
 0.34  
 42.21  
22.2% 
 9.02  
 2.24  
 0.33  
 16.86  
8.9% 
 1.39  
 1.06  
 0.34  
 7.46  
3.9% 
a Xin'an River Basin includes Huizhou District, Xiuning County, Tunxi District, She County, and Yi County.  
b Yangzi River Basin includes Qimen County and Huangshan District. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding. 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
28 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve  
million Euro
Disbursement
Contract Awards
100.00
90.00
80.00
70.00
60.00
50.00
40.00
30.00
20.00
10.00
0.00
Year 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Total 
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Projected Contract Awards 
Projected Disbursement  
(€ million) 
Q3 
0.00  
Q1  Q2 
0.00   0.00  
Q4 
8.54  
16.67  17.46   13.48   11.34  
5.01  
0.00  
0.00  
0.00  
7.18   7.63  
0.49   0.00  
0.00   0.00  
0.00   0.00  
2.28  
0.00  
0.00  
0.00  
Total 
8.54  
58.95  
22.11  
0.49  
0.00  
0.00  
90.09    
Q1 
0.00  
3.73  
7.18  
7.51  
3.16  
0.94  
Q2  Q3  Q4 
0.00   0.00   0.00  
4.16   8.64   9.25  
8.22   8.84   8.15  
5.68   4.58   3.34  
1.74   1.46   1.41  
0.79   0.72   0.59  
Total 
0.00  
25.77  
32.40  
21.11  
7.77  
3.04  
90.09  
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
29 
Fund Flow Diagram 
1. 
General  
ADB loan proceeds will go to the advance account at the Anhui Provincial Department of 
53. 
Finance. The loan proceeds will then be used to either: 1) pay project expenditures directly, 2) 
reimburse: (i) district and/or county-level finance bureaus for payments to contractors by district 
and/or  county  PMOs; (ii)  Huangshan  Municipal  Bureau of  Finance for  payments for  consulting 
services or centrally procured equipment (e.g., printers for all PMOs) and supplies (iii) Huangshan 
Municipal  Bureau  of  Finance for  payments to  eligible farmers for Green Incentive  Fund;   or  3) 
transfer funds to HTIC for the Green Investment Fund component. 
ADB 
ADB  
Loan 
Loan 
Repayments 
Anhui Provincial DOF 
(ADB loan to advance account / CNY conversion account) 
ADB  
Loan 
Loan Repayments 
County/ District BOF 
Huangshan Municipal 
BOF 
Procurement 
payments 
Procurement 
payments 
LP 
contribution 
Green  
Incentive 
Fund 
payments 
D
i
r
e
c
t
P
a
y
m
e
n
t
HTIC 
GIF 
Contractors 
Consultants & 
Suppliers 
Farmers 
Equity  
Investments 
ADB loan 
Loan Repayment 
Procurement payments 
Eco-compensation payments 
Qualified 
Investees 
LP contribution 
Equity Investment 
Investment proceeds 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  BOF  =  Bureau  of  Finance,  GIF  =  Green  Investment  Fund,  HTIC  = 
Huangshan Trust and Investment Corporation, LP = Limited partner.  
Figure 3: Fund flow chart of the Project 
30 
2. 
Fund flow for project loan 
54. 
ADB will enter into a Loan Agreement with the PRC, acting through MOF; MOF will on-
lend ADB loan to APG; APG will on-lend ADB loan to HMG; HMG will enter into an onlending 
agreement with HTIC. 
55. 
Anhui  Provincial  Department  of  Finance  (APDOF),  on  behalf  of  APG,  will  establish  an 
advance  account  denominated  in  euro  to  receive  loan  proceeds  from  ADB,  and  a  CNY 
Conversion  Account  (CCA)  in  CNY  to  receive the  conversion  of  ADB  loan  funds from  euro  to 
CNY. 
3. 
Green Incentive Fund 
56. 
The disbursement of the Green Incentive Fund will be implemented by the HMBOF. The 
HMBOF  will  disburse  directly  to  the  participating  tea  gardens  through  its  designated  account 
based  on  the  list  of  participating  tea  gardens  and  their  corresponding  amounts  provided  by 
HPMO. The HPMO will (i) agree with the tea gardens in advance in terms of the compensation 
scheme, (ii) engage the third party to verify actual achievements, and (iii) provide this information 
to  HMBOF  as  supporting  documents  for  disbursement.  Upon  signing  of  Incentive  Payment 
Agreement, HMBOF will release the fund from its designated account, and claim reimbursement 
from the advance account at APDOF for ADB’s share of the expenditures. It is cash grant so there 
is no repayment from tea gardens to the HMG.    
Figure 4: Fund flow chart of Green Incentive Fund 
4. 
Green Investment Fund 
57. 
Figure 4 shows the (i) cash flows of ADB loan funds to and from Qualitied Investees; (ii) 
repayment flows and withdrawal application flows between ADB, HMG and HTIC. The agreement 
flow, loan disbursement and fund flow are as follows: 
31 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
HTIC as LP will enter into a Limited Partnership Agreement with HXIC to create 
GIF. 
ADB  loan  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  to  APDOF’s  advance  account  and 
converted into CNY in the CCA. 
HXIC will enter into Equity Investment Agreements with the Qualified Investees. 
Based on the executed Equity Investment Agreements, HXIC through HTIC will 
request transfer of funds from the advance account to the GIF RFA 
HXIC  disburses  the  loan  proceeds  from  the  GIF  RFA  to  Qualified  Investees 
within 3 business days upon receiving funds from advance account.  
The cash accumulated in the RFA will be used for reinvesting and/or setting up 
new LP’s for equity financing to subprojects until ADB loan principal repayments 
are due. 
58. 
Loan  proceeds  re-deployment.  HXIC  shall  cause  GIF  (during  their  respective 
reinvestment periods) to, redeploy all Divested Capital to make further investments in Qualified 
Investees as quickly as feasible after GIF divest from the eligible investee and the proceed is paid 
to the GIF. The capital will be redeployed to new Eligible Investee for eligible subproject, if not 
paid to HMG for serving the debt service obligations.  
Figure 5: Fund flow chart of Green Investment Fund 
32 
V. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Financial Management Assessment 
The financial management assessment (FMA) was conducted in accordance with Asian 
59. 
Development  Bank’s  (ADB)  Financial  Management  and  Analysis  of  Projects,  Financial  Due 
Diligence: A Methodology Note, and other relevant technical guidance.14  The FMA considered 
the  financial  management  capacity  of  HMG  as  the  project  executing  agency,  and  the  seven 
implementing  agencies  for  the  investment  loan  component,  Huangshan  District  Government, 
Huizhou  District  Government,  Tunxi  County  Government,  She  County  Government,  Yi  County 
Government,  Qimen  County  Government,  and  Xiuning  County  Government.  HMG  selected 
Huangshan  Trust  and  Investment  Corporation  (HTIC),  the  implementing  agency  for  the  GIF 
component. HTIC, incorporated in January 2016 in Huangshan, is a 100% state-owned enterprise 
of the Huangshan Municipal Government. HTIC is operating under PRC’s commercial law and is 
financially  autonomous.  Huangshan  Xintou  Investment  Company  (HXIC)  is  100%  owned 
subsidiary of HTIC, will be the fund manager of the GIF. The FMA also assessed the financial 
management capacities of both HTIC and HXIC for implementing the financial intermediation loan 
component.  The  FMA  covered  funds-flow  arrangements,  staffing,  accounting  and  financial 
reporting  systems, 
internal  and  external  auditing 
arrangements. 
information  systems,  and 
financial 
60. 
The FMA confirms that both the executing agency and the eight implementing agencies 
have  satisfactory  financial  management  capacity  and  capability  in  terms  of  funds-flow 
management,  advance funds usage,  SOE  procedures,  accounting  and  financial  reporting,  and 
auditing to effectively and efficiently implement the project. 
61. 
The  key  weakness  in  project  financial  management  is  executing  and  implementing 
agencies’  lack  of  experience  in  executing  ADB-financed  projects.  This  risk  will  be  mitigated 
through financial management action plan. The overall financial management risk-rating of the 
project before considering mitigating measures is moderate.  
The  identified  key  financial  management  risks  will  be  mitigated  by  the  proposed  action 
62. 
plan as shown in Table 10 and will be closely monitored during project implementation. 
Table 10: Proposed Financial Management Action Plan 
Timing 
Responsibility 
executing agency, 
implementing 
agencies 
Two months before loan 
effectiveness 
Action 
Appointment of qualified financial management 
staff to perform key roles in executing agency 
and implementing agencies 
Defining clear financial management job 
descriptions and requirements for roles and 
responsibilities within executing agency and 
implementing agencies, including but not limited 
to internal structure, reporting lines, separation of 
duties, tasks and responsibilities, performance 
requirements 
Development of a comprehensive investment 
manual for GIF to include detailed criteria, 
procedures, process, compliance requirements 
executing agency, 
implementing 
agencies 
Two months before loan 
effectiveness  
HMG, HTIC, ADB 
Three months after loan 
signing 
14 The  guideline  is  available  electronically  from  the  ADB  website  (https://www.adb.org/projects/operations/financial-
management-resources). 
Action 
and standards in terms of qualified investments’ 
selection, approval, due diligence, safeguards, 
and monitoring 
Responsibility 
Timing 
33 
executing agency, 
implementing 
agencies 
Two months before loan 
effectiveness 
Development of financial management manuals 
and training of relevant staff 
Training on ADB’s financial management 
requirements, including accounting and reporting, 
project auditing, loan disbursement, and foreign 
exchange risk management 
Consultation within related government offices, 
external professionals, and financial services 
providers on interest rate and foreign exchange 
risk management 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, GIF = green investment fund, HMG = Huangshan Municipal Government, HTIC 
= Huangshan Trust and Investment Corporation.  
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
executing agency, 
implementing 
agencies, ADB 
executing agency, 
implementing 
agencies, ADB 
One month before loan 
effectiveness 
During first year of 
project implementation 
No significant country-level financial management issues are identified. Overall inherent 
63. 
risk and control risk are assessed as moderate. 
Disbursement 
1. 
Disbursement Arrangements for ADB Funds 
The  loan  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement 
64. 
Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),15 and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between the government and ADB. Online training for project staff on disbursement policies and 
procedures  is  available.16 Project  staff  are  encouraged  to  avail  of  this  training  to  help  ensure 
efficient disbursement and fiduciary control. 
65. 
Advance  fund  procedure.  The  Anhui  Provincial  Department  of  Finance  (APDOF)  will 
establish and maintain an advance account. The currency of the ADB advance account is in Euro. 
The  advance  account  is  to  be  used  exclusively  for  ADB’s  share  of  eligible  expenditures.  The 
APDOF will administer the advance accounts and will be accountable and responsible for proper 
use of advances to the advance accounts. The advance accounts will be for the overall project 
including the investment project loan component and the financial intermediation loan component. 
66. 
The  total  outstanding  advance  to  the  advance  account  will  not  exceed  the  estimate  of 
ADB’s  share  of  expenditures  to  be  paid  through  the  advance  account  for  the  forthcoming  six 
months. HMBOF may request for initial and additional advances to the advance account based 
on  an  estimate  of  expenditure  sheet17 setting  out  the  estimated  expenditures  to  be  financed 
through the account for the forthcoming six months. Supporting documents will be submitted to 
ADB or retained by the IAs in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as 
amended from time to time) when liquidating or replenishing the advance account. 
15  The handbook is available electronically from the ADB website (http://www.adb.org/documents/ loan-disbursement- 
handbook). 
16  Disbursement eLearning. http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning.  
17  Estimate  of  Expenditure  sheet  is  available  in  Appendix  8A  of  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  (2017,  as 
amended from time to time). 
34 
Statement  of  expenditure  (SOE)  procedure.18 The  SOE  procedure  may  be  used  to 
67. 
reimburse eligible expenditures or liquidate of advances to the advance account.  
Statement of expenditure (SOE) procedure for GIF. For the GIF component, SOE for 
68. 
FIL procedure may be used for reimbursement of eligible expenditures or liquidation of advances 
to  the  advance  account  for  equity  investment  below  the  free  limit  of  CNY60  million. 
Reimbursement  and  liquidation  of  individual  payments  in  excess  of  the  free  limit  should  be 
supported  by  full  documentation  when  submitting  the  withdrawal  application  to  ADB.  The 
withdrawal  application  should  include  a  statement  from  HMG  that  all  listed  equity  investments 
satisfy the terms and conditions specified in the onlending agreement between the government 
and the HTIC. For the first equity investment or equity investment above the free limit, investment 
proposals  need  to  be  submitted  by  the  HTIC  through  the  HMG  to  ADB  for  prior  review  and 
approval. This enables ADB to satisfy itself on the quality of the HTIC’s appraisal of subprojects. 
69. 
Supporting documents and records for the expenditures claimed under the SOE will be 
maintained and made readily available for review by ADB's disbursement and review missions, 
upon  ADB's  request  for  submission  of  supporting  documents  on  a  sampling  basis,  and  for 
independent audit. 
Conditions for withdrawals for project loan. The withdrawal shall not be made until  (i) 
70. 
the KfW Loan Agreement is executed and delivered, and (ii) all conditions precedent to the loan 
effectiveness shall have been fulfilled. 
2. 
Disbursement Arrangements for the Green Incentive Fund 
HMG will assign a designated account for the proposed Green Incentive Fund that will be 
71. 
disbursed through the following steps:    
(i) 
HMG, with support of ADB and KfW and consultants, conducts a participatory design 
and  study  to  develop  the  guidelines  for  the  Green  Incentive  Fund  operation 
mechanism,  including  (a)  green  tea  garden  selection  criteria,  (b)  tea  garden 
application  for  participation  and  approval  procedure,  (c)  third  party  monitoring  and 
result verification mechanism, and (d) result-based compensation mechanism; 
(ii) 
HMG issues the guidelines for the Green Incentive Fund and invites tea gardens to 
apply for participation; 
(iii) 
HMG, through HPMO, screens, selects and approves participating tea gardens;  
(iv) 
participating tea gardens implement the green farming practice as promoted by HMG; 
(v) 
HMG engages a third-party monitoring agent to assess and verify the progress and 
achievements made by the participating tea gardens in reducing the targeted pollution 
discharge; 
18  SOE forms are available in Appendix 7B and 7D of ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from 
time to time). 
35 
(vi) 
HMG makes compensation payments from its designated account to the participating 
tea gardens in accordance with the pre-announced criteria, and the tea gardens sign 
receipts for cash grant received. 
(vii)  HMG  submits the receipts  signed  by the  tea  gardens as the  evidence  of  payments 
made, together with the compensation criteria, to APDOF to request reimbursement 
of funds from the advance account for ADB’s share of expenditures. 
Conditions  for  withdrawals  for  Green  Incentive  Fund.  The  withdrawal  shall  not  be 
72. 
made until (i) the HMG adopt clear reward guidelines, disbursement arrangement, and eligibility 
criteria  for  the  Qualified  Recipient  (each  recipient  of  the  cash  grant  from  the  Green  Incentive 
Fund),  (ii)  screen  and  approve  the  Qualified  Recipient  in  compliance  with  the  foregoing 
requirements,  and  (iii)  execute and  deliver  an  Incentive  Payment  Agreement  with  all  Qualified 
Recipient in addition to the above requirements stipulated in the para 70.  
3. 
Disbursement Arrangements for the Green Investment Fund 
73. 
The disbursement processing sequence for the GIF will be as follows. 
(i) 
(ii) 
HTIC as LP will enter into a Limited Partnership Agreement with HXIC to create 
GIF. 
ADB  loan  proceeds  will  be  disbursed  to  APDOF’s  advance  account  and 
converted into CNY in the CCA. 
(iii) 
HXIC will enter into Equity Investment Agreements with the Qualified Investees. 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Based on the executed Equity Investment Agreements, HXIC through HTIC will 
request transfer of funds from the advance account to the GIF RFA. 
HXIC  disburses  the  loan  proceeds  from  the  GIF  RFA  to  Qualified  Investees 
within 3 business days upon receiving funds from advance account, and 
The cash accumulated in the RFA will be used for reinvesting and/or setting up 
new LP’s for equity financing to subprojects until ADB loan principal repayments 
are due. 
74. 
Conditions for withdrawals for GIF. The withdrawal shall not be made until (i) Onlending 
Agreement has been signed between HMG and HTIC; (ii) the Limited Partnership Agreement for 
GIF have been signed by HTIC and HXIC; (iii) the GIF is formally established, with the permission 
of  the  HMG,    for  the  purpose  of  providing  equity  investment;  (iv)  the  Framework  Cooperation 
Agreement has been signed and the Revolving Account has been opened at the Account Bank, 
(v) the ESMS for the Project gas been endorsed and adopted by the HTIC for GIF, and (vi) the 
Equity Investment Agreement with all relevant Qualified Investee (an investee which satisfies the 
eligibility criteria set out in Appendix 4-C to the PAM) shall have been executed and delivered by 
HXIC and Qualified Investee in addition to above requirements stipulated in the para 70. 
75. 
Before the submission of the first withdrawal application, the borrower will submit to ADB 
sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal applications on 
36 
behalf of the government, together with the authenticated specimen signatures of each authorized 
person.  The minimum  value  per  withdrawal  application is  stipulated  in the  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). Individual payments below such amount must 
be paid (i) by the executing agency and subsequently claimed to ADB through reimbursement, or 
(ii) through the advance fund procedure, unless otherwise accepted by ADB. The borrower will 
ensure sufficient category and contract balances before requesting disbursements. Use of ADB’s 
Client Portal for Disbursements19 system is encouraged for submission of withdrawal applications 
to ADB. 
4. 
Disbursement Arrangements for Counterpart Fund 
The  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  will  be  responsible  for  (i)  preparing 
76. 
disbursement projections, and (ii) requesting budgetary allocations for counterpart funds in annual 
government budgets, which is to be reviewed by the city governments and approved by the city 
people’s congresses. Based on actual incurrence of costs, the HPMO and the district and county 
implementing agencies will initiate disbursement requests to their relevant finance bureaus. Upon 
confirmation  of  the  eligibility  of  the  payments,  the  finance  bureaus  will  disburse  directly  to the 
contractors.  
Accounting 
77. 
The  executing  agency  and  implementing  agencies  will  maintain,  or  cause  to  be 
maintained, separate books and records by funding source for all expenditures incurred on the 
project, following  the  accrual-based  accounting system  and  in  accordance with the  accounting 
policies and procedures for  government  fiscal  revenues  and  expenditures  issued  by  the MOF. 
These accounting policies and procedures are also used to record and report the receipts and 
payments of fiscal revenues and expenditures through computerized systems with the ability to 
generate  financial  statements.  The  HPMO  will  ensure  that  project  financial  statements  are 
prepared by district and county SPMOs in accordance with the government's accounting laws and 
regulations which are consistent with international accounting principles and practices. 
Statement of Utilization of Funds for GIF. HTIC will maintain a Revolving Fund Account 
78. 
to accept ADB and KfW loan proceeds. HTIC will cause HXIC to manage the accounts at GIFF. 
HXIC will prepare annual consolidated statements of utilization of funds (SUF) in accordance with 
the  government's  accounting  laws  and  regulations  which  are  consistent  with  international 
accounting principles and practices acceptable to ADB. A sample statement is in Appendix 4-D. 
 Auditing and Public Disclosure 
1. 
General  
79. 
The HMG will cause the detailed project financial statements prepared by HPMO and the 
implementing agencies to be audited in accordance with equivalent national standards and by an 
independent auditor both acceptable to ADB. The audited project financial statements together 
with the auditor’s opinion in the English language will be submitted to ADB within six months from 
the  end  of  the  fiscal  year  by  the  HPMO.  Annual  Audited  Entity  Statements  of  the  Executing 
19 The ADB Client Portal Disbursement system facilitates online submission of withdrawal application to ADB, resulting 
the  Borrower  are  available  online  at 
to  be  completed  by 
faster  disbursement.  The 
in 
https://www.adb.org/documents/client-portal-disbursements-guide. 
forms 
37 
Agency  (AEFS)  should  be  submitted  by  HMG  and  the  project  implementing  agencies  (three 
district and four county governments in Huangshan). 
80. 
For entities preparing independent entity financial statements, the audited entity financial 
statements,  together  with  the  auditor’s  report  and  management  letter,  will  be  submitted  in  the 
English language to ADB within six months from the end of the fiscal year to which they relate. 
81. 
The audit report for the project financial statements will include a management letter and 
auditor’s opinions, which cover (i) whether the project financial statements present an accurate 
and fair view or are presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the applicable 
financial  reporting  standards;  (ii)  whether  the  proceeds  of  the  loan  were  used  only  for  the 
purpose(s)  of  the  project;  and  (iii)  whether  the  executing  agency  was  in  compliance  with  the 
financial covenants contained in the legal agreements (where applicable). 
82. 
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by review 
missions and during normal program supervision, and followed up regularly with all concerned, 
including the external auditor.  
83. 
The government, HMG, and the implementing agencies have been made aware of ADB’s 
approach to delayed submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of 
the  audited  project  financial  statements.20 ADB  reserves  the  right  to  require  a  change  in  the 
auditor (in a manner consistent with the constitution of the borrower), or for additional support to 
be provided to the auditor, if the audits required are not conducted in a manner satisfactory to 
ADB,  or  if  the  audits  are  substantially  delayed.  ADB  reserves  the  right  to  verify  the  project's 
financial accounts to confirm that the share of ADB’s financing is used in accordance with ADB’s 
policies and procedures.  
84. 
Public disclosure of the audited project financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion 
on the project financial statements, will be guided by ADB’s Access to Information Policy.21 After 
the  review,  ADB  will  disclose  the  audited  project  financial  statements  and  the  opinion  of  the 
auditors on the project financial statements no later than 14 days after ADB’s confirmation of their 
acceptability  by  posting  them  on  ADB’s  website.  The  management  letter,  additional  auditor’s 
opinions, and audited entity financial statements will not be disclosed.22 
2. 
For Green Investment Fund 
The audited SUF for GIF together with the external auditor’s report will be prepared by 
85. 
HTIC and submitted to ADB within 6 months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate.  
20 ADB’s  approach  and  procedures  regarding  delayed  submission  of  audited  project  financial  statements:  (i)  when 
audited project financial statements are not received by the due date, ADB will write to the executing agency advising 
that (a) the audit documents are overdue; and (b) if they are not received within the next 6 months, requests for new 
contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  advance  accounts,  processing  of  new 
reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed; (ii) when audited project  financial 
statements are not received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will withhold processing of requests for new 
contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of  advance  accounts,  processing  of  new 
reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters. ADB will (a) inform the executing agency of ADB’s actions; 
and (b) advise that the loan may be suspended if the audit documents are not received within the next 6 months; (iii) 
When audited project financial statements are not received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may suspend 
the loan. 
21  ADB. 2018. Access to Information Policy. Manila. 
22  This type of information would generally fall under access to information policy exceptions to disclosure. ADB. 2018. 
Access to Information Policy. Paragraph 17. 
38 
86. 
In addition to the annual audited SUF, HTIC will (i) have its financial statements audited 
annually  by  independent  auditors  whose qualifications,  experience and terms  of reference are 
acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international auditing standards or the national equivalent 
acceptable  to  ADB;  (ii)  as  part  of  each  such  audit,  have  the  auditors  prepare  the  auditors’ 
opinion(s) on the financial statements and compliance with any financial covenants it is required 
to maintain as specified in the loan or project agreements; and (iii) furnish to ADB not later than 
6  months  after the  end of the  fiscal year  to  which  they relate,  copies  of such  audited financial 
statements  and  auditors’  opinion(s),  all  in  the  English  language,  and  such  other  information 
concerning these documents and the audit as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request. 
VI. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
87. 
In  accordance  with  the  Procurement  Regulation  for  ADB  Borrowers  (2017),  the 
procurement risk assessment and the strategic procurement planning have been conducted and 
concluded that the project procurement is at low risk as the executing and implementing agencies 
have experienced in managing international financial institution’s funded projects.  
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
All  advance  contracting  and  retroactive  financing  will  be  undertaken  in  conformity  with 
88. 
ADB Procurement Policy (2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement Regulations for 
ADB  Borrowers  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time). 23 The  issuance  of  invitations  for  bids, 
bidding  documents,  bid  evaluation  reports,  and draft  contracts  under  advance  contracting  and 
retroactive financing will be subject to ADB prior approval. The borrower, HMG, HSDG, HZDG, 
TDG, SCG, YCG, QCG, XCG and HTIC have been advised that approval of advance contracting 
and retroactive financing does not commit ADB to finance the project. 
Advance contracting. Advance contracting will apply to the urgent procurement of two 
89. 
works contracts for (i) Smart River Monitoring System of Huangshan and (ii) Village Environment 
Improvement Project in Tunxi District, and three consulting services contracts for start-up support.  
Retroactive financing. Retroactive financing will apply to the urgent procurement of civil 
90. 
works  and  consulting  services.  Retroactive  financing  will  be  subject  to  a  maximum  amount 
equivalent to 20% of the loan amount for eligible expenditures incurred prior to loan effectiveness, 
but not earlier than 12 months before the loan agreement is signed. 
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services 
91. 
All  procurement  of  the  ADB-financed  works,  goods  and  non-consulting  services,  and 
consulting services will be undertaken in accordance with Procurement Policy (2017, as amended 
from time to time) and Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017, as amended from time 
to time). 24  
The Project  has  a total  59  contract  packages to  be  financed  by  ADB,  including  28  civil 
92. 
works contracts, 11 goods contracts, and 20 service contracts. Open competitive bidding (OCB) 
23 https://www.adb.org/documents/adb-procurement-policy. 
24 Since cofinancier’s resources and ADB’s ordinary capital resources are used to jointly finance individual 
procurement  packages,  universal  procurement  will  apply  to  all  procurement  packages  to  be  financed 
under this project. ADB. 2015. Enhancing Operational Efficiency of the Asian Development Bank. Manila. 
39 
procedures nationally advertised will be used for all civil works and goods contracts. Quality- and 
cost-based selection (QCBS), quality-based selection (QBS), consultants’ qualification selection 
(CQS), and individual consultant selection (ICS) procedures will be applied for consulting services 
procurement. 
An 18-month procurement plan indicating threshold and review procedures, goods, works, 
93. 
and consulting service contract packages and procurement guidelines are in section C. 
OCB. OCB using national advertising will be used for contracts. For procurement under 
94. 
OCB, the following provisions will be applied: (i) the advertisement will be published in the national 
press for national advertising, ADB website encouraged, an official gazette, or an open access 
website; (ii) standard bidding documents issued in 2015 by the Ministry of Finance will be used 
for OCB national advertising, while the standard bidding document for ICT procurement issued 
by the ADB can be adopted for supply contracts related to the ICT monitoring equipment supply 
and software development; and (iii) bidding documents will only be in Chinese language (except 
for contracts which require ADB’s prior review and approval) for OCB advertised nationally, and 
the currencies for bidding and payment will be in CNY unless otherwise agreed between HMG 
and  ADB.  Procurement  under  OCB  will  use  the  single-stage,  one-envelope  procedure.  The 
relevant sections of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy25 (1998, as amended from time to time) will be 
included  in  all  procurement  documents  and  contracts.  Bidding  will  not  be  conducted  using 
electronic  system  tools.  If  bidding  rules  set  by  the  Public  Resources  Trading  Center  are 
inconsistent  with  ADB’s  procurement  policy  and  regulations,  ADB’s  procurement  policy  and 
regulations shall prevail. 
Consulting  Services.  All  consultants  will  be  recruited  according  to  ADB  Procurement 
95. 
Policy (2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers 
(2017, as amended from time to time). Appendix 2 contains the indicative terms of references for 
all consulting services. Consulting firms will be engaged using either the quality- and cost-based 
selection with a standard quality: cost ratio of 90:10, and consultants qualification selection using 
either full technical proposal, simplified technical proposal or biodata technical proposal. Individual 
consultants will be engaged through individual consultant selection procedure. 
Thresholds  for  ADB  Review.  For  the  first  civil  works  package  and  the  first  goods 
96. 
package, regardless of the estimated contract amount, the invitations for bids, bidding documents, 
bid evaluation reports, and draft negotiated contracts need ADB’s prior review and approval. For 
the subsequent nationally advertised OCB packages, invitations for bids, bidding documents, bid 
evaluation reports, and signed contracts provided they are consistent with previously approved 
documents  will  not  require ADB’s  prior  review.  Post review (sampling)  approach based  on the 
procurement  risk  assessment  results  and  strategic  procurement  planning  conducted  for  the 
project will be adopted. 
97. 
Procurement Principles for GIF. Procurement activities for the qualified enterprises of 
GIF will follow commercial practice of the selected commercial entities but should address the 
core  procurement  principles  as  stated  in  ADB  Procurement  Policy,  and  adopt  appropriate 
procedures, including (i) payment of reasonable prices, and (ii) fair canvassing when selecting 
suppliers. All qualified enterprises will be encouraged to procure all goods through competitive 
bidding or shopping when such procedures are most appropriate in the interest of economy and 
efficiency. HTIC should monitor procurement and report to ADB if there occurs any inconsistency 
with  ADB  core  procurement  principles  and  PRC’s  procurement  laws.  To  provide  guidance  to 
25 http://www.adb.org/Documents/Policies/Anticorruption-Integrity/default.asp 
40 
qualified investees in undertaking procurement using ADB loan proceeds, and for HTIC to monitor 
the  procurement  activities  undertaken  by  qualified  enterprises,  a  project  specific  procurement 
regulation has been prepared and included in Appendix 4-E. 
Procurement Plan 
Basic Data 
Project  Name:  Preparing  Yangtze  River  Economic  Belt  Projects  -  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River  Ecological 
Protection and Green Development Project 
Project Number: 52026 
Country:  People’s Republic of China 
Project Procurement Classification: B 
Approval Number: 
Executing Agency: Huangshan Municipal Government 
Implementing Agency: 8 IAs: District and county government of 
Tunxi District, Huangshan District, Huizhou District, She County, 
Xiuning County, Yi County, Qimen County, and Huangshan Trust 
Investment Company 
Procurement Risk: Low 
Project Financing Amount:   
   ADB Financing: €90.09 million 
   KfW Financing:  € 50.00 million 
   Non-Bank Financing: €50.57 million 
Date of First Procurement Plan:  15 
August, 2019 
Project Closing Date: 30 December 2026 
Date of this Procurement Plan: 8 November 2019 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, KfW = Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
1. 
Methods, Review, and Procurement Plan 
Except  as  ADB  may  otherwise  agree,  the  following  process  thresholds  shall  apply  to 
98. 
procurement of goods, works, non-consulting services, and consulting services: 
Method 
Open Competitive Bidding 
Advertised Nationally 
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Comments 
The procurement assessment examined potential for attracting enough 
qualified  bidders  to  ensure  contract  is  delivered  on  time,  to  requisite 
quality and exhibit value for money. It was concluded that no works and 
goods  contracts  would  require  international  advertising  to  attract 
enough qualified bidders. All works and goods contracts can therefore 
be advertised nationally following OCB procedures.  
OCB = open competitive bidding, RFQ = request for quotation. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
Method 
Quality-and cost-
based selection 
Consultant 
qualification 
selection 
Consulting Services 
Comments 
The  following  submissions  are  required  for  prior  review  and  approval  by  ADB: 
Submission 1 (Preparing Cost Estimates,  Shortlist,  and Request for  Proposals), 
Submission 2 (Evaluating Technical Proposals and Preparing Evaluation Report), 
Submission  3  (Opening  and  Evaluating  the  Financial  Proposal(s),  Ranking  the 
Proposals, and Recommending Contract Award). 
Quality and cost ratio – 90:10  
Consultant Qualification Selection (CQS) is adopted for small consultancy 
services. 
41 
Method 
Individual 
consultant 
selection 
Comments 
Start-up individual consultants will be engaged by individual consultant selection 
method.  
ADB = Asian Development Bank. 
2. 
Lists of Active Procurement Packages (Contracts) 
The following table lists goods, works, non-consulting services, and consulting services 
99. 
contracts  for  which  the  procurement  activity  is  expected  to  commence  within  the  procurement 
plan duration. 
Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services 
Package 
No. 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
 (€ x 1000) 
Procurem
ent 
Method 
Revie
w 
Bidding 
Procedu
re 
Advertis
ement 
Date 
Comment
s 
Works-
HZ-1 
Works-
HS-4 
Works-
XN-1 
Works-
XN-2 
Works-
YX-1 
Works-
SX-1 
Works-
SX-2 
Works-
SX-3 
Works-
SX-4 
Works-
QM-1 
Works-
QM-2 
Works-
QM-3 
Works-
XN-3 
Works-
XN-4 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Huizhou District 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Huangshan District 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Xiuning County - 1 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Xiuning County -2 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Yi County 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
She County-1 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
She County-2 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
She County-3 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
She County-4 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Qimen County-1 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Qimen County -2 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Qimen County-3 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Xiuning County-
Shangshan 1 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
 12,228   OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2020 Q4  Works 
 2,060  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2020 Q4  Works 
 5,521  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2  Works  
 5,580  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2022 Q1  Works 
 6,199  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q1  Works 
 3,407  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2  Works 
 5,599  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3  Works 
 6,195  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2022 Q1  Works 
 1,554  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2022 Q3  Works 
 3,229  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2020 Q4  Works 
 3,110  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3  Works 
 3,156  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2022 Q3  Works 
 2,801  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2  Works 
 1,671  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q4  Works 
42 
Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services 
Package 
No. 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
 (€ x 1000) 
Procurem
ent 
Method 
Revie
w 
Bidding 
Procedu
re 
Advertis
ement 
Date 
Comment
s 
Xiuning County-
Shangshan 2 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Xiuning County-
Shangshan 3 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Xiuning County-Xikou 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Xiuning County-Wucheng 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Huizhou District 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Tunxi District-1  
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Tunxi District-2 
Xinhua Village 
Environment Improvement 
Project in Huangshan 
District 
Xitou Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
She County-1 
Xitou Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
She County-2 
Environmental 
Infrastructure 
Improvement along Xin'an 
River in She County 
Zhang River Rehabilitation 
Project in Yi County 
Caocun River 
Rehabilitation Project in 
Huangshan District 
Xi'an River Green 
Agriculture Demonstration 
Project in She County 
Xinhua Village Green 
Agriculture Demonstration 
Project in Huangshan 
District 
Pine Forest Disease 
Prevention Project-
monitoring and response 
system 
Pine Forest Disease 
Prevention Project-
Inspection and Prevention 
System 
Works-
XN-5 
Works-
XN-6 
Works-
XN-7 
Works-
HZ-2 
Works-
TX-1 
Works-
TX-2 
Works-
HS-1 
Works-
SX-4 
Works-
SX-5 
Works-
SX-2 
Works-
YX-2 
Works-
HS-2 
Works-
SX-3 
Works-
HS-3 
Goods-
HSC-1 
Goods-
HSC-2 
 2,957  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2022 Q2  Works 
 2,144  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3  Works 
 2,977  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2022 Q3  Works 
 944  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3  Works 
 1,293  
OCB Natl 
Prior 
1S1E 
2020 Q4 
Works  
(1st  works 
contract) 
 9,372  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q4  Works 
 1,644  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2  Works 
 7,139  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2020 Q4  Works 
 1,734  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3  Works 
 3,430  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3  Works 
 493  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3 
Works  
 2,084  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2  Works 
 2,562  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2  Works 
 1,190  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q3  Works 
 930  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q1 
 1,651  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q1 
Goods 
Goods 
43 
Comment
s 
Goods 
Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services 
Package 
No. 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value 
 (€ x 1000) 
Procurem
ent 
Method 
Revie
w 
Bidding 
Procedu
re 
Advertis
ement 
Date 
Goods-
HSC-3 
Goods-
HSC-4 
Goods-
HSC-5 
Goods-
HSC-6 
Goods-
HSC-7-
Lot 1 
Goods-
HSC-7-
Lot 2 
Goods-
HSC-8 
Goods-
HSC-9 
Goods-
HSC-10 
Services 
Packag
e No. 
Serv-
HSC-1 
Serv-
HSC-2 
Serv-
HSC-3 
Serv-
HSC-4 
Serv-
HSC-5 
Serv-
HSC-6 
Serv-
HSC-7 
Serv-
HSC-8 
Serv-
HSC-9 
Serv-
HSC-10 
Pine Forest Disease 
Prevention Project-
Disease control system 
Pine Forest Disease 
Prevention Project-MIS 
Smart River Monitoring 
System of Huangshan 
Smart Environment 
Monitoring System in 
Qimen County 
Smart EHS Management 
System in Huizhou District 
Industrial Park 
Smart EHS Management 
System in She County 
Industrial Park 
Huangshan MIS Top 
Layer System Project 
Huangshan Smart EHS 
General System 
 8,749  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q1 
 411  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q1 
Goods 
 2,566  
OCB Natl 
Prior 
1S1E 
2020 Q3 
Goods 
(1st  goods 
contract) 
 687  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2020 Q4 
Goods 
 1,907  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2 
Goods 
 1,763  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2 
Goods 
 483  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2 
Goods 
 387  
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E 
2021 Q2 
Goods 
Office Equipment Supply 
 131 
OCB Natl 
Post 
1S1E  
2020 Q3 
Goods 
General Description 
Study on Xinan River Eco-
Compensation Evaluation 
System 
Huangshan Rural 
Wastewater Discharge 
Standard Study 
Green Economic 
Development Strategic 
Study and Planning for 
Huangshan City 
Certification Study on 
Green Incentive Fund 
Project Management 
Supporting Consulting 
Service 
Huangshan Training for 
Capacity Strengthening 
Construction Supervision 
Service - Huizhou District  
Construction Supervision 
Service - Huangshan 
District  
Construction Supervision 
Service - Tunxi District -B 
Construction Supervision 
Service - Xiuning County  
Estimate
d Value   
(€ x 
1000) 
Recruitme
nt Method 
Revie
w 
Type of 
Proposal 
Advertis
ement 
Date 
Comment
s 
 392  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q4 
Service 
 104  
CQS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q4 
Service 
 392  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q4 
Service 
 392  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2021 Q2 
Service 
 1,652   QCBS 
Prior 
FTP 
2020 Q3 
Service 
 281  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q3 
Service 
 297  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q3 
Service 
 198  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q4 
Service 
 210  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q3 
Service 
 521  
QCBS 
Prior 
STP 
2020 Q3 
Service 
44 
Services 
Packag
e No. 
Serv-
HSC-11 
Serv-
HSC-12 
Serv-
HSC-13 
Serv-
HSC-14 
Serv-
HSC-15 
Serv-
HSC-16 
Serv-
HSC-17 
Serv-
HSC-
18-20 
General Description 
Construction Supervision 
Service - Qimen County  
Construction Supervision 
Service - She County  
Construction Supervision 
Service - Yi County  
Green Incentive Fund 
Feasibility Study 
External Social and 
Resettlement Monitoring 
Project Experience 
Dissemination Program 
She County Household Pig 
Manure Management Study 
Project Start-up 
Consultancy before Loan 
Implementation 
Estimate
d Value   
(€ x 
1000) 
Recruitme
nt Method 
Revie
w 
Type of 
Proposal 
Advertis
ement 
Date 
Comment
s 
 216  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q4 
Service 
 709  
QCBS 
Prior 
STP 
2020 Q4 
Service 
 167  
CQS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q4 
Service 
 392  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q3 
Service 
 274  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2020 Q3 
Service 
 392  
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
2022 Q4 
Service 
 157  
CQS 
Prior 
BTP 
2021 Q1 
Service 
 150  
ICS 
Prior 
N/A 
2020 Q4 
Service 
1S1E  =  single-stage  one-envelop,  AC  = Advanced  Contracting,  ADB  = Asian  Development  Bank,  BTP  =  Biodata 
Technical  Proposal,  CQS  =  Consultants’  Qualification  Selection,  FTP  =  Full  Technical  Proposal,  OCB  Natl  =  open 
competitive bidding advertised nationally, QCBS = quality- and cost- based selection, RF = Retroactive Financing, STP 
= Simplified Technical Proposal. 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates. 
3. 
List of Awarded and Completed Contracts  
100.  The following table lists the awarded contracts and completed contracts for goods, works, 
and consulting services.  
Goods, Works and Services 
Package 
No. 
General Description 
Contract 
Value (€) 
Date of ADB Approval 
of Contract Award 
Date of 
Completion 
Comments 
4. 
Non-ADB Financing  
101.  The following table lists goods, works, and consulting services contracts over the life of 
the project, financed by non-ADB sources. 
Goods, Works and Services 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value  
(€x 1000) 
Estimated 
Number  of 
Contracts 
Procurement 
/Selection Method 
Comments 
Project Supervision Service - Tunxi District  
Land Acquisition and Resettlement 
Project Feasibility Study 
Geological Survey 
Compulsory  Review  of  Geological  Survey 
Results 
Construction Design 
29 
 483  
 247  
 811  
 49  
 2,897  
1 
7 
1 
7 
7 
7 
Domestic procedure 
Service 
Domestic procedure 
Service 
Domestic procedure 
Service 
Domestic procedure 
Service 
Domestic procedure 
Service 
Domestic procedure 
Service 
45 
Goods, Works and Services 
General Description 
Compulsory Design Review 
Construction Cost Consulting 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Construction Management 
Tendering Agency 
Estimated 
Value  
(€x 1000) 
 151  
 1,778  
 64  
 1,784  
 355  
Estimated 
Number  of 
Contracts 
7 
7 
1 
7 
1 
Procurement 
/Selection Method 
Domestic procedure 
Domestic procedure 
Domestic procedure 
Domestic procedure 
Domestic procedure 
Comments 
Service 
Service 
Service 
Service 
Service 
D. 
Consultant's Terms of Reference 
102.  The  outline  terms  of  reference  for  the  consulting  services  packages  are  detailed  in 
Appendix 2 of the PAM.  
A. 
Environment 
VII. 
SAFEGUARDS 
Institutional arrangements for the project environmental safeguards. The project is 
103. 
classified  by  ADB  as  Category  B  for  environment.  The  project  environmental  safeguard 
assessments and documents comprise: (i) an initial environmental examination (IEE) including 
an  environmental  management  plan  (EMP).  The  IEE  and  EMP  cover  all  project  components 
except one, a Green Investment Fund (under output 3), which will be implemented by HTIC; and 
(ii)  an  ESMS,  for  safeguard  management  for  the  Green  Investment  Fund.  The  IEE,  EMP  and 
ESMS have been prepared in compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). For all 
project matters relating to environmental safeguards, the IEE, EMP and ESMS form the basis of 
the official loan agreement between ADB and the executing agency.  
104.  Content of the EMP. The EMP (provided in Appendix 3 of this PAM and Appendix 1 of 
the IEE) describes (i) the project environmental safeguard objectives, (ii) roles and responsibilities 
for  EMP  implementation,  (iii)  mitigation  measures,  (iv)  inspection,  monitoring,  and  reporting 
arrangements, (v) training and institutional strengthening, (vi) a project-specific grievance redress 
mechanism,  (vii)  public  consultation  during  project  implementation,  and  (viii)  a  feedback  and 
adjustment mechanism. The EMP identifies specific roles and responsibilities for all agencies that 
will be involved in EMP implementation, including the HMG, implementing agencies, contractors, 
construction supervision companies, and operators of project facilities. The mitigation measures 
are tailored to the project-specific conditions and risks identified in the IEE. The scope and content 
of the EMP comply with ADB’s SPS for environmental safeguards and the PRC’s environmental 
laws and regulations. All project agencies are required to comply with the EMP. 
105.  EMP implementation. The EMP will be implemented in all phases of the project: design, 
pre-construction, construction, and operation. The HMG will be responsible for ensuring that the 
project will be designed, constructed, decommissioned, and operated in accordance with (i) the 
national and local government environmental, health, and safety laws, regulations, procedures, 
and guidelines; (ii) the SPS, and (iii) the IEE including the EMP. The executing agency, through 
the HPMO, holds final responsibility for implementation of and compliance with the EMP. 
106.  For  finalization  of  the  preliminary  engineering  designs,  and  preparation  of  the  detailed 
engineering  designs  for  the  project,  the  HPMO  will  forward  the  EMP  to  the  engineering  and 
46 
environmental design institutes. The HPMO and implementing agency environment officers and 
start-up  environment  safeguard  specialist  will  work  with  the  design  institutes  to  ensure  that 
safeguard  risks  identified  in  the  EMP  are  considered  in  the  detailed  designs  and  avoided, 
minimized, or mitigated. The EMP will be updated at the end of the detailed design, as needed. 
To  ensure  that  bidders  will  respond  to  the  EMPs  provisions,  the  HPMO  and  implementing 
agencies  will  prepare  and  provide  the  following  specification  clauses  for  incorporation  into  the 
bidding documents: (i) a list of environmental management requirements to be budgeted by the 
bidders in their proposals; (ii) environmental clauses for contractual terms and conditions; and (iii) 
domestic EIAs, and the project IEE including updated EMP for compliance. All tenders involving 
civil  works  will  be  required  to  include  and  fully  address  the  EMP  requirements,  especially  the 
mitigation and monitoring measures. 
107.  Personnel. The EMP will be coordinated by the following personnel: (i) one full-time and 
qualified  HPMO  environment  officer,  who  will  be  appointed  by  the  HMG.  The  officer  will  be 
responsible  for  overall  coordination  of  the  EMP;  (ii)  seven  full-time  implementing  agency 
environment officers (one per project county or district), who will be appointed by the county and 
district implementing agencies. These officers will lead the daily coordination of the EMP at the 
site  level  and  will  coordinate  closely  with  the  HPMO  environment  officer.  The  HPMO  and 
implementing  agency  environment  officers  will  be  supported  in  their  roles  by  national 
environmental safeguard specialists engaged under the loan consulting services, as follows: (i) 
an  environmental  safeguard  specialist  as  part  of  the  “start-up”  consulting  services,  to  provide 
interim support to the HPMO before the loan implementation consultants are recruited; and (ii) a 
loan implementation environment consultant (LIEC), as part of the loan consulting services. These 
consultants will support the HPMO and implementing agency environment officers to establish 
and  implement  the  EMP,  including  to:  assess  whether  the  detailed  engineering  designs  are 
consistent  with  the  scope  of  the  preliminary  designs  and  EMP  or  whether  new  safeguard 
assessments  are  required;  integrate the  EMP  within  the  project  bidding  documents;  visit  work 
sites  and  liaise  with  contractors  and  construction  supervision  companies;  and,  support  the 
preparation  of  safeguard  progress  reports.  Terms  of  reference  for  all  environment  safeguard 
positions for the project are provided in Appendix 2 of the PAM and Appendix 1 of the EMP. 
108.  Capacity building. The implementing agencies have no previous experience with ADB-
funded  projects  or  safeguard  requirements.  To  ensure  effective  implementation  of  the  EMP,  a 
capacity  building  program  is  included  in  the  EMP  for  training  of  project  agencies  in  EMP 
implementation,  mitigation  measures,  supervision,  monitoring,  reporting,  and  the  grievance 
redress mechanism. Training will be provided by the loan consultants for safeguards and other 
specialists in the loan consulting teams. Trainees will include the staff of the HPMO, implementing 
agencies, contractors, and construction supervision companies.  
109.  Procedures for feedback and adjustment of the EMP, including in the event of non-
compliance.  Based  on  site  inspections  and  monitoring  reports,  the  HPMO  shall  decide,  in 
consultation  with  the  LIEC,  whether  (i)  further  mitigation  measures  are  required  as  corrective 
actions,  or  (ii)  improvements  are  required  for  environmental  management  practices.  The 
effectiveness  of  mitigation  measures  and  monitoring  plans  will  be  evaluated  by  a  feedback 
reporting  system.  Adjustment  to  the  EMP  will  be  made,  if  necessary.  The  HPMO  and 
implementing agency environment officers, start-up environment safeguard specialist, and LIEC 
will  play  critical  roles  in  the  feedback  and  adjustment  mechanism.  If  during  inspection  and 
monitoring,  substantial  deviation  from  the  EMP  is  observed,  or  any  changes  are  made  to  the 
project  that  may  cause  substantial  adverse  environmental  impacts  or  increase  the  number  of 
affected people, then the HPMO will immediately consult with ADB and form an environmental 
assessment team to conduct additional environmental assessment. If necessary, further public 
47 
consultation will be undertaken. A new or updated domestic environmental assessment, and IEE 
(including  an  EMP)  will  be  prepared  and  submitted  to  ADB  for  review,  appraisal,  and  public 
disclosure.  The  revised  EMP  will  be  passed  to  the  contractors,  construction  supervision 
consultants (CSC) and operators of the project facilities, for implementation. 
110.  Environmental  assurances.  Project-specific  environmental  safeguard  conditions  are 
included  in  the  loan  and  project  agreements  and  include  the  need  for  all  project  agencies  to 
comply with the EMP. 
111. 
Institutional  arrangements  for  GIF  environmental  safeguards.  Pursuant  to  ADB’s 
Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), Green Investment Fund may not be applied to the activities 
described in ADB’s Prohibited Investment Activities List set forth in Appendix 4-F. In compliance 
with  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009),  environmental  and  social  safeguards  for  all 
activities supported under GIF will be subject to an environmental and social management system 
(ESMS). The Huangshan Trust Investment Company (HTIC) is the implementing agency for GIF 
and will be responsible for establishment and implementation of the ESMS. An advanced draft 
ESMS template ((provided in the Appendix 2 of the IEE and Appendix 5 of this PAM)) has been 
prepared and will form the basis for the final draft ESMS document to be prepared by HTIC. The 
final draft ESMS will be subject to review and endorsement by the HMG and ADB. 
B. 
Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement 
112.  Category  and  impacts.  The  project  is  classified  as  category  B  for  involuntary 
resettlement. In total, the project involves 72.31 mu of permanent land occupation (4.63 mu state-
owned land and 67.68 mu collective owned land), affecting 200 households with 830 persons. A 
total of 60 m2 of non-residential house will be affected, involving 1 household with 4 persons. No 
household will have significant impacts from permanent land acquisition or relocation. A total of 
316.43 mu land will be used temporarily, including 219.39 mu state-owned land and 97.04 mu 
collective land.  
113.  Resettlement  plan.  A  resettlement  plan  has  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009)  and  relevant  laws  and  regulations  of  the  PRC.  The 
resettlement plan includes adequate measures of compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation 
for  affected  people.  Surveys  and  consultations  were  undertaken  with  affected  people  in 
preparation  of  the  resettlement  plan  during  project  preparation.  Affected  people  will  be  further 
consulted  for  updating  and  implementation  of  the  resettlement  plan  during  the  project 
implementation. A grievance redress mechanism has been established and incorporated into the 
resettlement plan. The resettlement plan also includes measures of (i) the capacity building of the 
executing and implementing agencies to implement the resettlement plan in compliance with ADB 
requirements;  and  (ii)  internal  and  external  monitoring  and  reporting  on  the  resettlement  plan 
implementation. 
114.  Updating resettlement plan. The resettlement plan will be (i) updated based on the final 
design, detailed measurement survey and census of affected persons, (ii) disclosed to affected 
persons,  and  (iii)  submitted  to  ADB  for  review  and  approval  prior  to  the  award  of  civil  works 
contract and commencement of land acquisition and resettlement.  
115. 
Institutional arrangement for implementation of the resettlement plan. HMG will be 
the  executing  agency  and  will  supervise,  coordinate,  and  manage  the  implementation  of  the 
resettlement  plan.  A  project  leading  group  (PLG)  has  been  established in HMG,  and  a  project 
management office (PMO) has been established under the PLG in HMG. Implementing agencies 
48 
(IAs) will be the local governments of the seven districts and counties. Local Natural Resources 
Bureaus are responsible  for  land  acquisition  compensation  and resettlement,  and  She  County 
Housing Administration Bureau for the non-residential house compensation in She County. The 
affected  township  governments  and  village  committees  will  participate  in  and  support  the  land 
acquisition and resettlement activities. 
116.  Capacity Building for implementation of the resettlement plan in compliance with 
ADB requirements. The executing and implementing agencies have the capacity to implement 
domestically funded projects. Their capacity will be strengthened to implement the resettlement 
plan in compliance with ADB requirements through several measures, including: (i) executing and 
implementing agencies will each appoint focal social safeguard staff, (ii) project implementation 
support  consultants  will  include  social  safeguard  specialists,  (iii)  staff  of  executing  and 
implementing agencies will be trained on social safeguard measures, (iv) a resettlement start-up 
consultant  will  provide  training  on  ADB’s  relevant  policy  requirements  and  will  assist  the 
implementing  agencies  to  update  and  finalize  the  resettlement  plan,  and  (iv)  an  external 
monitoring agency will be recruited for external monitoring. 
117.  Resettlement  plan  implementation  schedule.  According  to  the  project  construction 
schedule,  the  resettlement  implementation  plan  has  been  prepared  and  included  in  the 
resettlement plan. The overall resettlement schedule for the project is developed as the following 
table.  The  specific  implementation  time  may  be  properly  adjusted  due  to  the  deviation  of  the 
overall project progress. 
Table 11: Implementation Schedule for Resettlement 
No. 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
Task 
Information disclosure 
RIB 
Disclosure of the draft 
RP on ADB’s website 
Target 
Agencies in charge 
Time 
Remarks 
Affected townships and 
villages 
Huangshan and 
district/county PMOs 
Aug 2019 
Stakeholders 
ADB 
Aug 2019 
2  RP update and resettlement budget approval 
DMS 
2.1 
Affected townships and 
villages 
IA, Huangshan and 
district/county PMOs 
May 2020 
Updating the RP based 
on the DMS, and 
disclosing the updated 
RP to APs 
Submission of the 
updated RP to ADB for 
review and approval 
Updated RP budget 
approval (compensation 
rates) 
LA announcement 
Disclosing the updated 
RP 
Releasing the LA 
announcement 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
Affected townships and 
villages 
IA, Huangshan and 
district/county PMOs 
May 2020 
Huangshan and 
district/county PMOs 
May 2020 
resettlement budget 
District/county 
governments, PMOs 
June 2020 
Affected townships and 
villages 
Affected townships and 
villages 
District/county 
governments, PMOs 
District/county 
governments 
Aug 2020 
Oct 2020 
4  Compensation agreement 
Entering into LA 
compensation 
4.1 
Affected townships and 
villages 
District/county 
municipal 
administration 
Dec 2020 
Target 
No. 
5 
5.1 
Task 
agreements and paying 
compensation 
Livelihood restoration measures 
Payment of 
compensation for young 
crops and attachments 
Affected HHs 
5.2 
5.3 
Implementation of 
restoration programs 
Implementation of 
training program 
Hiring APs under the 
Project 
5.4 
Affected villages 
Affected villages 
Affected villages 
6  Capacity building of resettlement agencies 
49 
Time 
Remarks 
Jan 2021 
Jan 2021 – 
Mar 2026 
Apr 2021 – 
Mar 2026 
Apr 2021 – 
Mar 2026 
Agencies in charge 
offices, village 
committees 
District/county 
municipal 
administration 
offices, township 
governments 
Township 
governments 
District/county labor 
and social security 
bureaus 
District/county 
PMOs, labor and 
social security 
bureaus, contractor 
6.1 
6.2 
Training of Huangshan 
PMO staff 
Training of district/county 
PMO staff 
7  M&E 
Establishing an internal 
monitoring mechanism 
Internal monitoring 
reporting 
Appointing an external 
M&E agency 
Baseline survey 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
17 person-times 
Huangshan PMO  May 2020 
90 person-times 
Huangshan PMO  May 2020 
As per the RP 
Huangshan PMO 
Oct 2020 
Semiannual 
Huangshan and 
district/county PMOs 
From Jan 
2021 
One 
Huangshan PMO 
Oct 2020 
Affected townships and 
villages 
External M&E 
agency 
Jan 2021 
7.5 
External 
reporting 
monitoring 
Semiannual 
External M&E 
agency 
Jan 2021 
1st report 
(incl. 
baseline 
survey) 
2nd report 
Jul 2021 
Jan 2022  3rd report 
4rd report 
Jul 2022 
Jan 2023  5th report 
6th report 
Jul 2023 
7th report  
Jan 2024 
Jul 2024 
8th report 
Completion report 
7.6 
Huangshan and 
district/county 
PMOs, municipal 
administration offices 
Jul 2025 
8  Public consultation 
9  Grievance redress 
10  Disbursement of compensation fees 
District/county municipal administration offices  Ongoing 
District/county municipal administration offices  Ongoing 
50 
No. 
10.1 
10.2 
10.3 
Task 
Target 
Agencies in charge 
Time 
Remarks 
- To district/county 
municipal administration 
offices 
- To township 
governments 
- To Affected HHs 
Initial funds 
Initial funds 
Initial funds 
District/county 
governments 
Aug 2020 
District/county 
municipal 
administration offices 
Township 
governments 
Oct 2020 
Jan 2021 
11  Commencement of civil construction 
11.1  The Project 
District/county municipal administration offices 
RIB=  resettlement  information  booklet,  RP=  resettlement  plan,  DMS=  detailed  measurement 
survey,  AP=  affected  person,  LA=  land  acquisition,  PMO=  project  management  office,  IA= 
implementing agency, M&E= monitoring and evaluation. 
Apr 2021 
118.  Resettlement  monitoring.  Provisions  of  both  internal  and  external  monitoring  are 
included  in the  RP.  With  assistance of  project management  support  consultants, the  PMO  will 
prepare  and  submit  semiannually  the  internal  monitoring  reports  to  ADB  together  with  the 
progress reports. Furthermore, PMO will employ an external resettlement monitoring institute or 
firm  to  (i)  monitor  and  evaluate  resettlement  progress  and  results;  and  (ii)  submit  semiannual 
monitoring reports to ADB during resettlement implementation. 
C. 
Ethnic Minorities/Indigenous Peoples Safeguard 
Indigenous peoples. The project does not involve impacts on ethnic minority villages or 
119. 
communities that would trigger ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement requirements on indigenous 
peoples. There are only a few ethnic minority individuals living dispersedly in five counties among 
the seven project counties/districts. Huangshan Municipality has 38 ethnic minority groups with 
an estimated population of 4,902 persons, accounting for 0.27% of the total population. Majority 
of the ethnic minority groups are Hui. The scattered ethnic minority individuals in the project area 
are not expected to have differential impacts; and they will enjoy the project benefits as residents 
in  the  project  area.  Therefore,  the  project  is  classified  as  category  C  on  indigenous  peoples 
according to ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and no action plan needs to be prepared 
for ESMS. 
D. 
Environmental and Social Management System for the Green Investment Fund 
120.  An  ESMS  (provided  in  the  Appendix  2  of  IEE  and  Appendix  5  of  the  PAM)  has  been 
prepared for the GIF (under output 3 of the project) by the Huangshan PMO and HTIC, supported 
by the TRTA consultants and ADB team. The Green Investment Fund will not fund any activities 
that: (i) involve involuntary land acquisition impacts; (ii) involve demolition of residential or private 
commercial  buildings;  (iii)  involve  involuntary  resettlement  which  meet  the  definition  of  ADB 
“Category A” or “Category B” for resettlement; (iv) have impacts on vulnerable ethnic minorities 
(“Category A” or “Category B”); and (v) any legacy issues of involuntary resettlement or ethnic 
minorities  from  past  activities  or  existing  facilities.  HPMO  and  HTIC  committed  that  these 
requirements  will  be  met  during  the  screening  of  identified  subprojects  in  accordance  with  the 
procedures  stipulated  in  the  ESMS;  and  adequate  resources  will  be  allocated  to  ensure  the 
implementation, monitoring and reporting of ESMS for the Green Investment Fund.  
121.  Content of the ESMS and safeguards selection criteria. The ESMS template describes 
(i)  institutional  framework  of  the  ESMS,  including  legislative  and  policy  framework,  roles  and 
51 
responsibilities of each specified position, and subproject selection criteria; (ii) activities that the 
GIF will or will not support (including activities listed under ADB’s prohibited investment activity 
list); (iii) implementation steps for the ESMS; (iv) integration of the ESMS into existing business 
procedures in HTIC; (v) establishment and implementation of a grievance redress mechanism; 
and  (vi)  capacity  building  and  training  for  HTIC  to  implement  the  ESMS.  For  environment 
safeguards,  activities  that  will  not  be  supported  by  GIF  include:  (i)  activities  which  may  cause 
significant and irreversible impacts to the environment i.e. meet the definition of ADB “Category 
A”  for  environment;  (ii)  are  located  in  or  next  to  a  designated  water  source  protection  zone, 
protected area, cultural heritage site, or critical natural habitat; (iii) involve large-scale landscape 
alteration e.g. quarrying, or terracing on slopes greater than 25º. For social safeguards, activities 
that  will  not  be  supported  by  GIF  include:  (i)  involve  involuntary  land  acquisition  impacts;  (ii) 
involve  demolition  of  residential  or  private  commercial  buildings;  (iii)  involve  involuntary 
resettlement  which  meet  the  definition  of  ADB  “Category  A”  or  “Category  B”  for  resettlement 
safeguards; and (iv) have impacts on vulnerable ethnic minorities (“Category A” or “Category B” 
for indigenous peoples safeguards). HTIC is required to ensure that these requirements are met 
during the screening of newly identified subprojects in accordance with the procedures stipulated 
in the ESMS. 
122.  Establishment of the ESMS. Prior to the transfer of any loan proceeds to HTIC, HTIC 
shall issue a formal Presidential Directive to integrate the ESMS into HTIC business procedures 
and submit this directive to HMG and ADB at least three months prior to establishing GIF. HTIC 
shall  adhere  to  the  guidelines  in  the  ESMS  and  ensure  that  all  screening,  categorization  and 
assessment  of  equity  investment  applications  specified  in  the  ESMS  is  conducted  before final 
approval of any investments. HMG and HTIC will ensure that all participating applicants receiving 
funds from GIF will follow the requirements listed in the ESMS.  
123.  Before HTIC makes its first investment in a project county or district, HMG shall ensure 
that HTIC, before requesting a withdrawal under the onlending agreement for such investment, 
submits to ADB, through the PMO, an application for approval of such investment.  
124.  ESMS  personnel.  HTIC  will  recruit  at  least  one  qualified  environment  officer  and  one 
qualified social officer. These officers will lead the establishment of the ESMS and work closely 
with  the  HTIC  fund  managers,  applicants,  and  qualified  investees,  to  integrate  the  ESMS  into 
existing  business  procedures  and  for  daily  implementation  of  the  ESMS  procedures  for  the 
safeguard  screening,  categorization,  and  management  of  approved  equity  investments.  Draft 
terms of reference for the HTIC environment officer and social officer positions are in the Appendix 
6 of ESMS. 
125. 
Implementation  procedures.  HTIC  will  ensure  that  each  Qualified  Project  meets  the 
requirements  of  the  ESMS  i.e.:  screening  procedures  have  been  completed;  the  proposed 
activities meet the ESMS criteria; and the proposed designs seek to maximize environmental and 
social benefits. To support the design process, the HTIC environmental officer and social officer 
and applicant will consult with relevant government bureaus. The HTIC environment officer and/or 
social  officer  will  also  work  with  the  PMO  environmental  officer  and  social  officer,  and  loan 
implementation  consultants  as  necessary,  for  technical  feedback  and  support.  All  Qualified 
Projects shall comply with ADB's Safeguards Policy Statement. The HTIC and qualified investees 
shall submit to PMO, ADB, and/or HTIC all records, and documents as may be requested from 
time to time. 
E. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
52 
126.  A  project-specific  grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRM)  has  been  developed  in 
compliance with SPS requirements to address environmental, health, safety, and social concerns 
associated  with  ADB-funded  projects.  The  GRM  complements  and  builds  upon  existing  PRC 
mechanisms  for  environmental  complaints,  including  the  national  environmental  complaint 
hotline.  The  GRM  is  designed  to  achieve  the  following  objectives:  (i)  provide  channels  of 
communication  for  communities  to  raise  concerns  about  environmental  and  social-related 
grievances which might result from the project; (ii) prevent and mitigate adverse environmental 
and social impacts to communities caused by project construction and operation; and (iii) build 
trust and respect and promote productive relationships between the project agencies and local 
villages and communities. The GRM is accessible to all members of the villages and communities, 
including women, youth, minorities and poverty-stricken villagers and residents. Multiple points of 
entry are available, including face-to-face meetings, written complaints, telephone conversations, 
e-mail, and social media. The details of the GRM, including a time-bound flow chart of procedures, 
are described in the EMP.  
127.  Specific GRM procedures have been incorporated into the EMP, resettlement plan and 
ESMS. The complaint channels are slightly different for environmental and social issues, but the 
PMO will maintain an integrated system to document, follow-up, and report on all cases. Before 
construction, the district/county PMOs and municipal administration offices will notify the project 
design  and  impacts  to  the  APs.  The  environment  and  social  officers  of  the  HPMO  and  seven 
SPMOs  in  the  three  districts  and  four  counties  will  be  the  lead  coordinators  for  GRM 
implementation.  At  the  beginning  of  construction,  the  district/county  PMOs  and  municipal 
administration will determine the project site, floor area, etc. with the affected village committees 
during  a  field  visit.  For  issues  of  great  public  concern  (if  any),  the  district/county  PMOs  and 
municipal administration will further improve the project design. All project agencies and staff will 
be trained in the GRM and will take an active role in supporting these officers when necessary. 
F. 
Other 
128.  Prohibited  investment  activities.  Pursuant  to  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement 
(2009),  ADB  funds  may  not  be  applied  to  the  activities  described  on  the  ADB  Prohibited 
Investment Activities List set forth at Appendix 5 of the Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). HTIC 
will ensure that the investments are in compliance with applicable national laws and regulations 
and will apply the prohibited investment activities list (Appendix 4-F) to subprojects financed by 
ADB.  
VIII.   GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS 
A.  General 
129.  Gender.  The  project’s  gender  category  is  some  gender  elements,  following  ADB’s 
Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming Categories of ADB Projects (2012). The project will ensure 
women will participate and benefit equitably under each output. Women are expected to benefit 
from  increased  employment,  improved  living  environment,  and  better  quality  of  life.  A  gender 
action plan (GAP) has been prepared based on gender analyses. The GAP includes the following 
measures: (i) fair and equitable participation of women in project design and implementation, with 
at  least  40%  women  participants;  (ii)  separate  sanitation  facilities  for  female  workers;  (iii) 
participation of women in training and knowledge dissemination; (iv) training and capacity building 
of  staff  of  the  EA  and  IAs  to  implement  gender  and  social  measures;  and  (v)  priority  jobs  for 
women, with at least 30% during construction of the subprojects and 40% during the operation. 
53 
Key gender targets are also included in the design and monitoring framework. The executing and 
implementing agencies will ensure GAP implementation, monitoring, and reporting. 
130.  Poverty and Social. The project is classified as general intervention for poverty reduction. 
A poverty and social analysis was undertaken based on intensive stakeholder consultations and 
socioeconomic surveys. It indicated that the project will provide socioeconomic development and 
poverty  reduction  opportunities  for  residents  including  the  poor  and  low-income  people  by 
increasing their access to (i) jobs during project construction and operation; (ii) new jobs in green 
enterprises; and (iii) a better living environment. A total of 319,607 residents of the seven project 
districts  and  counties,  including  254,341  urban  and  65,266  rural  residents,  will  directly  benefit 
from  the  project.  Other  residents  in  Huangshan  will  also  benefit  indirectly  from  the  improved 
environment. The project will create 1,204 jobs during project construction and 546 jobs during 
operation. The HMG prepared a social development action plan based on the poverty and social 
analysis, with specific targets for the poor and low-income people. Consultations were undertaken 
with  residents  and  other  stakeholders  during  the  project  preparation.  A  consultation  and 
participation plan for project implementation stage has been included in the PAM. The executing 
and implementing agencies will ensure implementation, monitoring, and reporting on social and 
poverty measures. 
B.  For Green Investment Fund 
131.  HTIC shall and shall cause the investees to ensure that contractors and service providers 
engaged in subprojects under GIF will implement relevant provisions of gender action plan and 
social development action plan, including: (i) give equal pay for equal work regardless of gender, 
ethnicity or social group; (ii) give priority to women in the employment and training opportunities 
generated under the subprojects; (iii) maximize the employment of local people who meet the job 
and efficiency requirements for subproject construction, operation and maintenance; (iv) provide 
workers  with  adequate  on-the-job  and  safety  training;  (v)  disseminate  information  on  sexually 
transmitted diseases (including HIV/AIDS) to subcontractors/employees and local communities 
surrounding  the  subproject  construction  sites;  (vi)  implement  HIV/AIDS  awareness  and 
prevention training  for  sub-contractors/employees;  (vii)  provide  necessary  measures to ensure 
the  safety  and  health  of  its  sub-contractors/employees;  and  (viii)  observe  local  customs 
concerning acceptable behavior towards the local population.  
132.  HTIC shall and shall cause the investees to ensure that the core labor standards and the 
PRC’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during subproject implementation and 
that  specific  provisions  are  included  in  bidding  documents  and  contracts  financed  by  the  ADB 
Loan under GIF requiring that the contractors, among other  things: (a) comply with the PRC’s 
applicable labor  law  and  regulations  and incorporate  applicable workplace occupational  safety 
norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; and (e) do not restrict workers from developing any legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment. 
54 
Actions 
Target/Indicators 
Responsible 
Agencies 
Time-
frame 
Budget 
Source 
Table 12: Gender Action Plan 
A. Output 1: Urban point source pollution management facilities upgraded 
A.1.  Increase  women’s  access  to  sanitation  services  by 
upgrading urban sewage and stormwater drainage system.  
A.2. Protect lives and properties of women from floods through 
riverbank  rehabilitation, landscaping improvement, and flood 
control measures in Yi County and Huangshan District. 
A.3.  Ensure women representatives attend consultations on 
detailed  designs  of  relevant  project  components  and  public 
hearings on water tariff proposals. 
A.4.  Ensure  women’s  access  to  job  opportunities  during 
construction and operation stages. 
• Drainage system upgraded for 241,778 people, with 49% women 
• Riverbank rehabilitation, landscaping improvement and flood control 
measures implemented for 13,244 people, including 49% women 
• 200  representatives  of  beneficiaries  per  project  county  or  district, 
including 40% women, attended consultations and tariff hearings465 
employment positions created during construction (180 skilled and 
285 unskilled) with 30% women  
• 226 employment positions created during operation (88 skilled and 
138 unskilled) with 40% women 
Baseline: 0 
PMOs, 
implementing 
agencies, and 
contractors 
(supported by 
HRSSB, 
design institute, 
and 
consultants) 
2020–
2026 
Project 
budget 
B. Output 2: Rural point and non-point source pollution control facilities and systems enhanced 
B.1.  Increase women’s access to rural water, sanitation and 
environment  services  by  constructing  water  supply  pipes, 
onsite  wastewater 
treatment  stations,  sewage  pipes, 
walkways, parking lots, public toilets, etc. 
B.2.  Address needs  of women in non-point source pollution 
control  through  programs  of  soil  test  formulated  fertilization, 
application  of  organic  fertilizer  and  solar  energy  powered 
insecticidal lamps, construction of rural production roads and 
tourism facilities, pine forest disease prevention, etc. 
B.3.  Ensure  women  representatives  attend  consultations  on 
detailed design of relevant project components. 
B.4.  Ensure  women  benefit  from  job  opportunities  during 
construction and operation stages. 
C. Output 3: Green financing mechanisms piloted 
C.1.  Ensure women representatives attend consultations on 
detailed design on green financing mechanisms 
C.2.  Promote  women  in  leadership  positions  in  SMEs 
benefitting from green finance.  
C.3. Ensure that green finance and eco-compensations benefit 
women and men equitably. 
• Rural environment infrastructure constructed for 47,682 people, with 
49% women 
• Rural  nonpoint  pollution  control  measures  implemented  for  6,903 
people, with 50 women 
• 200 representatives of beneficiaries per project county or district, with 
40% women, attended consultations on detailed design  
• 288  positions  created  during  construction  (104  skilled  and  184 
unskilled) with 30% women  
• 140 positions created during operation (49 skilled and 91 unskilled) 
PMOs, 
implementing 
agencies, and 
contractors 
(supported by 
HRSSB, 
design institute, 
and 
consultants) 
with 40% women 
Baseline: 0 
2020–
2026 
Project 
budget 
• 200 representatives of beneficiaries per project county or district, 
including 40% women, attended consultations on detailed designs 
of green finance and eco-compensation mechanism 
• At least six SME subprojects supported under the first batch of 
equity financing under the GIF, including at least 30% women 
in management and decision-making staff position of SMEs to 
be selected under the GIF 
PMOs, HTIC, 
and 
contractors 
(supported by 
HRSSB, 
design institute, 
and 
consultants) 
2020–
2026 
Project 
budget   
Actions 
Target/Indicators 
Responsible 
Agencies 
Time-
frame 
Budget 
Source 
55 
C.4.  Ensure  women’s  access  to  job  opportunities  during 
construction  and  operation  of  activities  under  green  finance 
and eco-compensation scheme. 
• SMEs to be selected for the green investment fund have at least 30% 
women in management and decision-making positions  
• €2.8  million  sustainable  green  incentive  fund  established,  and 
compensation provided to participating 4,500 farmers, cooperatives, 
and other stakeholders, including 40% women  
• 251  positions  created  (126  skilled  and  125  unskilled)  during 
construction, with 40% women 
• 100 positions created (50 skilled and 50 unskilled) during operation, 
with 40% women 
Baseline: 0 
D. Output 4: Capacity for ecological system and project management strengthened 
D.1. Ensure women participate in the design, construction and 
operation of monitoring and management systems, including 
smart  water  conservancy  management  system,  smart 
environment  monitoring  system,  smart  environment,  health, 
and  safety  management  system,  management  information 
system support, etc.  
D.2. Technical support activities, including studies on river eco-
compensation,  green  economic  development  strategy,  etc. 
include a gender perspective.  
D.3.  Ensure  women’s  access  to  job  opportunities  during 
construction and operation stages. 
• 50  beneficiaries  per  project  county/district,  including  40%  women, 
participated in designs of monitoring and management systems  
• Xin’an  River  eco-compensation  evaluation  study,  green  farming 
certification, tea farming eco-compensation study, rural wastewater 
discharge standard study, and pig manure management study are 
completed, with a gender perspective on relevant studies 
• 200  positions  created  (160  skilled  and  40  unskilled)  during 
construction, with 30% women  
• 80 positions created (64 skilled and 16 unskilled) during operation, 
PMOs, 
implementing 
agencies, and 
contractors 
(supported by 
HRSSB, and 
social 
consultants) 
with 40% women 
Baseline: 0 
E. All Outputs: Compliance with labor laws and core labor standards and project implementation management support   
2020–
2026 
Project 
budget   
focal  staff 
E.1.  Social  and  gender  specialists  are  included  in  project 
implementation support team to guide GAP implementation 
E.2.  Assign  social  and  gender 
in  PMOs, 
implementing agencies, responsible for GAP implementation.  
E.4. Provide training for PMOs and implementing agencies on: 
(i) ADB gender policy; (ii) GAP implementation and monitoring;  
E.5. Ensure zero tolerance to SEAH by establishing reporting 
mechanisms, training, and awareness raising for contractors. 
E.6. Separate toilets are provided to women workers. 
E.7. Sex-disaggregated data collected during implementation. 
• Social and gender specialists recruited. 
• One social and gender focal staff in each PMO and implementing 
agency appointed to implement the GAP  
• 100% staff in the PMOs and implementing agencies receive training 
on the GAP and GAP implementation and monitoring 
• Proportion of women staff in all training is at least 40%  
• 100% contractors comply with and report on requirements on SEAH 
• 100% women employees have access to separate toilets 
• Project monitoring system collected sex-disaggregated data 
Baseline: 0 
PMOs, 
implementing 
agencies, and 
contractors 
(supported by 
social 
consultants) 
2020–
2026 
Project 
budget 
and 
relevant 
local 
gov’t 
budget 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, GAP = gender action plan, GIF = green investment fund, HRSSB = Human Resources and Social Security Bureau, HTIC = Huangshan Trust Investment 
Company, PMO= project management office, SEAH = sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment, SME = small- and medium-sized enterprise. 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
56 
Actions 
Target/Indicators 
Responsible 
Agencies 
Time-
line 
Budget 
Source 
Table 13: Social Action Plan 
A. Output 1: Urban Point Source Pollution Management Facilities Installed 
A.1 Ensure public participation and access to sanitation services 
by upgrading urban sewage and stormwater drainage system  
A.2 Protect lives and properties of the public from floods through 
riverbank rehabilitation, landscaping improvement and flood control 
measures in Yi County and Huangshan District 
A.3 Ensure public representatives attend consultations on detailed 
designs  of  relevant  project  components  and  public  hearings  on 
urban water tariff proposals. 
A.4  Ensure  the  urban  poor  are  entitled  to  the  public  assistance 
program, namely given exemption partly from any tariff increase, and 
public assistance program is expanded to near-poor households 
A.5 Provide public awareness education on waste disposal, water 
conservation, sewage  water  disposal  and  water/river  protection in 
local communities 
A.6 Ensure access of residents to job opportunities during 
construction and operation stages. 
Targets: 
• Urban drainage system upgraded for 241,778 people, including 
20% poor and/or low-income people 
• Riverbank  rehabilitation,  landscaping  improvement  and  flood 
control  measures  implemented  for  13,244  people,  including 
20% poor and/or low-income people 
• 200 representatives of beneficiaries per project county/district, 
including  20%  poor  and/or  low-income  people,  attended 
consultations  on  detailed  designs  of 
relevant  project 
components and public hearings on urban water tariff proposals 
• 100% of urban poor and near-poor families covered by public 
assistance programs on tariff support 
• 300 representatives of beneficiaries per project county/district, 
including 20% poor and/or low-income people, attended public 
awareness  education  on  waste  disposal,  water  conservation, 
sewage water disposal and water/river protection 
• 465  job  opportunities  (180  skilled  and  285  unskilled)  during 
construction  and  226  job  opportunities  (88  skilled  and  138 
unskilled)  during  operation,  including  20%  provided  to  poor 
and/or low-income people with priority 
Baseline: 0 
2020-
2026 
Project 
budget 
PMOs, IAs, 
and 
contractors 
(supported by 
HRSSB, 
CAB, PADO, 
design 
institute, and 
consultants) 
B. Output 2: Rural Point and Non-point Source Pollution Control Facilities and Systems Enhanced 
B.1 Ensure public participation in and access to rural environment 
infrastructures and service by constructing water supply pipes, 
onsite wastewater treatment stations, sewage pipes, landscape 
walkway, parking lots, public toilets, etc. 
B.2 Address needs of the public in nonpoint pollution control through 
soil test formulated fertilization, application of organic fertilizer and 
solar  energy  powered  insecticidal  lamps,  construction  of  rural 
production  roads  and  tourism  facilities,  pine  forest  disease 
prevention, etc. 
B.3 Ensure public representatives attend consultations on detailed 
designs of relevant project components and public hearings on rural 
water tariff proposals. 
Targets: 
• Rural environment infrastructures improved for 47,682 people, 
including 20% poor and/or low-income people 
• Rural nonpoint pollution control measures implemented in rural 
areas for 6,903 people, including 20% poor and/or low-income 
people 
• 200 representatives of beneficiaries per project county/district on 
average,  including  20%  poor  and/or  low-income  people, 
attended consultations on detailed designs of relevant project 
components and public hearings on rural water tariff proposals 
• 100%  of  rural  poor  and  near-poor  families  covered  by  public 
assistance programs on tariff support 
• 300 representatives of beneficiaries per project county/district on 
PMOs, IAs, 
and 
contractors, 
(supported by 
CAB, PADO, 
HRSSB, 
design 
institute, and 
consultants) 
2020-
2026 
Project 
budget 
57 
Actions 
Target/Indicators 
Responsible 
Agencies 
Time-
line 
Budget 
Source 
B.4  Ensure  the  rural  poor  are  entitled  to  the  public  assistance 
program, namely given exemption partly from any tariff increase, and 
public assistance program is expanded to near-poor households 
B.5  Conduct  trainings  on  organic  farming  skills  and  tourism 
reception knowledge to the public 
B.6  Ensure  access  of  the  residents  to  job  opportunities  during 
construction and operation stages. 
average,  including  20%  poor  and/or  low-income  people, 
attended  trainings  on  organic  farming  skills  and  tourism 
knowledge 
• 288  job  opportunities  (104  skilled  and  184  unskilled)  during 
construction  and  140  job  opportunities  (49  skilled  and  91 
unskilled)  during  operation,  including  20%  provided  to  poor 
and/or low-income people with priority 
Baseline: 0 
C. Output 3: Green Financing Mechanisms Piloted 
C.1 Ensure public representatives attend consultations on detailed 
design of green finance and eco-compensation mechanism. 
C.2 Ensure the poor and low-income people involve in and benefit 
from green finance and eco-compensation scheme  
C.3  Increase  public  awareness  on  green  finance  and  eco-
compensation  mechanism  through  various  means,  including 
poster, calendar and brochure,  public  account  of  Wechat  APP, 
etc.  
C.4  Ensure  access  of  the  residents  to  job  opportunities  during 
construction and operation stages. 
2020-
2026 
Project 
budget,  
Targets: 
• 200 representatives of beneficiaries per project county/district on 
average,  including  20%  poor  and/or  low-income  people, 
attended consultations on detailed designs of green finance and 
eco-compensation mechanism 
• Green finance and eco-compensation scheme implemented for 
9,000 people, including 20% poor and/or low-income people  
• 500 representatives of beneficiaries per project county/district on 
average, including at least 20% poor and/or low-income people, 
participated  in  dissemination  of  green  finance  and  eco-
compensation mechanism 
• 251  job  opportunities  (126  skilled  and  125  unskilled)  during 
construction  and  100  job  opportunities  (50  skilled  and  50 
unskilled)  during  operation,  including  20%  provided  to  poor 
and/or low-income people with priority 
Baseline: 0 
PMOs,  HTIC, 
and 
contractors, 
(supported  by 
CAB,  PADO, 
HRSSB, 
design 
institute,  and 
consultants) 
D. Output 4: Capacity for ecological system and project management strengthened 
D.1  Ensure  public  participate  in  the  design,  construction  and 
operation of monitoring and management systems, including smart 
water  conservancy  management  system,  smart  environment 
monitoring  system,  smart  EHS  management  system,  MIS 
supporting system, etc.  
D.2 Ensure public participate in the consultation of technical support 
activities,  including  studies  on  river  eco-compensation,  rural 
wastewater  discharge  standard,  green  economic  development 
strategic, etc. 
D.3  Ensure  access  of  the  residents  to  job  opportunities  during 
construction and operation stages. 
Targets:  
• 50 beneficiaries per project county/district, including 20% poor 
and/or low-income people, participated in the design, construction 
and operation of monitoring and management systems  
• 100 representatives of per project county/district, including 20% 
poor  and/or  low-income  people,  participated  in  the  public 
consultation of technical support activities  
• 200  job  opportunities  (160  skilled  and  40  unskilled)  during 
construction and 80 job opportunities (64 skilled and 16 unskilled) 
PMOs, IAs, 
and 
contractors, 
(supported by 
CAB, PADO, 
HRSSB, 
design 
institute, and 
social 
consultants) 
2020-
2026 
Project 
budget  
58 
Actions 
Target/Indicators 
Responsible 
Agencies 
Time-
line 
Budget 
Source 
during  operation,  including  20%  provided  to  poor  and/or  low-
income people with priority  
Baseline: 0 
E. All Outputs: Compliance with labor laws and core labor standards  
E.1 Ensure contractors comply with labor laws and core labor 
standards, including no child labor, minimum wages, equal pay 
to equal work, and occupational health and safety 
E.2  Provide  public  education  on  health  and  HIV/AIDS,  STIs, 
and sexual harassment prevention  
E.3  Ensure  contractor  construction  personnel  are  involved  in 
HIV/AIDS and STI publicity activities 
E.4 Provide separate toilets and sanitation facilities to workers 
Targets:  
• 1,750 workers (construction and operation) receive training on 
labor rights, with at least 20% poor and/or low-income people 
• 1,750 workers (construction and operation) receive training on 
public  safety  and  health  knowledge,  with  at  least  20%  poor 
and/or low-income people 
• 100% of workers have access to separate toilets and sanitation 
facilities 
Baseline: 0 
PMOs, IAs, 
and 
contractors, 
(supported by 
CDPC, 
HRSSB and 
social 
consultants) 
2020-
2026 
Project 
budget, 
and 
relevant 
local 
governme
nt budget 
F: For All Outputs: Project implementation management support   
F.1  Ensure  social  and  gender  specialists  are  included  in  project 
implementation support team to guide the implementation of SDAP 
and provide training to the PMOs, IAs and town governments. 
F.2. Assign social and gender focal staff in PMOs, IAs and project 
towns to ensure the effective implementation of SDAP  
F.3  Provide  training  for  PMOs  and  IAs  on:  (i)  ADB  social 
development policies; (ii) SDAP implementation and monitoring; and 
(iii)  social  issues  on  pollution  control,  wastewater,  and  green 
agriculture  and  the  importance  of  social  inclusion  in  all  project 
components. 
F.4 Collect data disaggregated by income status 
F.5  Establish  effective grievance redress mechanisms and inform 
stakeholders 
Targets:  
• Social and gender specialists are recruited to guide and assist 
in implementing SDAP activities 
•  At least one social and gender focal person in each PMO and 
IA is appointed to undertake the SDAP activities 
• All  staff  in  the  PMOs  and  IAs  receive  training  on  SDAP 
implementation and monitoring 
• Disaggregated data by income status collected during project 
implementation 
• All  local  villages  and/or  residents  know  about  the  grievance 
PMOs, IAs, 
and 
contractors 
(supported by 
ACWF, 
HRSSB, 
CAB, PADO 
and 
consultants) 
redress mechanism. 
Baseline: 0 
2020-
2026 
Project 
budget  
ACWF =All-China Women’s Federation, ADB = Asian Development Bank, AIDS = acquired immune deficiency syndrome, CAB = Civil Affairs Bureau, CDPC = centers 
for  disease  prevention  and  control,  GAP  =  gender  action  plan,  HIV  =  human  immunodeficiency virus,  IA=  Implementing  agent,  PADO  =  Poverty  Alleviation and 
Development Office, HRSSB=human resources and social security bureau, DI= Design Institute, SDAP= social development action plan, PMO= project management 
office, STI = sexually transmitted infections. 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
IX. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND COMMUNICATION 
A. 
Project Design and Monitoring Framework  
DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK 
Impact the Project is Aligned with 
Sustainable economic growth and environmental improvement in the Yangtze River Economic Belt achieved 
(Yangtze River Economic Belt Development Plan, 2016–2030)a 
59 
Results Chain 
Outcome 
Economic and 
environmental 
conditions in 
the upstream 
of the Xin’an 
River improved 
Outputs 
1. Urban point 
source 
pollution 
management 
facilities 
upgraded 
2. Rural point 
and nonpoint 
source 
pollution 
control facilities 
and systems 
enhanced 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Risks 
The HMG 
changes 
priorities on 
green 
development 
and 
ecological 
improvement 
Hesitance of 
urban 
households 
to connect to 
wastewater 
systems 
By 2028: 
a.  95% of urban population provided access to 
wastewater treatment service (2019 baseline: 90%) 
b.  130,000 people benefiting from rural investments 
(2019 baseline: 0) (RFI A) 
c.  28,000 ha of land improved through climate-
resilient infrastructure and sanitation services (2019 
baseline: 0) 
d.  5,000 ha of farming land shifted to green farming 
with pesticide and fertilizer use control (2019 
baseline: 1,666.7 ha of farming land) 
e.  Water quality at the Xin’an River interprovincial 
section meets the eco-compensation phosphorus 
indexb of <=1 (2019 baseline: 1) 
a–c. HMG annual reports 
d. HMG project completion 
report 
e. Anhui and Zhejiang 
provinces’ cross-provincial 
eco-compensation annual 
evaluation reports 
By 2026: 
1a. 176 km urban trunk, secondary, and tertiary 
wastewater sewers installed or rehabilitated (2019 
baseline: 0 km) 
1a–1e. Project reports 
(monthly, quarterly, 
semiannual, annual) 
1b. 71.1 km stormwater drainage pipes installed in 
urban areas in Huangshan (2019 baseline: 0 km) 
1c. 9.9 km of river embankments constructed for 
increased flood protection (2019 baseline: 0 km) 
1d. 465 jobs created during construction (180 skilled 
and 285 unskilled) with 30% women (2019 baseline: 
Not applicable) 
1e. 226 jobs created during operation (88 skilled and 
138 unskilled) with 40% women (2019 baseline: Not 
applicable) 
By 2026: 
2a. 85 decentralized wastewater treatment systems 
with a minimum capacity of 2 cubic meters per day 
installed and 14,700 connections for rural 
households to the wastewater sewer systems 
installed (2019 baseline: 0) 
2b. 100 km of rural water supply pipes installed or 
rehabilitated in rural areas; 3,250 connections for 
households to piped water supply installed and 
connected, with subsidized connections for 380 poor 
and vulnerable households (2019 baseline: 0 km) 
2a–2f. HMG project 
completion report 
60 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
2c. Green farming practice adopted on 548 ha of 
farmland (2019 baseline: 0 ha) 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
Risks 
2d. Pine forest disease prevention measures 
implemented in 70,000 ha of forest in the Xin’an 
River Basin area and 900,000 pine trees immunized 
(2019 baseline: 0) 
2e. 288 jobs created during construction (104 skilled 
and 184 unskilled workers) with 30% women (2019 
baseline: 0) 
2f. 140 jobs created during operation (49 skilled and 
91 unskilled) with 30% women (2019 baseline: 0) 
By 2026: 
3a. At least six SME projects supported under the 
first batch of equity financing under the green 
investment fund, including women’s representation 
of at least 30% in management and decision-making 
staff positions in all SMEs, selected under the green 
investment fund (2019 baseline: 0) 
3b. €2.8 million sustainable green incentive fund 
established, and compensation provided to 4,500 
farmers, including 40% women (2019 baseline: 0) 
3c. 30% women in management and decision-
making positions of SMEs to be selected under the 
green investment funds (2019 baseline: Not 
applicable) (RFI B) 
3d. 251 jobs during construction (126 skilled and 
125 unskilled) and 100 jobs during operation (50 
skilled and 50 unskilled) created, including 40% 
women (2019 baseline: Not applicable) 
By 2026: 
4a. Smart river monitoring MIS, EHS management 
in industrial parks, smart environmental monitoring 
MIS in Qimen county, and pine forest monitoring 
MIS are installed (women’s participation included) 
(2019 baseline: Not applicable) 
4b. Information management top layer design and 
smart EHS general platform are developed and 
operational for the data resource bureau of the HMG 
(2019 baseline: Not applicable)  
3. Green 
financing 
mechanisms 
piloted 
4. Capacity for 
ecological 
system and 
project 
management 
strengthened 
3a–3d. Project reports  
(semiannual) and HMG 
project completion report 
3a. Gender scorecards for 
selection of projects to be 
developed under the 
project 
4a–4b. and 4d. Consultant 
study reports, and project 
completion report  
4c. Xin’an River eco-compensation evaluation study, 
green farming certification, tea farming eco-
compensation study, rural wastewater discharge 
standard study, and pig manure management study 
are completed, with a gender perspectivec on 
relevant studies (2019 baseline: Not applicable) 
4c. Sex-disaggregated data 
andreports to be collected 
under the project on 
farmers led by women and 
practices used 
4d. Information shared with the downstream 
Qiandao Lake area in Zhejiang Province  
provided through river quality MIS data sharing 
(2019 baseline: None) 
61 
Results Chain 
Performance Indicators with Targets and 
Baselines 
4e. 300 project staff and beneficiaries (at least 50% 
of whom are women) report enhanced knowledge 
and skills on ecological system and water resource 
management, water and environmental monitoring, 
data sharing, and project management (2019 
baseline: None) 
Data Sources and 
Reporting Mechanisms 
4e. Consultant training 
reports and participants’ 
survey 
Risks 
Key Activities with Milestones 
1. Urban point source pollution management facilities upgraded 
1.1  Conduct stakeholder consultations, with at least 40% women’s participation (Q1 2020–Q2 2021) 
1.2  Undertake full analysis of other sources of pollution, including their transport and effect on the river, to 
determine the impact on water quality objectives to be calculated per pollution source (Q3 2020–Q4 2022) 
1.3  Develop design and bidding documents; conduct tenders; and carry out construction of sewage collection 
systems and a centralized treatment system in the urban areas (Q3 2020–Q2 2026) 
2. Rural point and nonpoint source pollution control facilities and systems enhanced 
2.1  Conduct stakeholder consultations with at least 40% women participation (Q3 2020–Q4 2022). 
2.2  Recruit consultants; design and implement a comprehensive system for managing nonpoint source pollution in 
rural areas (Q3 2020–Q2 2023) 
2.3  Develop designs and bidding documents; conduct tenders; and carry out construction of decentralized sewage 
treatment systems and green infrastructure facilities in rural towns and villages (Q3 2020–Q2 2026) 
2.4  Plan, design, procure, and install forest prevention systems (Q3 2021–Q2 2026) 
2.5  Promote environment-friendly (clean) agricultural production practices (Q3 2021–Q2 2026) 
3. Green financing mechanisms piloted 
3.1  Define, establish, pilot, and operationalize green investment fund (Q3 2020–Q4 2023) 
3.2  Define, establish, pilot, and operationalize green incentive fund within Huangshan municipality (Q2 2021–Q4 
3.3 
3.4 
2026) 
Identify, conduct due diligence, and invest in about six green SMEs from the green investment fund (Q4 2020–
Q4 2026) 
Identify farmers, potential farmers’ cooperatives, and SMEs; formulate procedures; and implement green 
incentive fund, including proactive and inclusive measures for women in leadership positions on boards, 
employment, and other project benefits (Q3 2021–Q2 2026) 
4. Capacity for ecological system and project management strengthened 
4.1  Develop and install improved river water and environmental monitoring MISs, and a pine forest monitoring MIS, 
including software and hardware acquisition (Q3 2020–Q4 2025) 
4.2  Develop and install a smart EHS management MIS for industrial parks, including software and hardware 
acquisition (Q1 2021–Q2 2026) 
Improve the EA and IAs’ capacity to implement the project (Q2 2021–Q2 2026) 
4.3 
4.4  Share knowledge with other municipalities and developing member countries through trainings and workshops 
(Q3 2021–Q2 2026) 
Project Management Activities 
Provide overall support for the project’s final design and implementation, including support for capacity development 
and training of the staff of the HMG, the Huangshan PMO, district and county PMOs, and Huangshan Trust and 
Investment Corporation on ADB’s project management procedures, technical design and implementation, and 
safeguard and gender actions supervision and monitoring 
Inputs 
ADB: €90.09 million (ordinary capital resources loan) 
German development cooperation through KfW: €50.00 million (loan, not administered by ADB) 
Government of the People’s Republic of China: €49.97 million 
Assumptions for Partner Financing 
Not applicable 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EHS = environmental health and safety, ha = hectare, HMG = Huangshan 
Municipal Government, km = kilometer, MIS = management information system, PMO = project management office, 
Q = quarter, SMEs = small and medium-sized enterprises. 
RFI A: People benefitting from increased rural investment. Expected: 130,000. 
RFI B: Women represented in decision-making structures and processes. Expected: 30%. 
a  Government of the People’s Republic of China. 2016. Outline of the Yangtze River Economic Belt Development 
Plan, 2016–2030. Beijing. 
b  Under the eco-compensation scheme between Anhui and Zhejiang provinces, the central government and the two 
provincial governments set up an eco-compensation fund, with water quality subjected to periodic assessment at 
the interprovincial section to determine whether (i) Zhejiang province should compensate Anhui province to defray 
the ecological protection cost; or (ii) Anhui province should compensate Zhejiang province to pay for additional 
62 
water treatment cost, in case the water quality fails to meet agreed standards. From 2012 to 2017, the phosphorus 
index (measured by total phosphorus, total nitrogen, ammoniacal nitrogen, and permanganate indices) for water 
quality compensation index in the Xin’an River was in the range of 0.833–0.880. 
c  This gender perspective identifies gender impacts on people’s opportunities and constraints to benefit equally in a 
given context. 
Source: ADB estimates. 
B. 
Monitoring  
1. 
Project performance monitoring 
133.  To  monitor  the  progress  of  the  project  in  achieving  the  planned  outcome  and  outputs, 
HPMO  will  establish  a  project  performance  management  system  (PPMS)  before  the  project 
implementation starts (before the loan effectiveness) and will maintain it accordingly. The basis 
for project performance monitoring and reporting will be the DMF, which identifies performance 
targets for the outcomes and outputs of the project. It will be designed to permit adequate flexibility 
to  adopt  remedial  action  regarding  project  design,  schedules,  activities,  and  development 
impacts. 
134.  The  PPMS  will  cover  the  following  aspects  of  the  project  implementation:  (i)  project 
physical and financial progress; (ii) progress and results of capacity development; (iii) updating 
and implementation of the resettlement plan; (iv) implementation of the EMP; (v) implementation 
of  SGAP;  and  (vi)  compliance  with  loan  covenants  (policy,  financial,  economic,  sector,  and 
others). 
135.  HPMO  agreed  and  confirmed  that  they  will  (i)  establish  the  PPMS  before  the  loan 
effectiveness;  (ii)  recruit  the  loan  implementation  consultants  before  the  loan  effectiveness  to 
facilitate  the  project  start-up  and  provide  consulting  service  as  described  in  Appendix  2;  (iii) 
confirm  that  targets  are  achievable;  and  (iv)  develop  recording,  monitoring,  and  reporting 
arrangements. 
136.  With inputs from the IAs and other stakeholders, HPMO will prepare semi-annual project 
progress reports. Disaggregated baseline data for output and outcome indicators gathered during 
project  preparation  will  be  updated  and  reported  in  the  quarterly  reports  and  after  each  ADB 
review  mission.  At  the  start  of  project  implementation,  HPMO,  IAs,  and  ADB  will  develop 
integrated PPMS procedures to generate data systematically on the inputs and outputs, as well 
as the indicators to be used to measure the project’s impact and outcome considering the project 
scope. 
2. 
Compliance monitoring 
137.  During project implementation, ADB and HPMO will closely monitor the compliance of all 
the covenants under the project and will take necessary remedial actions for any noncompliance. 
The compliance status will be reported in the quarterly progress reports by the HPMO and will be 
reviewed during project review missions.  
138.  Legal Covenants. HMG shall ensure that in the event of (i) any change in ownership or 
control  of  the  project  facilities;  or  (ii)  any  sale,  transfer,  or  assignment  of  the  shares  of  IAs  is 
anticipated,  HMG  will  consult  with  ADB  at  least  6  months  prior  to  the  implementation  of  such 
change. HMG shall cause IAs to further ensure that such changes are carried out in a lawful and 
transparent manner. 
63 
139.  Counterpart  funding.  HMG  shall  provide  the  details  of  the  sources  of  the  counterpart 
funding as well as provide corresponding commitment letters. The total cost includes physical and 
price contingencies, and interest during construction. 
140.  Financial management. HMG shall establish and maintain sound financial management 
systems  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  guidelines  on  the  financial  management  and  analysis  of 
projects,  including  the  establishment  of  separate  project  accounts  and  the  maintenance  of 
minimum balances to ensure smooth cash flow and the timely settlement of project construction 
liabilities and future debt servicing. 
141.  Governance  and  anticorruption.  ADB’s  Anticorruption  Policy  (1998,  as  amended  to 
date)  were  explained  to  and  discussed  with  the  HMG,  HPMO  and  IAs.  Specific  policy 
requirements and supplementary measures are described elsewhere in this PAM. 
3. 
Safeguards monitoring 
142.  Environmental safeguard monitoring. The project monitoring program focuses on the 
environment in the project areas of influence. The environmental monitoring program is included 
in  the  project  EMP,  including  parameters,  time  and  frequency,  implementing  and  supervising 
agencies, and estimated costs. Three types of monitoring will be conducted in accordance with 
the EMP: (i) internal monitoring, to be conducted by the implementing agencies and construction 
supervision consultants (CSCs); (ii) external monitoring of air, water, noise and soil standards, to 
be conducted by the loan implementation consultant firm; and (iii) compliance monitoring to be 
conducted by the start-up environment safeguard specialist and continued by the LIEC, to ensure 
the EMP is being implemented. Monitoring shall comply with the PRC standards for environmental 
monitoring.  ADB  will  oversee  the  compliance  on  the  basis  of  semiannual  environmental 
monitoring reports provided by the HPMO and review missions.  
Internal environmental monitoring. During construction, the HPMO environment officer, 
143. 
IA  environment  officers,  and  CSCs  will  be  responsible  for  conducting  internal  environmental 
monitoring in accordance with the monitoring plan. Results will be reported through: (i) internal 
progress reports of the HPMO and IA environment officers, based on their direct observations at 
work sites;  and (ii)  monthly  reports  by  the  CSCs,  submitted to  the  implementing  agencies  and 
HPMO.  
144.  External  monitoring.  As  a  category  B  project  for  environment,  independent  external 
environmental monitoring is not required. Instead, the external environmental monitoring will be 
conducted  by  the  loan  implementation  consulting firm.  The  firm  will  have the  relevant  national 
certifications  and  capacity  to  undertake  the  external  monitoring  specified  in  the  EMP,  or,  will 
subcontract  this  monitoring  to  another  qualified  firm.  Monitoring  will  be  conducted  throughout 
construction and during the first year of operation. Semiannual monitoring reports will be prepared 
by the firm and submitted to the HPMO and implementing agencies.  
145.  EMP compliance monitoring. The LIEC will review the project progress and compliance 
with the EMP based on field visits, discussions with project agencies, and review of the progress 
reports  provided  by  the  CSCs  and  external  environmental  monitoring firm.  The findings  of  the 
LIEC will be reported to ADB through the semiannual EMP monitoring reports. 
146.  Environment safeguard reporting and disclosure. The HPMO will submit semiannual 
environmental  monitoring  reports  to  ADB.  The  reports  will  include:  (i)  progress made  for  EMP 
implementation,  (ii)  overall  effectiveness  of  the  EMP  implementation  (including  public  and 
64 
occupational health and safety), (iii) environmental monitoring and compliance, (iv) institutional 
strengthening  and  training,  (v)  public  consultation  (including  GRM),  and  (vi)  any  problems 
encountered during construction and operation, and the relevant corrective actions undertaken. 
The LIEC will assist the HPMO prepare the reports and submit them to ADB. ADB will review and 
disclose the reports on the ADB website.  
147.  Environmental  acceptance  reporting.  Following  the  PRC  Regulation  on  Project 
Completion  Environmental  Audit  (Ministry  of  Environmental  Protection,  2001),  within  three 
months after the completion of major subprojects, an environmental acceptance report for each 
subproject  shall  be  (i)  prepared  by  the  implementing  agencies  or  capable  environmental 
monitoring institute in accordance with the PRC Guideline on Project Completion Environmental 
Audit  (2017);  and  (ii)  finally  reported  to  ADB  through  the  semiannual  EMP  monitoring  and 
progress reporting process. The environmental acceptance reports of the subproject completions 
will indicate the timing, extent, effectiveness of completed mitigation and of maintenance, and the 
needs for additional mitigation measures and monitoring during operations. 
148.  ESMS Monitoring. (i) Daily monitoring by HTIC. The HTIC environment officer and social 
officer will establish a HTIC database to document and monitor implementation of the ESMS steps 
for  safeguard  screening,  categorization,  approvals,  and  management  of  applications  and 
approved equity investments. For approved equity investments that have safeguard requirements 
and conditions, the HTIC environment and/or social officer, together with the HTIC fund managers 
and relevant local bureau, will make occasional site visits to meet with the qualified investee and 
assess the extent of compliance with the safeguard conditions. (ii) Monitoring by PMO. The PMO 
environment  officer  and  social  officer,  supported  by  the  loan  implementation  environment 
consultant and social consultant, will coordinate with the HTIC environment and social officers to 
receive updates on ESMS progress and advise on any issues (e.g., non-compliance of a qualified 
investee with safeguard conditions), and help coordinate with relevant local bureaus, as needed. 
(iii)  Monitoring  by  ADB.  Progress  for  implementation  of  the  ESMS  will  be  monitored  through 
progress reports and review missions (see “compliance monitoring”). 
149.  Land  Acquisition  and  Resettlement.  Internal  and  external  monitoring  of  resettlement 
plan  implementation  will  be  conducted.  Monitoring  methodologies  are  specified  in  the 
resettlement plan. The HPMO and implementing agencies assisted by the project management 
consultants  will  carry  out  internal  monitoring  and  reporting  to  ensure  compliance  with  the 
provisions  of  the  RP.  The  HPMO,  implementing  agencies,  and  consultants  for  project 
management supports will develop a set of supervision milestones in accordance with the RP to 
ensure timely and effective implementation of resettlement activities. The PMO will submit internal 
monitoring reports semiannually to ADB together with the progress reports. 
150.  An external monitoring agency acceptable to ADB will be engaged by the HPMO prior to 
commencement of land acquisition. The external monitoring agency will conduct external M&E 
semiannually during the implementation of land acquisition and resettlement, and conduct follow-
up evaluation semiannually for two years after the completion of land acquisition and resettlement. 
The cost of the external resettlement M&E will be funded from the ADB loan. External resettlement 
M&E reports will be submitted semi-annually to ADB and a resettlement completion report will be 
prepared at the end of project. 
65 
4. 
Gender and social dimensions monitoring 
151.  Monitoring  indicators  for  the  GAP  and  SDAP  will  be  incorporated  into  the  PPMS.  The 
PMOs and implementing agencies will be responsible for establishing and coordinating regular 
monitoring and evaluation. 
152.  The regular project progress reports to ADB will include, at least semiannually, reporting 
on  GAP  and  SDAP  progress.  Assistance  will  be  provided  to  the  executing  agency  and 
implementing  agencies  by  the  project  consultant  who  will  help  to  set  up  effective  monitoring 
systems and work with the focal points and implementing agencies to ensure implementation of 
the GAP and SDAP. The project’s consultants will assist the PMO and implementing agencies to 
collect data for qualitative analysis to assess the effectiveness of the GAP and SDAP. This will 
include an end-of-project survey of a small number of sample beneficiaries and/or focus group 
discussions with beneficiaries to obtain qualitative information on the improvements to their lives 
as a result of the project. 
C. 
Evaluation 
153. 
In addition to regular monitoring, ADB and HMG will jointly review project performance at 
least once a year. The review will assess implementation performance and achievement of project 
outcomes  and  outputs,  assess  financial  progress,  identify  issues  and  constraints  affecting 
implementation,  and  work  out  a  time-bound  action  plan  for  resolution.  ADB  and  HMG  will 
undertake a midterm review to assess implementation status and take appropriate measures—
including  modification  of  scope  and  implementation  arrangements,  and  reallocation  of  loan 
proceeds, as appropriate—to achieve the project impact and outcome. 
D. 
Reporting  
154.  The HMG will provide ADB with (i)  semi-annual progress reports in a format consistent 
with ADB's project performance reporting system; (ii) consolidated annual reports including (a) 
progress achieved by output as measured through the indicator's performance targets, (b) key 
implementation  issues  and  solutions,  (c)  updated  procurement  plan,  and  (d)  updated 
implementation plan for the next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion report within 6 months 
of physical completion of the project. To ensure that project will continue to be both viable and 
sustainable,  project  accounts  and  the  audited  project  financial  statement  together  with  the 
associated auditor's report, should be adequately reviewed. 
155.  HTIC will prepare a semiannual progress reports in a format acceptable to ADB and submit 
these reports within 30 days of the end of each semi-annual period. These reports will provide (i) 
a  narrative  description  of  progress  in  project  implementation;  (ii)  any  changes  to  the 
implementation schedule; (iii) problems or difficulties encountered; (iv) work to be carried out in 
the next 6 months; and (v) compliance with ESMS. The progress report will also report summary 
statement of GIF RFA and any new investments approved. The template progress report can be 
accessed in Appendix 4-G. 
E. 
Stakeholder Communication Strategy  
156.  Project  information  will  be  communicated  through  public  consultation,  information 
disclosure mechanism in ADB’s and government’s websites, meetings, interviews, focus group 
66 
discussions  and  community  consultation  meetings  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  requirements  of 
information disclosure policy.  
157.  Environment.  Meaningful  consultation,  participation  and  information  disclosure  was 
conducted  during  project  preparation.  Information  disclosure  and  public  consultation  included 
newspaper disclosure; informal communication with key stakeholders, including residents, local 
authorities  and  sector  specific  institutions  and  authorities;  questionnaire  surveys;  and  wider 
stakeholder  meetings  attended  by  affected  people  and  other  concerned  stakeholders.  A  GRM 
has  been  defined  to  address  community  concerns,  reduce  risks,  and  assist  the  project  in 
maximizing environmental and social benefits. Meaningful consultation will continue throughout 
project implementation, especially prior to and during civil works. Planning for public consultations 
will ensure that environmental and social safeguard requirements are discussed.  
158. 
Involuntary  resettlement.  All  of  the  affected  villages/households  were  involved  in  the 
project  impact  and  socioeconomic  survey.  Through  meetings,  interviews,  focus  group 
discussions,  public  consultation  workshops,  and  community  consultation  meetings;  local 
representatives participated in the planning, and their concerns have been integrated into the RP. 
The  RP  has  also  been  posted  on  the  ADB  website.  Resettlement  information  booklets  were 
distributed to affected households. The booklets contain information such as the affected project 
areas,  implementation  progress  of  and  procedures  for  land  acquisition  and  relocation, 
compensation standards for land acquisition and house demolition, livelihood restoration strategy. 
Each implementing agency includes a full-time resettlement and social officer for supervision of 
implementation,  continued  public  consultation,  monitoring  of  progress,  and  response  to 
grievances.  The  grievance  redress  procedures  have  been  established  and  explanations  have 
been included in the resettlement information booklets. 
159.  Social  and  gender.  Consultations  with  communities  were  conducted  and  will  be 
continued  during  the  implementation  of  the  SDAP,  and  GAP,  not  only  to  inform  people  about 
project components or activities, but also to enable people to ask questions, make suggestions, 
state preferences, and/or express concerns. Special attention will be paid to the participation of 
women, the poor and/or low-income people and other vulnerable groups. Public hearings will be 
held for any proposed adjustments in the water tariff, with attendance of adequate representation 
of the poor/low-income people and women, etc. Information from the social monitoring reports will 
be disclosed periodically. 
160.  Public disclosure. ADB, the HMG including the HPMO, and implementing agencies will 
disclose  relevant  project  information  to  the  public  and  interested  parties.  This  includes  the 
information regarding the overall project and environment and social safeguards. The information 
disclosure measures for different stakeholders are described in the Table below. 
161.  Specific activities for GIF. In order to implement the stakeholder communication strategy 
for GIF, the following activities have or will be taken: 
(i)  Opportunities to access project funds to be openly and widely advertised within 
and around Huangshan area using a variety of media selected to reach the 
targeted enterprises most likely to benefit from the Funds. 
(ii)  HXIC and limited partner(s) of the Fund will ensure that local communities affected 
by the project are consulted before each investment’s approval under the 
provisions of ESMS, and after subproject implementation, to identify, assess, and 
remedy any residual concerns. 
67 
(iii)  Within 2 months from the loan effectiveness, the HTIC will commence disclosure of 
all key project-related information, including the scope, financial and institutional 
arrangements of the project. 
162.  A  consultation  and  participation  plan  (CPP)  has  been  prepared  for  the  concerned 
stakeholders within the project areas as required by ADB to ensure inclusiveness, transparency, 
and  meaningful  consultation  and  participation  of  concerned  stakeholders  for  the  Project.  The 
purpose of this plan is to engage the stakeholders in meaningful consultation and decision-making 
process;  inform  them  about  the  project  and  consult  them  on  various  issues  relevant  to  the 
project/subcomponents and activities during project design and implementation. Consultation and 
participation  serves  as  a  venue  for  the  key  stakeholders  (i.e.,  government  agencies,  project 
beneficiaries, and women) to be informed about the project, clarify and express feedbacks, issues 
and concerns, and suggestions; learn how they will be benefited by the projects; participate in 
decision-making  and take  action  and/or  be  involved  during  the  design,  project  implementation 
and operation/maintenance stages. The plan is in Table 14 below. 
68 
Table 14: Consultation and Participation Plan 
Participation Methods and 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Method 
Meeting  
Workshop  
Start   End  
2020 
2026 
Who will be 
responsible 
HMG/IAs/PM
Os    
Consultants  
Budget 
source 
Project 
budget  
Stakeholders  
Objective of their participation  
Type of Participation  
Information sharing, 
consultation meetings, 
seeking/incorporating 
feedback in decision 
making, and coordinating 
responsibilities 
To inform about the project activities, 
implementation 
schedule/arrangements, agencies 
responsible for project implementation.  
To provide information relevant 
policies applicable to the project 
including ADB policies on safeguard, 
gender, and other relevant aspects.  
To enable concerned agencies/IAs to 
express their needs/concerns and/or 
clarify matters to ensure that the 
project activities are implemented in a 
timely manner and in accordance with 
the ADB policies and guidelines.   
Government 
agencies/ 
bureaus/ units 
responsible for 
implementing 
the 
project/subproje
cts (Local 
Development 
and Reform 
Bureaus, Health 
Commissions, 
Housing & 
Urban-Rural 
Construction 
Bureaus, 
Human 
Resources and 
Social Security 
Bureaus, Civil 
Affairs Bureaus, 
Women’s 
Federations, 
Poverty 
Alleviation and 
Development 
Offices, etc.).  
Agencies 
responsible for 
implementing 
the RP/IEE, 
To define the roles of each agency 
during implementation of relevant 
plans, solicit their support, and 
harmonize the implementation of 
Information sharing, 
consultation meetings, 
seeking/incorporating 
feedback in decision 
Meeting  
Workshop  
HMG/IAs/PM
Os   
Consultants  
2020 
2026 
Project 
budget 
Stakeholders  
Objective of their participation  
Type of Participation  
69 
Participation Methods and 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Budget 
source 
Method 
Who will be 
responsible 
Start   End  
GAP, and 
SDAP (Natural 
Resources 
Bureaus, 
Agriculture and 
Rural Bureaus, 
Ecology and 
Environment 
Bureaus, 
township 
governments, 
etc.) 
Project 
beneficiaries/res
idents in the 
project area 
including 
affected 
persons/HHs, 
women, 
farmers, village 
committees and 
other 
stakeholders.  
relevant plans with the existing 
programs/plans of the government 
agencies/bureaus. 
making, and coordinating 
responsibilities 
Information sharing, 
consultation meetings, 
seeking/incorporating 
feedback in decision 
making, and coordinating 
responsibilities 
Meeting, FGD,  
public consultation  
HMG/IAs/PM
Os  
2020 
2026 
Project 
budget 
Consultants  
To enable the concerned agencies/IAs 
to express their needs/concerns 
and/or clarify matters to ensure that 
the relevant plans are implemented in 
a timely manner and in accordance 
with the ADB policies or approved 
plans.  
To inform beneficiaries/households on 
how they could access project benefits 
(i.e., employment/jobs, public 
awareness, training, community 
participation, and other activities), and 
seek inputs for decision-making in 
project cycle (design, implementation 
and monitoring).  
To provide information to 
households/individuals that would 
experience potential negative impacts 
(i.e., land acquisition/resettlement,) or 
experience positive project impacts 
according to relevant social and 
safeguard plans prepared for the 
project.  
To engage residents/communities in 
detailed design of relevant project 
activities (i.e., training/seminars, public 
70 
Stakeholders  
Objective of their participation  
Type of Participation  
Participation Methods and 
Responsibility 
Timeline 
Budget 
source 
Method 
Who will be 
responsible 
Start   End  
Community-
based 
organizations 
such as: -
farmers groups, 
women 
federations, 
etc.; contractors 
Women 
awareness, consultations, mobilization 
of cleaners/river guards, community 
volunteers, etc.) according to relevant 
plans for the project. 
To inform and seek participation of 
representatives of community-based 
organizations on issues/matters 
concerning water supply, river 
embankment improvement, solid 
waste and wastewater treatment/ 
management, ecological 
conservations, green space 
construction, etc.  
To seek their inputs in decision-
making and project implementation, 
and monitoring.   
To encourage contractors to hire local 
people including women, and the 
poor/low- income people  
To ensure inclusiveness of women 
and that they are able to benefit from 
the project 
To ensure women’s participating in 
consultation meetings on detailed 
design and tariff setting, training and 
or capacity building activities; and 
ensure women’s access to project 
related jobs according to relevant 
plans for the project. 
Information sharing, 
consultation meetings, 
seeking/incorporating 
feedback in decision 
making, and coordinating 
responsibilities 
Meeting, FGD,  
public consultation 
DCG/PMO   
IAs, 
consultants  
2020 
2025 
Project 
budget 
Meeting, FGD,  
consultation 
Information sharing, 
consultation meetings, 
seeking/incorporating 
feedback in decision 
making, and coordinating 
responsibilities 
HMG/IAs/PM
Os; 
Consultants 
(assisted by 
local 
women’s 
federations)  
2020 
2025 
Project 
budget 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EA = executing agency, FGD = focus group discussion, GAP = gender action plan, HPMO=Huangshan project management office; 
HH = household, HMG = Huangshan Municipal Government, IA = implementing agency, IEE = initial environment examination, LGU = local government unit, PMO 
= project management office, RP = resettlement plan, SDAP =social development action plan, TOR = terms of reference.
71 
X. 
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
163.  ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  relating  to  the  project. 26  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  shall  include 
provisions  specifying  the  right  of  ADB  to  audit  and  examine  the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
executing agency and all project contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers. 
Individuals and/or entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible to participate in 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project.27  
164.  To support these efforts, relevant provisions are included in the loan agreement and the 
bidding documents for the project.  
XI. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
165.  People  who  are,  or may  in the  future  be,  adversely  affected  by the  project  may  submit 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects can 
voice,  and  seek  a  resolution  of  their  problems,  as  well  as  report  alleged  violations  of  ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make an effort in good faith to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.    Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.28 
XII. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
166.  All revisions and/or updates during the course of implementation should be retained in this 
section to provide a chronological history of changes to implemented arrangements recorded in 
the PAM, including revision to contract awards and disbursement s-curves. 
26 Anticorruption Policy: https://www.adb.org/documents/anticorruption-policy. 
27  ADB's Integrity Office web site: https://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main. 
28 Accountability Mechanism. https://www.adb.org/site/accountability-mechanism/main. 
72 
APPENDIX 1: DETAILED ACTIVITIES OF ALL SUBPROJECTS 
No. 
Subprojects 
Construction content 
Output 1: Urban point source pollution management facilities installed 
A-Urban Drainage System Upgrade 
Corresponding 
Packages 
1A-1 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Huizhou District 
1A-2 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Huangshan District 
1A-3 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Xiuning County 
1A-4 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Yi County 
1A-5 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
She County 
1A-6 
Sewage and Stormwater 
Sewer Upgrade Project in 
Qimen County 
B-River Rehabilitation 
1) 
2) 
install 28.04km of sewage pipes (open cut); 
install 3.14km of stormwater drainage pipes 
(open cut); 
3)  construct one wastewater pump station; 
4)  construct 21.27km of stormwater ditches;  
5)  construct 60,000 m2 of porous pavement on 
sidewalk, 3000 ecological tree pits, and 400 
gutter inlets during road surface restoration.  
install 3.25km of sewage interception main 
(open cut); 
install 1.87km of stormwater drainage pipes 
(open cut); 
2) 
1) 
3)  construct 5,250 m2 of porous pavement on 
sidewalk, 525 ecological tree pits, and 70 
gutter inlets during road surface restoration. 
1)  renovate 4.38km of sewage main pipes 
along Binjiang Rd (pipe-jacking);  
install 12.37km of sewage pipes (open cut); 
install 3.39km of stormwater drainage pipes 
(open cut); 
2) 
3) 
4)  construct 6,870 m2 of porous pavement on 
sidewalk, 687 ecological tree pits, and 92 
gutter inlets during road surface restoration 
1)  renovate 4.3km of sewage interceptor along 
Hexi Rd (pipe-jacking); 
install 1.75km of sewage pipes (open cut); 
2) 
3)  construct 525 ecological tree pits. 
1)  renovate 9.22km of sewage pipes (open cut); 
2) 
3) 
install 20.23km of sewage pipes (open cut); 
install 25.45km of stormwater drainage pipes 
(open cut); 
install 1.43km of stormwater pipe culverts 
(open cut); 
4) 
5)  construct 45,000 m2 of porous pavement on 
sidewalk, 4,500 ecological tree pits, and 
1,018 gutter inlets during road surface 
restoration                                           
1)  renovate 10.22km of sewage pipes (open 
2) 
3) 
cut); 
install 6.65km of sewage pipes (open cut);  
install 14.51km of stormwater drainage pipes 
(open cut); 
4)  clean-up 2.42km of stormwater pipe culverts; 
5)  construct 51,792 m2 of porous pavement on 
sidewalk, 3,960 ecological tree pits, and 580 
gutter inlets during road surface restoration 
Works-HZ-1 
Works-HS-4 
Works-XN-1,  
Works-XN-2 
Works-YX-1 
Works-SX-1, 
Works-SX-2, 
Works-SX-3, 
Works-SX-4 
Works-QM-1,  
Works-QM-2,  
Works-QM-3 
No. 
Subprojects 
Construction content 
73 
Corresponding 
Packages 
1B-1 
Zhang River Rehabilitation 
Project in Yi County 
1B-2 
Caocun River Rehabilitation 
Project in Huangshan 
District 
1)  construct river revetment in section from 
Jiudong Bridge to Dongmen Bridge (1.1 km);  
2)  ecological landscaping improvement along 
Zhang River (3,200m2) and construction of 
1.52km walkway. 
Rehabilitate and upgrade a 3.85 km section of 
flood control channel that starts from 
downstream of Dashankeng Reservoir and ends 
at the confluence point of Caocun River and 
Xinhua River. 
Works-YX-2 
Works-HS-2 
Output 2: Rural point and non-point source pollution control facilities and 
systems enhanced 
A-Rural Environment Infrastructure Improvement 
2A-1 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Xiuning County 
2A-2 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Huizhou District 
2A-3 
Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Tunxi District 
2A-4 
Xinhua Village Environment 
Improvement Project in 
Huangshan District 
2A-5 
Xitou Village Environment 
Improvement Project in She 
County 
For 32 natural villages:  
1) 
install 41.42km of water supply pipes; 
2)  construct 27 onsite wastewater treatment 
stations; 
install 67.11km of sewage pipes; 
3)  construct 2 wastewater pumping stations; 
4) 
5)  construct 16,848m2 of landscape walkway; 
6)  construct 3,000m2 of parking lot; 
7)  construct 6 landscape pavilions and 10 
lookouts.  
For 8 natural villages: 
1)  construct 13 onsite wastewater treatment 
stations; 
install 5.67km of sewage pipes; 
2) 
For 54 natural villages: 
1)  construct 4 onsite wastewater treatment 
stations; 
install 50.8km of sewage pipes; 
2) 
3)  construct 22 wastewater pump stations. 
For 7 natural villages: 
1)  construct 16 onsite wastewater treatment 
stations; 
install 8.9km of sewage pipes; 
2) 
3)  construct 15,000m2 of walkway; 
4)  road greening of 3,000m2;  
5)  construct 800m2 of parking lots; 
6)  construct 2 tourism toilets. 
For 20 natural villages: 
1)  construct 25 onsite wastewater treatment 
stations; 
install 39km of sewage pipes; 
install 59.68km of water supply pipes; 
2) 
3) 
4)  construct 4,800m2 of walkway; 
5) 
6)  road greening of 3,000m2 and landscape of 
landscape development of 450m2; 
Works-XN-3, 
Works-XN-4, 
Works-XN-5, 
Works-XN-6, 
Works-XN-7 
Works-HZ-2 
Works-TX-1,  
Works-TX-2 
Works-HS-1 
Works-SX-4,  
Works-SX-5  
2A-6 
Environmental 
Infrastructure Improvement 
6,000m2; 
7)  construct 600m2 of parking lots. 
A total of 10 villages and towns are involved:  
Construct 8,452 m2 of parking lots and other 
supporting facilities for eco-tourism development, 
Works-SX-2 
74 
No. 
Subprojects 
Construction content 
Corresponding 
Packages 
along Xin'an River in She 
County 
including walkways, observation platforms, 
tourism toilets, landscape development, tourists 
rest stations, retaining walls, solid waste 
collection bins, etc. 
B - Non-point source pollution control 
2B-1 
Xin’an River Green 
Agriculture Demonstration 
Project in She County 
2B-2 
Xinhua Village Green 
Agriculture Demonstration 
Project in Huangshan 
District 
1) 
improve the agricultural infrastructure and 
tourism reception facilities in Nanping Village 
Characteristic Agricultural Park (2000 mu), 
Takeng Citrus Demonstration Park (3000 
mu) and Miantan Loquat Demonstration Park 
(1500 mu) in Huicheng Town, She County; 
2)  promote soil test formulated fertilization, 
application of organic fertilizer and solar 
energy powered insecticidal lamps, etc. 
1)  upgrade the agricultural infrastructure in 
Baishabao Lei Bamboo Ecological 
Demonstration Park (1000 mu), Xinchang Lei 
Bamboo Ecological Demonstration Park (700 
mu) and Xinhua Oil Tea Ecological 
Demonstration Park (120 mu);  
2)  construct 650m main road and 5.24km 
walkway within the parks for daily agriculture 
activities and sightseeing; 
3)  construct tourism facilities, including parking 
lots, tourism toilets, lookouts, etc. 
4)  promote soil test formulated fertilization, 
application of organic fertilizer and solar 
energy powered insecticidal lamps, etc. 
1) 
long-distance video monitoring and 
unmanned aerial vehicle monitoring of 
pinewood, and personnel training;  
2)  procurement of quarantine inspection 
2B-3 
Pine Forest Disease 
Prevention Project 
3) 
equipment and pulverisers;  
tree trunk injection for healthy pine trees 
(900,000 tree-time) and chemical control of 
pine wilt by applying environmentally friendly 
chemicals (70,000 hm2); 
Output 3: Green financing mechanisms piloted  
4)  development of an information management 
system for pine wilt control in Huangshan. 
Works-SX-3 
Works-HS-3 
Goods-HSC-1, 
Goods-HSC-2, 
Goods-HSC-3, 
Goods-HSC-4 
3-1  Green Investment Fund 
3-2 
Green Incentive Fund (eco-
compensation) 
The Fund targets sustainable companies and 
partners which needs capital for investing into 
projects supporting the green agenda of 
Huangshan Municipality.   
1)  select 20,000 mu of main polluted areas for 
development of pilot green tea plantations; 
2)  establish technical standard for green 
production in tea gardens; 
3)  establish “green” tea production certification 
N.A. 
N.A. 
system; 
75 
Corresponding 
Packages 
No. 
Subprojects 
Construction content 
4)  evaluate the production, cost, revenue, 
ecological benefits and compensation 
standard for green production in tea gardens; 
5)  build good brand and establish green 
marketing system; 
6)  project experience dissemination. 
Output 4: Capacity for ecological system and project management strengthened  
A-Monitoring and Management System 
4A-1 
Smart River Monitoring 
System of Huangshan 
4A-2 
Smart Environment 
Monitoring System in 
Qimen County 
4A-3 
Smart EHS Management 
System in Huizhou District 
Industrial Park 
4A-4 
Smart EHS Management 
System in She County 
Industrial Park 
4A-5 
Huangshan MIS Top Layer 
System Project 
4A-6 
Huangshan Smart EHS 
General System 
B-Technical Support 
4B-1 
Study on Evaluation of 
Xin’an River Eco-
compensation 
1) develop an intelligent water resources 
management network;  
2) develop an intelligent cloud service center; 
3) develop an intelligent water resources 
application integration system; 
4) develop standard and regulation system, 
safeguard system and operation and 
maintenance safeguard system. 
1) an eco-environmental monitoring network; 
2) a basic database of eco-environment; 
3) a comprehensive evaluation system of eco-
environment; 
4) multiple monitoring platforms, including 
environmental quality monitoring platform, 
pollution source automatic monitoring platform, 
etc.  
Construction of Internet of Things system, 
application support platform, data support 
system, standards and specifications, integrated 
business application system, etc. 
Construction of Internet of Things system, 
application support platform, data support 
system, standards and specifications, integrated 
business application system, etc.  
MIS/GIS database, communications, and 
programs at Huangshan Municipal Smart 
Management System to support overall smart 
city management system.  
A GIS and program for environmental, health and 
safety (EHS) administration, management, 
monitoring, and emergency response systems 
for industrial parks and factories.  
1)  study and establish statistical indicators of 
eco-compensation;  
2)  propose accounting methods of 
compensation standards; 
3)  study the compensation benefits evaluation; 
4)  Hiring individual consultants: international 
project management and rural wastewater 
specialist, social specialist and 
environmental specialist.  
Goods-HSC-5 
Goods-HSC-6 
Goods-HSC-7-Lot 1 
Goods-HSC-7-Lot 2 
Goods-HSC-8 
Goods-HSC-9 
Serv-HSC-1, 
Serv-HSC-15, 
Serv-HSC-16, 
Serv-HSC-18 
4B-2 
Rural Wastewater 
Discharge Standard Study 
Research on sewage discharge standard in rural 
areas. 
Serv-HSC-2 
76 
No. 
Subprojects 
Construction content 
Corresponding 
Packages 
Green Economic 
Development Strategic 
Study and Planning for 
Ecological Huangshan City 
Greener Tea Production 
Eco-compensation 
Certification Program 
She County Household Pig 
Manure Management Study 
Green Incentive Fund 
Feasibility Study 
4B-3 
4B-4 
4B-5 
4B-6 
C-Project Management 
4C-1 
Project Management 
Consulting Service 
4C-2 
Huangshan  Training 
Capacity Strengthening 
for 
4C-3  Office Equipment Supply 
Strategic study for green development in 
Huangshan 
Serv-HSC-3 
Research on the standard certification system of 
green tea plantations. 
Serv-HSC-4 
Pilot study for household pig manure 
management 
Feasibility study for the implementation of Green 
Incentive Fund 
Serv-HSC-17 
Serv-HSC-14 
1) 
 Project implementation supporting 
consulting service.  
2)  External social and resettlement compliance 
monitoring 
3)  Dissemination of project experiences 
4)  Project Start-up Consultancy before Loan 
5) 
Implementation 
trainings provided by project implementation 
supporting consultants; 
Serv-HSC-5,  
Serv-HSC-15,  
Serv-HSC-16, 
Serv-HSC-18 
6)  project management trainings provided by 
Serv-HSC-6 
ADB; 
7)  study tours. 
1)  Project Information Management System: 
covering contract management, budget 
management, cost management, fund 
management, risk management, progress 
management, quality management, safety 
management, etc.  
2)  office supplies such as computers, printers 
and photocopiers in project management 
offices. 
4C-4 
Construction Supervision 
Service 
Recruitment of agencies for construction 
supervision. 
Goods-HSC-10 
Serv-HSC-7,  
Serv-HSC-8,  
Serv-HSC-9,  
Serv-HSC-10,  
Serv-HSC-11, 
Serv-HSC-12,  
Serv-HSC-13 
77 
APPENDIX 2: OUTLINE TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR CONSULTING SERVICES  
1. 
12 consulting services are financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to complete 
the following purposes: (i) project start-up and implementation support; (ii) capacity building; (iii) 
external  social  and  resettlement  monitoring;  (iv)  external  environmental  monitoring;  (v) 
construction supervision; (vi) studies. 
2. 
The project management office (HPMO) on behalf of EA (HMG) and IAs will be responsible 
for  engaging  the  consulting  service contract  packages  in  accordance  with ADB’s  Procurement 
Policy (2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers 
(2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).  The  consulting  firm  will  be  selected  for  the  project 
implementation support and capacity development by (i) inviting simple technical proposals; and 
(ii) using the quality- and cost-based selection method. 
3. 
In addition to the consulting services financed by the loan, domestically funded consulting 
services will be recruited by the EA and IAs. The HPMO will recruit a procurement agent to provide 
bidding support including preparation of bidding documents, invitation for bids and bid evaluation 
reports, while the IAs will engage domestic design institutes to carry out preliminary and detailed 
engineering designs.  
Summary of Consulting services 
Estimated 
Value 
(€ x 1000) 
International 
Expert (Person-
month) 
National Expert 
(Person-month) 
No. 
4B-1 
4B-2 
4B-3 
4B-4 
4B-5 
4B-6 
4C-1 
Subproject 
Study on Eco-compensation 
Evaluation of Xin’an River Basin 
Rural wastewater Discharge 
Standard Study 
Green Economic Development 
Strategic Study and Planning for 
Ecological Huangshan City 
Green Tea Eco-Compensation 
Certification System Study 
She County Household Pig Manure 
Management Study 
Green Incentive Fund Feasibility 
Study 
Project Implementation Supporting 
Consulting Services 
 392  
 104  
 392  
 392  
157 
392 
 1,652  
4C-2 
Training for Capacity Strengthening 
 281  
4C-3 
Construction supervision service 
2,317 
4C-4 
4C-5 
External Social and Resettlement 
Monitoring 
Project Experience Dissemination 
Program 
4C-6 
Project Start-up Consultancy before 
Loan Implementation 
 274  
 392  
150 
PM = Person Month, TBD = To Be Determined. 
8 PM 
3 PM 
20 PM 
6 PM 
10 PM 
20 PM 
TBD 
10 PM 
39 PM 
2 PM 
50 PM 
TBD 
31 PM 
144 PM 
4 PM 
588 PM 
40 PM 
11 PM 
Project 
management and 
rural wastewater 
specialist (4PM) 
Social specialist 
(5 PM), 
Environmental 
specialist (5 PM) 
78 
Indicative Terms of Reference for 
4B-1 Study on Eco-Compensation Evaluation of Xin’an River Basin 
A.  Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness.  
This document sets out the tentative TOR for the consulting services to undertake a study 
3. 
on the eco-compensation evaluation of Xin’an River Basin to promote the effective application of 
eco-compensation mechanism within Xin’an River Basin and other areas with similar conditions 
in China. The executing agency for the project is the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). 
The  direct  client  for  the  consulting  services  is  the  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management 
office (HPMO) established in the Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission 
(HDRC). 
B. 
The Objectives and Overall Scope of Services 
4. 
HMG has set up its sustainable economic development objectives in implementation of 
ecological protection, green development, and rural vitalization strategies. The consulting service 
of  eco-compensation  evaluation  of  Xin’an  River  Basin  is  to  study  and  establish  statistical 
indicators of eco-compensation, propose accounting methods of compensation standards, and 
evaluate the compensation benefits. 
C. 
Implementation Arrangements 
5. 
The  consulting  service  will  be  carried  out  by  a  team  of  consultants  through  a  firm.  A 
minimum of 8 person-months of international and 20 person-months of national specialists will be 
required. The consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and 
the  consulting  firm  will  be  recruited  by  HPMO  according  to  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB 
Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from time 
to time).29 The consulting firm will be selected by (i) inviting full technical proposals; and (ii) using 
the quality- and cost-based selection (QCBS) method, with a quality–cost weighting ratio of 90:10. 
The consulting services are expected to start in July 1, 2020 and finish in June 30, 2021.  
29 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
79 
D. 
Reporting Requirements 
6. 
The consultant team will produce (i) an inception report within 4 weeks after mobilization, 
(ii) a draft study report 9 months after mobilization, and (iii) a final study report at the end of the 
consulting services. The inception, draft and final reports will be subject to reviews by ADB and 
HPMO. The comments received from ADB and HPMO, and selected key experts who would be 
invited as reviewers should be incorporated and addressed in the final report. All reports are to 
be written in English and translated into Chinese. One soft and two printed copies of each report 
are  to  be  submitted  to  ADB  (English  version  only)  and  HPMO  (both  Chinese  and  English 
versions). 
E. 
Key Expertise Required 
7. 
The proposing entities will determine the number and the nature of experts which they will 
require  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  the  consulting  service  in  accordance  with  their  proposed 
approach  and  methodology.  However,  ADB  requires  a  minimum  of  one  international  and  two 
national experts.  
8. 
Eco-compensation  economist  and  team  leader  (international,  8  person-months). 
The specialist should have (i) a post-graduate degree in finance, economics, business, or related 
field; (ii) at least 10 years of professional experience in technical and/or international cooperation 
projects (ADB preferred), including management and leadership responsibility; (iii) experience in 
eco-compensation  analysis  and  application;  (iv)  demonstrated  capacity  to  present  results  of 
complex analysis in concise and logical manner; (v) demonstrated ability to supervise a team of 
experts  working  remotely;  and  (vi)  fluency  in  English.  Work  experience  in  the  PRC  will  be  an 
advantage. Specific tasks will include the following:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
carry  out  a  comprehensive  review  and  assessment  of  existing  eco-compensation 
schemes, policies and regulations in Xin’an River Basin and the implementation status of 
any ongoing eco-compensation related projects and incentive programs; 
conduct a comprehensive review of international- and domestic-level eco-compensation; 
identify the fiscal and institutional barriers for the implementation of comprehensive eco-
compensation;  
develop the evaluation criteria/principles for ecosystem value; 
establish a set of performance indicators for evaluation of ecosystem value; 
based  on  the  analysis  of  policies,  regulations,  planning  and  existing  best  practices, 
establish  the  eco-compensation  standards  that  would  be  applied  in  Huangshan 
Municipality; 
assist  HPMO  in  promoting  the  implementation  of  established  eco-compensation 
evaluation system; and  
lead  the  preparation  of  required  report,  including  assign  work  to  the  consulting  team 
members; consolidate the inputs from consulting team members; and finalize the inception, 
draft and final reports for submission to ADB and HPMO for review and approval. 
Ecosystem  evaluation  and  management  specialist  (national,  10  person-months). 
9. 
The specialist should have (i) a postgraduate degree in ecosystem management, environmental 
management,  or  a  relevant  field;  (ii)  10  or  more  years  of  research  and  policy  experience  in 
ecosystem evaluation, ecosystem management, and environmental planning; and (iv) fluency in 
both Chinese and English. Specific tasks will include the following: 
80 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
assist the team leader in carrying out a comprehensive review and assessment of existing 
eco-compensation  schemes,  policies  and  regulations  in  Xin’an  River  Basin  and  the 
implementation  status  of  any  ongoing  eco-compensation  related  projects  and  incentive 
programs; 
conduct  a  comprehensive  review  of  international-  and  domestic-level  ecosystem 
evaluation in eco-compensation through literature review; 
assist in establishing a set of performance  indicators for evaluation of ecosystem value 
after discussing with key stakeholders; 
assist  HPMO  in  promoting  the  implementation  of  established  eco-compensation 
evaluation system; and 
assist the team leader in preparing required reports; and  
undertake other tasks assigned by the team leader, as needed. 
10. 
Payments  for  ecosystem  services  specialist  (national,  10  person-months).  The 
specialist should have (i) a post-graduate degree in finance, economics, business, or related field; 
(ii)  at  least  10  years  of  professional  experience  in  technical  and/or  international  cooperation 
projects (ADB preferred); (iii) experience in analysis of industry stakeholders, market structure, 
and  trends;  particularly  on  payment  of  ecosystem  services  would  be  an  advantage;  and  (iv) 
fluency in both Chinese and English. Specific tasks will include the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
assist the team leader in carrying out a comprehensive review and assessment of existing 
eco-compensation  schemes,  policies  and  regulations  in  Xin’an  River  Basin  and  the 
implementation  status  of  any  ongoing  eco-compensation  related  projects  and  incentive 
programs; 
review  existing  methods  for  determination  of  eco-compensation  standards  and  select 
feasible methods to be applied in the study;  
assist  the  team  leader  in  establishing  the  eco-compensation  standards  that  would  be 
applied in Huangshan Municipality; 
assist  HPMO  in  promoting  the  implementation  of  established  eco-compensation 
evaluation system; and 
assist the team leader in ensuring the timely implementation of the TA activities, including 
(a)  collecting  data  through  surveys  and  interviews  with  key  stakeholders;  and  (b) 
organizing the inception, interim, and final workshops, to deliver quality and timely outputs, 
including developing a detailed implementation schedule; and coordinating the assigned 
tasks with the concerned consulting team members;  
assist the team leader in preparing required reports; and  
undertake other tasks assigned by the team leader, as needed. 
81 
Indicative Terms of Reference for 
4B-2 Rural Wastewater Discharge Standard Study 
A. 
Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River  Ecological  Protection  and  Green  Development 
Project  (the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin 
through  improving  urban  and  rural  wastewater  management,  reducing  soil  erosion  and 
agriculture-related  non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms, 
capacities, and public awareness. 
This document sets out the TOR for consulting services to undertake a study for rural 
3. 
wastewater discharge standard in Huangshan City to ensure its ecological protection at affordable 
costs. The executing agency for the project is the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). The 
direct client for the consulting services is the Huangshan Municipal project management office 
(HPMO) established in the Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC). 
B. 
Objectives and Overall Scope of Works 
HMG has set up its sustainable economic development objectives in implementation of 
4. 
ecological protection, green development, and rural vitalization strategies. The Anhui Xinan River 
Ecological Protection and Green Development Project includes a component of design, finance, 
construction and commissioning of decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DWTF) in 121 
rural villages. The sustainable operation and management (O&M) of DWTF is critical to ensure 
the investment effective and efficient, while the effluent standard of DWTF is a core factor to affect 
the process selection, capital cost, and O&M costs. The consulting service of rural wastewater 
(RWW) discharge standard study is to assess current DWTF process technologies, capital costs 
and O&M costs, and cost recovery mechanism, compare international good practices, and study 
affordability  and  willingness  to  pay  to  recommend  optimized  affordable  effluent  discharge 
standards at various environmental criteria.  
C. 
Major Outputs and Activities 
5. 
The consulting service will be carried out by a team of consultants through a firm. A total 
of 3 person-months of international and 6 person-months of national specialists will be required. 
The  consulting  services  will  be  financed  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  and  the 
consulting  firm  will  be  recruited  by  the  HPMO  according  to  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB 
Borrowers  -  Goods,  Works,  Non-consulting  and  Consulting  Services  (2017,  as  amended  from 
time to time).30 The consulting firm will be selected by (i) inviting simple technical proposals; and 
30 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
82 
(ii) using the quality-based selection (QBS) method. The consulting services are expected to start 
in July 1, 2020 and finish in July 1, 2021.  
6. 
The outputs of the consulting service will include:  
7. 
Output  1:  Assessment  of  current  conditions  of  rural  wastewater  treatment  processes, 
treatment  efficiency,  and  effluents,  and  their  capital  and  O&M  costs  including  land  footprint, 
operators’ skills, sludge generation and disposal costs; 
8. 
Output 2: Investigation of Huangshan ecological and environmental capacities to clean 
up DWTF effluents at various locations such as water resource protection zones, mountainous 
villages,  low  land  with  high  groundwater  table,  adjacent  to  wetland,  etc;  and  local  economic 
development and financial affordability of the county/district governments, township governments 
and villagers.  
9. 
Output 3: Review of national and provincial policies, regulations, and development plans, 
and  political  action plans  on  RWW  management,  especially  subsidy  policies,  cost-sharing  and 
cost  recovery  strategies,  and  local  practice  and  current  DWTF  effluent  criteria  adopted  in 
Huangshan and Anhui Province; 
10. 
lessons learnt worldwide; 
Output 4: Introduction of international good practice and summarizing experiences and 
11. 
Output 5: Study of DWTF effluent standards and cost impacts based on site locations to 
recommend various discharge standards for various villages in Huangshan City and cost recovery 
mechanism and possible tariffs. 
D. 
Consultant’s Services 
12. 
team consisting of relevant required expertise with the minimal specialists: 
The following specialists will be required but the consulting firm should propose their best 
13. 
national 6 person months) 
Rural  Wastewater  Specialists  (Team  leader  International,  3  person-months, 
The RWW specialists should have at least 15 years working experiences in both developed and 
developing countries (international specialist) and with qualifications of at least Master’s degree 
in civil engineering, municipal engineering, environmental engineering or relevant disciplines. The 
specialists  shall  have  professional  engineer’s  qualifications 
internationally  (International 
specialist) and nationally (national consultant). The specialists will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Undertake site visits, surveys of local DWTFs, investigations, data collections, and all 
analyses and studies;  
prepare the inception, draft, and final reports;  
organize review workshops and present findings and recommendations; 
coordinate with ADB and HPMO/IAs on carry out the study; 
assure the quality of the works. 
83 
Indicative Terms of Reference for  
4B-3 Green Economic Development Strategic Study and Planning for  
Huangshan Ecological City 
A. 
Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River  Ecological  Protection  and  Green  Development 
Project  (the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin 
through  improving  urban  and  rural  wastewater  management,  reducing  soil  erosion  and 
agriculture-related  non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms, 
capacities, and public awareness. 
3. 
This document sets out the TOR for consulting services to undertake a strategic study 
and  planning  for  green  economic  development  in  Huangshan  City  to  ensure  its  ecological 
protection while achieve sustainable economic development. The executing agency for the project 
is the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). The direct client for the consulting services is 
the  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office  (HPMO)  established  in  the  Huangshan 
Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC). 
B. 
The Objectives and Overall Scope of Works 
4. 
HMG has set up its sustainable economic development objectives in implementation of 
ecological protection, green development, and rural vitalization strategies.  The consulting service 
of green economic development strategy study and planning is to assess current conditions and 
competitiveness  of  industrial  and  agriculture  sectors,  investigate  natural  and  social  resources, 
review  national  and  provincial  policies,  regulations,  and  development  plans,  introduce 
international  best  practice,  summarize  experiences  and  lessons  learnt,  identify  development 
opportunities, and formulate the next 5 year (2021–2025) and 15 year (2021–2035) development 
strategic plans. The jurisdictions of the study will cover whole Huangshan City including 3 districts 
and four counties.  
C. 
Major Outputs and Activities 
5. 
The consulting service will be carried out by a team of consultants through a firm. A total 
of 10 person-months of international and 20 person-months of national specialists will be required. 
The  consulting  services  will  be  financed  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  and  the 
consulting  firm  will  be  recruited  by  the  HPMO  according  to  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB 
Borrowers  -  Goods,  Works,  Non-consulting  and  Consulting  Services  (2017,  as  amended  from 
time to time).31 The consulting firm will be selected by (i) inviting full technical proposals; and (ii) 
31 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
84 
using the quality- and cost-based selection (QCBS) method, with a quality–cost weighting ratio of 
90:10. The consulting services are expected to start in July 1, 2020 and finish in July 1, 2021.  
6. 
The outputs of the consulting service will include:  
7. 
Output  1:  Assessment  of  current  conditions  and  competitiveness  of  all  sectors  in 
Huangshan  City  including  manufacturing  industries,  IT  industries,  tea  industries,  agriculture, 
tourism sector, and service sectors to identify strengths and weakness; 
8. 
Output 2: Investigation of Huangshan natural and social resources including ecological 
resources (Green Mountain and Green Water), heritage resources, agriculture resources, human 
resources, tourism resources, and industrial resources and propose resource development and 
utilization plans; 
9. 
Output 3: Review of national and provincial policies, regulations, and development plans, 
and political action plans to streamline of the socialist-economic characteristics and comparison 
studies on developed economic development models and modernization process;   
10. 
lessons learnt worldwide; 
Output 4: Introduction of international best practice and summarizing experiences and 
11. 
Output 5: Analysis and identification of development opportunities, and develop a 5 year 
(2021 – 2025) and 15 year (2021-2035) development strategic plans for HMG to cover at least 
the  following  sectors:  (i)  industrial  development  strategic  plan;  (ii)  agriculture  development 
strategic plan; (iii) tourism development strategic plan; (iv) IT sector development strategic plan; 
(v)  social  development  strategic  plan;  (vi)  service  sector  development  strategic  plan;  (vi)  rural 
development  strategic  plan;  and  (vii)  overall  master  plan  for  Huangshan  Green  Economic 
Development Strategic Plan. 
D. 
Consultant’s Services 
12. 
team consisting of relevant required expertise: 
The following specialists will be required but the consulting firm should propose their best 
13. 
months) 
Economists  (Team  Leader  International,  10  person-months,  National  20  person 
The  economists  should  have  at  least  15  years  working  experiences  in  both  developed  and 
developing  countries  (international)  and  with  qualifications  of  at  least  a  Masters  degree  in 
economics. The specialists will:  
(vi)  Manage the study team as team leader (international);  
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
prepare the inception, draft, and final reports including all deliverables;  
carry out site visits, data collection, and any surveys required; 
review national and provincial/city policies and regulations, development plans, and 
relevant strategies for green development in various industries and sectors; 
conduct  comparative  studies  of  developed  economies  and  developing  countries  to 
identify the pathways to realize green development; 
assess  the  capacity  of  HMG  and  institutional  settings  on  their  strengths  and 
weakness; 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
(xiii) 
(xiv) 
assess  Huangshan  various  sectors  and  resources  to  identify  opportunities  and 
opportunity costs;  
organize review workshops; and 
introduce international best practices. 
85 
86 
Indicative Terms of Reference for  
4B-4 Green Incentive Fund Certification System Study 
A. 
Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness.  
This document sets out the tentative terms of reference (TOR) for the consulting services 
3. 
to establish and implement green tea certification system under the pilot Green Incentive Fund. 
The executing agency for the project is the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). The direct 
client for the consulting services is the Huangshan Municipal Project Management Office (HPMO) 
established in the Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC). 
B. 
Objectives and Scope of Works 
The green incentive fund is designed to provide incentives to tea farmers to adopt green 
4. 
farming practice. The compensations to farmers’ adaption of green farming measures shall be 
quantified  and  realize  the  goal  of  changing  farmers’  farming  behavior.  The  independent 
certification system is to be developed to verify and certify the green farming measures taken as 
the bases for government’s subsidy. The certification body would be the third party or the second 
party  consisting  of  tea  farmers,  tea  processing  and  marketing  enterprises,  consumers,  tea 
production  technical  centers,  local  governments,  and  other  stakeholders.  For  a  successful 
implementation of the fund, the certification system will be developed during the feasibility study 
while  implemented  during  the  5-year  executing  period.  Ultimately  the  certification  will  be 
conducted by an international reputable certification organization to ensure the green tea farming 
and products recognized by the customers.  
C. 
Deliverable Requirements 
5.  
The consultant team will produce (i) an inception report within 4 weeks after mobilization, 
(ii) a draft report on certification system 6 months after mobilization, and (iii) a final report within 
12 months. The inception, draft and final reports will be subject to reviews by ADB and HPMO. 
The comments received from ADB and HPMO, and selected key experts who would be invited 
as reviewers should be incorporated and addressed in the final report. All reports are to be written 
in English and Chinese. One soft and two printed copies of each report are to be submitted to 
ADB (English version only) and HPMO (both Chinese and English versions). On a yearly basis, 
the team should organize and facilitate the verification process to ensure the subsidies quantified 
87 
and  delivered  to  tea  farmer  in  a  timely  manner.  Before  end  of  the  service,  an  international 
reputable certification organization should be identified and certificate should be obtained.   
D.  Implementation schedules 
The schedule for the certification system design and implementation is arranged at the 
6.  
following table.  
Major Activities 
Major Output 
Implementation schedule with milestones 
Call for bidding and recruiting of 
the design team 
Tea farm assessment and 
stakeholder interview 
Certification Scheme Development 
Pilot implementation 
Revision and competition of the 
Scheme 
E. 
Required expertise 
A design team with competent 
capacity 
Non-point source pollution mitigation 
assessment: main pollutant reduction 
estimation and main technical 
measures and practices 
Ecological tea-farming certification 
scheme: institution and personnel, 
inspection and certification protocol, 
Conduct the certification process 
every year for 5 years 
A complete Eco-compensation 
Scheme 
Expected Completion 
Date 
August 2020 
October 2020 
May 2021 
June 2026 
June 2026 
7.  
The certification system should be developed and implemented by an experienced team 
to  fulfill  the  objectives  and  provide  the  outputs  identified  in  the  proposal.  The  assignment  will 
require the following consultants as follows.  
8. 
 Eco-compensation specialist (national 10 person-months): The specialist will have a 
master’s  degree  in  environmental  economics  or  relevant  qualification  and  at  least  10  years  of 
work  experience  in  eco-compensation  management  or  related  fields,  and  be  familiar  with 
regulation and policies in agricultural sector in PRC. The specialist will (i) analyze the international 
and  national  experiences  on  eco-compensation  designing  and  implementation;  (ii)  conduct 
quantitative analysis for tea farming costs and market prices; (iii) establishment the certification, 
rewarding and delivery procedures for tea farmers; (iv) implementation of certification for whole 
fund period on a yearly basis; and (v) join the field visit, interview and meetings if necessary.  
9. 
Tea  specialists  (national  12  person-months):  The  specialists  will  have  a  graduate 
degree in tea, or a relevant discipline; and at least 10 years of work experience in tea production 
and processing in Huangshan region. The specialists will: (i) develop green farming technologies 
and measures package in ecological tea farm in line with local conditions. The technologies and 
measures include but are not limited to agronomic, biological, physical, chemical, and engineering 
practices  which  help  to  reduce  agro-chemical  application  and  the  discharge  of  TN,  TP  and 
pesticides;  (ii)  provide  support  for  the  ecological  tea  farm  standard  development,  certification 
scheme  and  rewarding  and  compensation  delivery  mechanism;  and  (iii)  join  the  field  visit, 
interview and meetings if necessary. 
Agricultural certification specialist (national, 12 person-months): The specialist will 
10. 
have a graduate degree in quality management, or a relevant discipline; and at least 10 years of 
work  experience  in  quality  management  system,  organic  agricultural  certification  or  good 
88 
agricultural  practice.  The  specialists  will:  (i)  develop  ecological  tea  farm  certification  scheme, 
including  the  institution,  inspection  and  certification  rules  and  protocol;  (ii)  establishment  the 
certification, rewarding and delivery procedures for tea farmers. (iii) implementation of certification 
for whole fund period on a yearly basis; and (iv) identify and facilitate with international reputable 
certification body to secure the international green certificate if possible.   
11.     Financial specialist (national,  8 person-months): The specialist will have at least 10 
years of working experiences in financial management and with qualifications of at least graduate 
degree  in  financial  management,  or  a  relevant  discipline.  The  specialists  will:  (i)  carry  out  site 
visits, data collection and analysis; (ii) financial analysis on the proposed ecological team farm 
certification  scheme,  including  the  financial  feasibility  and  sustainability;  (iii)  propose  any 
recommendations on the certification scheme to enhance the financial sustainability.  
12.     Non-point source pollution management specialist (national, 8 person-months): The 
specialist will have at least 10 years of working experiences in rural wastewater management and 
with  qualifications  of  at  least  graduate  degree  in  environmental  engineering,  or  a  relevant 
discipline. The specialists will: (i) carry out site visits, data collection, and any surveys required; 
(ii) assess the non-point source pollution mitigation measures; (iii) estimate the reduction of main 
pollutant from tea gardens; and (iv) introduce international best practice on the agriculture non-
point pollution control and feasible technical measures. 
F. 
Budget 
The budget for the Green Incentive Fund design is CNY 3 million including provisions of 
13. 
the testing and certification costs by reputable international certification body.  
89 
Indicative Terms of Reference for 
4B-5 She County Household Pig Manure Management Pilot Study  
A.  Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution  (NSP),  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and 
public awareness.  
This document sets out the tentative terms of reference (TOR) for the consulting services 
3. 
to undertake a study on She County household pig farming manure management pilot study to 
promote the effective NSP population control within She County. The executing agency for the 
project  is  the  Huangshan  Municipal  Government  (HMG).  The  direct  client  for  the  consulting 
services  is  the  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office  (HPMO)  established  in  the 
Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC). 
4. 
Farmers in She County have long tradition to raise pigs at household backyards for making 
homemade  gammons  and  bacons  which  are  traditional  festival  foods  in  Huizhou  region.  Even 
today, there are approximately 34,700 households to raise 81,000 pigs, or 2.4 pigs a household. 
As a pig can produce 5 kg dung a day, the annual pig manure at She County would be 147,825 
tons. The pig manures are composted and then used as organic fertilizers. However, the current 
practice for pig manure collection and composting are not professionally designed nor conducted. 
Uncontrolled pig manure handling causes contamination of runoff and discharge into Xinan River 
and threatens Xin’an River water quality.           
B. 
The Objectives and Overall Scope of Services 
5. 
The consulting service is to study and pilot effective measures for household pig manure 
collection, composting, and application in order to achieve the NSP control in Xinan River Basin. 
The study also includes a pilot project to design, build, and operate pig manure disposal facilities 
at  3  typical  villages  located  within  1  km  from  Xinan  River  or  its  tributaries  for  one  year  to 
demonstrate  sound  approach  for  pig  manure  management  and  evaluate  the  NSP  deduction 
effects. The budget is CNY 1,200,000 including professional remuneration costs (CNY 900,000) 
and 3 village pilot projects (CN Y300,000).   
C. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The consulting  service will  be  carried  out  by  a team  of  consultants through a  firm.  The 
6. 
consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the consulting 
firm will be recruited by HPMO according to Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers - Goods, 
90 
Works,  Non-consulting  and  Consulting  Services  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time).32 The 
consulting  firm  will  be  selected  by  (i)  inviting  simplified  technical  proposals;  and  (ii)  using  the 
quality-based selection (QBS) method. The consulting services are expected to start in July 1, 
2020 and finish in June 30, 2021.  
D. 
Reporting and Pilot Project Requirements 
7. 
The consultant team will produce (i) an inception report within 4 weeks after mobilization, 
(ii) a design report within 2 months after mobilization, (iii) a final study report at the end of the 
consulting services, and 3 pilot projects at 3 villages. The inception, draft design, and final reports 
will be subject to reviews by ADB and HPMO. The comments received from ADB and HPMO, and 
selected key experts who would be invited as reviewers should be incorporated and addressed 
in the final report. All reports are to be written in English and in Chinese. The pilot projects will be 
designed, procured (supply of materials and equipment), and managed by the consultants with 
assistance  from  pig  farming  households.  The  hog  houses  renovation,  compositing  sites, 
composting applications, etc. will be provided by the selected villages and farmers at no cost to 
the  consultants.  The  villagers  shall  also  contribute  to  all  supports  such  as  labors  and  local 
transportations  required  to  renovate  hog  house,  build  and  operate  compositing  facilities,  and 
transport and apply the composts to designed pilot crop or tea fields.   
8. 
The detailed outputs will include: 
(a)  detailed  designs  of  pilot projects  including  drawings,  technical  specifications,  operation 
procedures, etc. for the whole process of the pig manure management from hog house 
renovation until application of pig manure in farming fields.  
(b)  evaluation  of  detailed  processes  and  effectiveness  of  pilot  results  of  hog  house 
renovation, pig manure collection, composting process and application of pig manure to 
farming fields. 
(c)  evaluation  of  effectiveness  of  NSP  efforts  by  application  of  pig  manure  management 
practice.  
(d)  review of national, provincial and local policies, regulations, plans, and compliances for 
household pig raising and develop a compliance auditing template. 
(e)  conduct monthly auditing for 3 pilot projects during the consulting services. 
(f)  develop a practical manual for application of proven technologies, designs, operations, 
and trouble shorting for whole process of pig manure management. 
(g)  conduct  training  and  dissemination  of  the  successful  experiences  of  pig  manure 
management. 
(h)  design  a  quantitative  eco-compensation  program  to  compensate  the  pig  raising 
households at output-based results if they adopt the effective pig manure management 
practice.        
E. 
Key Expertise Required 
9. 
The consultants will determine the inputs, the number, and the specialties of experts which 
they  will  require  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  the  consulting  service  in  accordance  with  their 
proposed approach and methodology.  
32 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
91 
Indicative Terms of Reference for 
4B-6 Green Incentive Fund Feasibility Study 
A.  Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness.  
This document sets out the tentative terms of reference (TOR) for the consulting services 
3. 
to undertake a feasibility study on the Green Incentive Fund to promote the effective application 
of  green  tea  farming  eco-compensation  mechanism  within  Huangshan  City.  The  executing 
agency for the project is the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). The direct client for the 
consulting services is the Huangshan Municipal Project Management Office (HPMO) established 
in the Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC). 
B. 
The Objectives and Overall Scope of Services 
4. 
HMG has set up its sustainable economic development objectives in implementation of 
ecological protection, green development, and rural vitalization strategies. The consulting service 
of feasibility study is to design rewarding and eco-compensation mechanism that is targeted to 
encourage tea gardens to actively adopt green farming practice, including identification of eligible 
activities for rewarding, establishing an evaluation mechanism to assess contributions made by 
farmers to ecological improvement, and the operational mechanism of the system. 
The Green Incentive Fund design will work on the following aspects: Evaluation of current 
5. 
tea farming in Huangshan: The evaluation will quantify the application rate of fertilizer (chemical 
and organic) and pesticides in tea production, and estimate the room (or potential) for reduction. 
The labor, material, capital and all other inputs and tea output will be analyzed. Climate, land, 
geography,  soil,  erosion  and  runoff,  biological  community  and  other  natural  factors  will  be 
investigated. This work aims to identify the region/watershed with high risk of non-point source 
pollution in tea farming, where will be screened as the region and tea farm for project pilot and 
implementation.  
6. 
Analysis and assessment of technical support system for tea production in Huangshan: 
The tea farm, processing and marketing enterprises, tea farmer, tea management office, agro-
technical extension center, commercial agro-technical supplier, tea technicians, and tea farming 
production materials (fertilizer and pesticide supplier) will be visited and interviewed, to examine 
the technical and behavioural bottlenecks, influencing factors and workable measures in current 
92 
technical support system for tea production, especially on reduction on agro-chemical application 
and improvement of tea safety.  
7. 
Development of eco-tea farm standard: Combined with baseline analysis, indicators and 
indicator  value,  such  as  i.e.,  agro-chemical  application  rate,  TN,  TP  and  main  pesticides 
discharged, will be examined and integrated into ecological tea farm standard. This work on one 
hand, provide the basis for quantification of Green Incentive Fund performance, and on the other 
hand, the standard should be in line with local natural, social and economic conditions; otherwise, 
the  standard  will  not  be  workable  and  not  be  accepted  by the  tea  farmers.  For  tea  farming  in 
Huangshan,  existing  tea  gardens  may  be  at  different  level  of  garden  management  and  may 
employ different tea farming techniques, it is much necessary to classify different tea gardens into 
different categories and accordingly, their baseline operation and farming technology selection 
will also be different. Tea gardens with different development status or under different categories 
may have different priority to achieve the green tea garden standards (e.g. some may need more 
efforts to build retaining pond or buffer bushes, some may need more efforts to reduce use of 
chemical  fertilizers,  etc.),  in  this  case  farmers  are  allowed  to  choose  their  own  strategies  to 
improve  their  team  farming  operations.  These  differences  will  be  well  considered  in  the 
scoring/evaluation  standard  to  assess  their  efforts  and  contribution  to  the  goal  of  the  overall 
project. 
Build-up of technical support system for ecological tea-gardening: Technical support is the 
8. 
key for ecological tea-gardening. In the design/study, how to encourage the active involvement of 
current  governmental,  commercial  and  farmer  technician’s  technical  support  should  be  well 
examined and designed.  
9. 
Set-up  of  ecological  tea farm  certification  scheme:  The third-party  certification,  such  as 
ISO  9000/14000,  Good  Agricultural  Practice  (GAP),  Green  Food  or  Organic  Agriculture,  are 
currently  being  operated  in  the  world  and  PRC.  They  are  typical  commercial  and  for-profit 
certification activities and can’t be directly applied in current eco-compensation scheme. In the 
proposed  Green  Incentive  Fund,  experiences  and  framework  of  the  third-party  certification 
scheme  will  be  learned  and  borrowed.  Participatory  certification,  which  invites  the  farmer  and 
consumer, is another certification system transferring the credits and trust, will also be combined. 
The  ecological  tea  farm  certification  scheme  will  consist  the  stakeholders  of  government,  tea 
production/processing  enterprises,  tea  farmer,  consumer,  expert  and  others.  Inspectors, 
certification  committee,  and  certification  protocol,  tea  and  water  sampling  and  analysis  will  be 
main components of the certification scheme.  
10. 
Creation of result-based rewarding or compensation delivery mechanism: The rewarding 
or compensation mechanism is influenced by economic development status, tea farming cost and 
benefit, pollution level, willingness to pay by polluter/consumer and also other social factors. The 
mechanism will be determined based on an intensive technical, economic and social analysis at 
several rounds of exercise, with the participation of different stakeholders. 
Construction of ecological brand and marketing support pathways: For the marketing of quality 
tea with low ecological and environmental pollution, consumers should be educated via various 
feasible public reaching and advertisement channels, which will also be designed and constructed 
with conventional supermarket, e-commerce and exhibition events 
11. 
Institutional management and schedule arrangement: In the Green Incentive Fund design, 
institutional  management  will  be  set-up  by  consultation  with  relevant  stakeholders,  with  full 
considering of the successful. scheme implementation. During the TrTA phase, it is found that 
current government departments, or tea technical extension station or center, has limited human 
93 
and  time  resources  for  the  implementation  of  the  scheme.  It  is  suggested  by  HPMO  and 
agricultural departments that tea enterprise, may act as the implementation organization for the 
scheme.  During  the  scheme  design,  qualification,  role,  responsibilities  of  the  implementation 
organization (IO), i.e., tea enterprises, will be determined. 
C. 
Implementation Arrangements 
12. 
The  consulting  service  will  be  carried  out  by  a  team  of  consultants  through  a  firm.  A 
minimum of 10 person-months of international and 31 person-months of national specialists will 
be required. The consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and 
the  consulting  firm  will  be  recruited  by  HPMO  according  to  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB 
Borrowers  -  Goods,  Works,  Non-consulting  and  Consulting  Services  (2017,  as  amended  from 
time to time).33 The consulting firm will be selected by (i) inviting full technical proposals; and (ii) 
using the quality- and cost-based selection (QCBS) method, with a quality–cost weighting ratio of 
90:10. The consulting services are expected to start in July 1, 2020 and finish in September 30, 
2021.  
13. 
The schedule for the Green Incentive Fund design is arranged at the following table.  
Major Activities 
Major Output 
Implementation schedule with milestones 
Call for bidding and recruiting of 
the design team 
Tea farm assessment and 
stakeholder interview 
Ecological Tea Farm Standard 
Development 
Certification Scheme Development 
Rewarding/compensation Delivery 
Mechanism Development 
Pilot implementation of the 
Scheme 
Revision and competition of the 
Scheme 
D. 
Reporting Requirements 
A design team with competent 
capacity 
Non-point source pollution mitigation 
assessment: main pollutant reduction 
estimation and main technical 
measures and practices 
Ecological Tea Farm Standard: 
indicators, indicator value, 
quantification methods 
Ecological tea-farming certification 
scheme: institution and personnel, 
inspection and certification protocol, 
Result-based Rewarding/ 
compensation Delivery Mechanism 
Revision suggestions to the draft 
ecological tea-farming Standard, 
certification Scheme, and rewarding/ 
compensation delivery Mechanism 
A complete Green Incentive Fund 
Expected Completion 
Date 
July 2020 
October 2020 
October 2020 
November 2020 
December 2020 
May 2021 
December 2021 
The consultant team will produce (i) an inception report within 4 weeks after mobilization, 
14. 
(ii) a draft study report 6 months after mobilization, and (iii) a final study report at the end of the 
consulting services. The inception, draft and final reports will be subject to reviews by ADB and 
HPMO. The comments received from ADB and HPMO, and selected key experts who would be 
invited as reviewers should be incorporated and addressed in the final report. All reports are to 
33 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
94 
be written in English and translated into Chinese. One soft and two printed copies of each report 
are  to  be  submitted  to  ADB  (English  version  only)  and  HPMO  (both  Chinese  and  English 
versions). 
E. 
Lessons Learnt 
15. 
In the PRC, agriculture is becoming a major source of water pollution as pollutants from 
industry and municipal sources are been under well control. Due to the heavy use of chemicals 
in agriculture, PRC is faced with a severe food safety issue, and also the pollution of ecological 
environment, such as air, soil and water.  
16. 
The PRC still has to feed its 1.4 billion population using the limited farmland resources. 
Food  production  is  still  one  of  the  most  important  ecological  services  and  needs  to  be  a  top 
priority. Thus, land use change such as transforming of intensively managed farmland to fallow, 
may  only  be  applied  to  a  small  fraction  of  farmlands.  Farmer’s  employment  with  access  to 
farmland should be given a high priority as this is a complicated social issue with multi-functions. 
17. 
Currently operated eco-compensation programs are at macro-level and mainly designed 
for  large  area,  at  least  at  prefectural  administrative  level  with  land  area.  The  policies  and 
mechanisms  are  more  at  macro  level  of  financial  or  taxation  policies  and  systems,  without 
touching the micro level of farmer’s households, which are the key role of farming operation and 
dominant  player  for  non-point  source  pollution  control.  The  financial  or  taxation  policies  and 
system  implemented  are  still  conventional  economic  tools,  without  a  full  consideration  of 
marketing economic. 
18. 
Farmer’s active and full participation is the determining factor for the eco-compensation. 
In  the  most  eco-compensation  program/projects  operated  in  China,  a  top-down  approach  has 
been  mostly  adopted  and  for  farming  operation,  farmer’s  initiative  was  very  less  motivated. 
Farmers’  involvement  can  be  through  farmer’s  cooperative/association  in  which  farmers  can 
actively express their concerns and join the decision-making process. Development and pollution 
control  oriented  local  policies,  incentives  and  practices should be  mobilized  and utilized  in the 
project through ADB involvement.  
19. 
Farming  activities’  outcome  on  non-point  source  pollution  control  can  be  checked, 
monitored  and  verifiable  through  appropriate  approaches,  such  as  self-claiming,  on-site 
inspection and monitoring, sampling and analysis and etc.  
20. 
Environmental sound farming practices and robust technologies should be provided and 
accepted by farmers for the ecological service improvement and pollution mitigation. As current 
governmental technical support system in China are lack of personnel resources and not timely 
provided to farmers, commercial and private technical extension service may play an important 
role for the technical support.  
21. 
Compensation system, or rewarding method, should be designed with well consideration 
of improved ecological service or reduced environmental pollution, and also other indicators such 
as farmer’s  technical  readiness,  farmer’s  economic  status  and  etc.,  with  an  intensive  dialogue 
among  stakeholders  and  technical  support  from  the  experts.  A  pilot  implementation  of  eco-
compensation is much needed, by which experiences and lessons can be gained and farmer’s 
enthusiasm and confidence can be also increased.  
95 
A better understanding of the actual farmers’ behavior change is needed. Providing free 
22. 
organic compost was never going to work, therefore more focus needs to be between the design 
of the eco-comp mechanism and the change required by the farmer to improve the environment. 
F. 
Key Expertise Required 
23. 
The design/study of the scheme should be undertaken by an experienced team to fulfill 
the objectives and provide the outputs identified in the proposal. The assignment will require the 
following consultants as follows.  
24. 
Agro-environmental  Protection  Specialist  (international  10  person-months):  The 
specialist  (team  leader/deputy  team  leader)  should  have  post-graduate  degrees  preferably  in 
ecology/environmental sciences or agronomy related field, or ecosystems services/approach and 
with specialization in environmental protection in agricultural sector and a minimum 15 years of 
experience  in  designing,  research  and development,  and technical  extension  in the  PRC.  The 
specialist will apply innovative approaches and concepts pertaining to non-point source pollution 
management,  including  agro-chemical  management.  The  specialists  will  have  the  overall 
responsibility for the quality of the Scheme outputs and coordinating with government agencies 
and other specialists in the team. Specifically, the specialists will (i) prepare and coordinate the 
implementation of the workplan; (ii) assess tea farming and the potentiality of non-point source 
pollution reduction and, to identify the possible technical measures and practices for TN, TP and 
pesticides  control;  (iii)  organize  to  develop  ecological  tea  farm  standard  with  indicators  and 
criteria; (iv) pilot implementation of the proposed scheme; (v) prepare the final Green Incentive 
Fund  for  tea  farming  in  Huangshan;  and  (vi)  coordinate  the  overall  scheme  design  with 
governments, tear farmers, tea enterprises and collaboration with team members.  
25. 
Eco-compensation  Specialist  (National  5  person-months)  and  Environmental 
Economist specialist (National 3 person-months): The specialists will have a master’s degree 
in environmental economics or relevant qualification and at least 10 years of work experience in 
eco-compensation management or related fields, and be familiar with regulation and policies in 
agricultural  sector  in  PRC.  The  specialists  will  (i)  analyze  the  international  and  national 
experiences on eco-compensation designing and implementation; (ii) conduct economic analysis 
for  tea  farming  in  Huangshan;  (iii)  establishment  the  rewarding  and  compensation  delivery 
mechanism for tea farm and incentive to change the farming behavior; (iv) pilot implementation 
of the Green Incentive Fund and revise the scheme concerning of the lessons/findings from the 
pilot implementation; and (v) join the field visit, interview and meetings if necessary.  
26. 
Tea  specialist  (National  5  person-months)  organic/nature-based  background:  The 
specialists will have a graduate degree in tea, or a relevant discipline; and at least 10 years of 
work experience in tea production and processing in Huangshan region. The specialists will: (i) 
develop  green  farming  technologies  and  measures  package  in  ecological  tea  farm  in  line  with 
local  conditions.  The  technologies  and  measures  include  but  are  not  limited  to  agronomic, 
biological,  physical,  chemical,  and  engineering  practices  which  help  to  reduce  agro-chemical 
application and the discharge of TN, TP and pesticides; (ii) provide support for the ecological tea 
farm  standard  development,  certification  scheme  and  rewarding  and  compensation  delivery 
mechanism; and (iii) join the field visit, interview and meetings if necessary. 
27. 
Soil and fertilization specialist (National 5 person-months): The specialists will have 
a graduate  degree  in  soil  and plant  nutrition  sciences,  or  a  relevant  discipline;  and  at  least  10 
years of work experience in soil test and fertilization for tea on research, technical extension and 
management. The specialists will: (i) develop STFF and other appropriate fertilization scheme, 
96 
which  maintain  the  tea  yield  and  reduce  the  total  N  and  P  fertilizer  inputs;  (ii)  develop  the 
measuring and quantification method for TN and TP reduction as non-point source pollution from 
tea farming; (iii) provide support for the ecological tea farm standard development, certification 
scheme  and  rewarding  and  compensation  delivery  mechanism;  and  (iv)  join  the  field  visit, 
interview and meetings if necessary.  
28. 
Plant  protection  specialist  (National  5  person-months):  The  specialists  will  have  a 
graduate  degree  in  plant  protection  sciences,  or a  relevant  discipline;  and at  least  10  years  of 
work  experience  in  pest  and  insect  control,  pesticides  application  in  Huangshan  region.  The 
specialists will: (i) develop IPM and other appropriate pest control scheme, which maintain the 
tea  yield  and  reduce  the  total  pesticides  inputs;  (ii)  develop  the  measuring  and  quantification 
method  for  pesticides  reduction  as  non-point  source  pollution  from  tea  farming;  (iii)  provide 
support  for  the  ecological  tea  farm  standard  development,  certification scheme  and rewarding 
and  compensation  delivery  mechanism;  and  (iv)  join  the  field  visit,  interview  and  meetings  if 
necessary. 
Agricultural  certification specialist  (National  5  person-months):  The specialists  will 
29. 
have a graduate degree in quality management, or a relevant discipline; and at least 10 years of 
work  experience  in  quality  management  system,  organic  agricultural  certification  or  good 
agricultural  practice.  The  specialists  will:  (i)  develop  ecological  tea  farm  certification  scheme, 
including the institution, inspection and certification rules and protocol; (ii) provide support for the 
ecological tea farm standard development, certification scheme and rewarding and compensation 
delivery mechanism; and (iii) join the field visit, interview and meetings if necessary. 
Social  and  institution  arrangement  specialist  (National  3  person-months):  The 
30. 
specialists will have a graduate degree in social sciences, agricultural technical extension or a 
relevant  discipline;  and  at  least  10  years  of  work  experience  in  rural  development,  poverty 
alleviation and ecological protection using participatory approach. The specialists will: (i) conduct 
social  survey  and  work  with  economics  specialist  on  the  development  of  rewarding  and 
compensation  delivery  mechanism;  (ii)  provide  support  for  the  ecological  tea  farm  standard 
development,  certification  scheme  and rewarding  and  compensation  delivery  mechanism;  and 
(iii) join the field visit, interview and meetings if necessary. 
G. 
Budget 
31. 
The budget for the Green Incentive Fund design is CNY 3 million. The costs will cover 1) 
Remuneration for  consultant, about  CNY  1.78  million;  2)  Rewarding  and compensation for the 
pilot for 600 mu in 2 villages 0.3 million (at CNY500/mu per year); 3) Tea, soil and water sampling 
and analysis, CNY 0.25 million; 4) Traveling cost, CNY 0.1 million; 5) Training, meeting, and other 
contingency: CNY 0.57 million. 
97 
Indicative Terms of Reference for  
4C-1 Project Implementation Supporting Consulting Services 
A.  Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Huangshan is a famous tourist destination in the PRC, largely due to scenic 
values.  The  Xin’an  River  originates  in  Huangshan  Municipality  and  flows  eastward  through 
Zhejiang Province. Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, 
and the growth of tourism are increasing the environmental pressures in the Xin’an River Basin.  
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
2. 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness. 
3. 
This document sets out the terms of reference for consulting services needed to ensure 
the smooth implementation of the project. The executing agency for the project is the Huangshan 
Municipal  Government  (HMG).  The  direct  client  for  the  consulting  services  is  the  Huangshan 
Municipal  project  management  office  (HPMO)  established  in  the  Huangshan  Municipal 
Development and Reform Commission (HDRC). 
B. 
Overall Scope of Work 
4. 
The  consultants  will  provide  the  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  with  project 
management  support,  including  support  for  project  performance  management,  design  review, 
procurement  and  contract  management,  construction  management,  environmental  and  social 
safeguards implementation, and financial management. 
C. 
Implementation Arrangements 
5. 
The consulting services for project implementation support will be carried out by a team 
of consultants through a firm. A total of 30 person-months of international and 144 person-months 
of national consulting services will be required. The consulting services will be financed by the 
Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the consultants will be recruited by the HPMO according to 
Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB  Borrowers  -  Goods,  Works,  Non-consulting  and  Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time).34 The consulting firm will be selected by (i) inviting 
full technical proposals; and (ii) using the quality- and cost-based selection (QCBS) method, with 
a quality–cost weighting ratio of 80:20. The consulting services are expected to start in July 1, 
2020 and finish in June 30, 2026.  
D. 
Reporting Requirements 
6. 
The  consultant  team  will  produce  (i)  an  inception  report  within  4  weeks  after 
commencement of the consulting services, (ii) a semiannual report by July 15 of each year; (ii) an 
annual report by January 15 of each year, (iii) draft final report six months before project closure, 
34 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
98 
and (iii) a final report at the end of the consulting services. The  inception, semiannual, annual, 
and draft final reports will be subject to tripartite reviews by ADB, the HPMO, and the consultants. 
All reports are to be written in English and translated into Chinese. One soft and two printed copies 
of each report are to be submitted to ADB (English version only) and the HPMO (both Chinese 
and English versions). 
7. 
The inception report will present an approach for the consulting services, including a work 
plan and an implementation schedule. The semiannual, annual, draft final, and final reports will 
present  activities  conducted  by  the  consultants,  effects  of  the  consulting  services,  issues 
encountered, and recommendations to improve project management. 
E. 
Other Requirements 
8. 
The consultant team will provide a fully qualified interpreter to work with the consultants 
on a full-time basis and support the ADB missions. The consultant will help PMO to prepare the 
procedures for operation of the Green Incentive Fund: (i) include in the guidance manual for Green 
Incentive  Fund  a  list  of  safeguard  measures  to  ensure  compliance  with  PRC  and  ADB 
requirements for environmental and social safeguards. This will include: (a) clear description of 
the  types  of  activities  the  fund  will  and  will  not  support  (i.e.  exclusion  of  category  A  or  B  on 
environment,  involuntary  resettlement  and  indigenous  peoples);  (b)  the  project  assurance  on 
safeguards for the Green Incentive Fund, including that no activities involving category A or B on 
environment,  involuntary  resettlement  and  indigenous  peoples  will  be  supported  under  the 
incentive fund.  
F. 
Scope of Services 
9. 
For each of the international and national consultant positions, (i) possession of a related 
degree, qualification, and/or memberships of related academic societies; and/or past participation 
in related training courses; (ii) experience in similar positions for loan, grant, or TA projects; and 
(iii) experience in implementing projects in the People’s Republic of China (PRC); are required.  
a. 
Project Management Specialist and Team Leader (International, 24 person-months) 
10. 
The specialist will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
coordinate all project management support activities as team leader;  
finalize the approach for project management support;  
prepare the inception, semiannual, annual, draft final, and final reports;  
assist  the  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  in  preparing,  implementing, 
monitoring, and evaluating the overall project and subprojects; 
assist  the  HPMO  in  preparing  the  project  progress  reports  in  a  format  provided  by 
ADB;  
assess  the  need  for  capacity  development  of  the  staff  of  the  HPMO  and  the 
implementing  agencies;  and  plan,  design,  organize,  and  implement  seminars, 
financial 
tours 
workshops, 
management,  disbursement  arrangements, 
implementation,  monitoring,  and 
evaluation  of  resettlement,  gender  development,  and  environmental  management, 
and project monitoring and evaluation; 
assist the HPMO in preparing a project completion report on the execution and initial 
operation of the project, including its cost, the performance of HMG of its obligations 
under the project agreement, and the accomplishment of the purposes of the project;  
for  project  management, 
training,  and/or  study 
99 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
undertake design reviews for rural wastewater projects and sewers and stormwater 
management projects; 
develop  bidding  documents  with  design  institutes  for  civil  works  and  goods  supply 
contracts; 
conduct quality assurance and review of payment certificates for quality and payment 
controls for PMO managed contracts; 
(xi)  monitor compliance with the loan covenants, assess key implementation issues, and 
(xii) 
make recommendations for improvement; and  
conduct any other necessary work for smooth and appropriate implementation of the 
project.  
b. 
Construction Management Specialist and Deputy Team Leader (National, 48 person-
months) 
11. 
The specialist will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
assist the team leader in developing comprehensive project implementation plans and 
procedures for monitoring and controlling overall project and activities; 
conduct  technical  review  and  provide  expert  comments  on  engineering  detailed 
design in accordance with the design codes and standards; 
conduct  routine  site  visits  and  provide  technical  inputs  to  construction  planning, 
supervision and monitoring for quality control of the subproject construction; 
collect  all  necessary  information  and  prepare  the  reports  required  under  loan  and 
project covenants; 
undertake design reviews for rural wastewater projects and sewers and stormwater 
management projects; 
develop  bidding  documents  with  design  institutes  for  civil  works  and  goods  supply 
contracts; 
conduct quality assurance and review of payment certificates for quality and payment 
controls for IAs’ managed contracts; 
identify detailed capacity development needs for sustainable infrastructure services 
and governance; 
conduct evaluation of construction work and project implementation upon completion 
of  the  sub-projects  and  the  project  as  whole,  stressing  on  quality  control  and  cost 
control in particular; 
assist  IAs  in  conducting  the  analysis  and  experience  reviewing,  and  in  capacity 
strengthening in quality control and cost control. 
Undertake project completion report. 
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
c. 
 Procurement and Contract Management Specialist (National, 24 person-months) 
12. 
The specialists will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
review  the  procurement  plan;  and  after  consultation  with  the  HPMO  and  the  IAs, 
revise as needed;  
set schedule for obtaining technical specifications from the design institute;  
review of business sections in the bidding documents; 
review of bid evaluation reports;   
coordinate with the national procurement agency (hired by the HPMO);  
100 
(vi)  monitor the HPMO’s procurement activities under the project, and assist the HPMO 
in preparing, updating, and implementing the procurement plan; 
conducting  contract  management  during  the  project  implementation,  including 
monitoring  construction  progress,  preparing  progress  reports,  reviewing 
the 
contractor’s  claims  for  payments,  coordinating  project  implementation  among 
contractors and various stakeholders, and coordinating daily operational tasks; 
providing expert inputs, review and justification for contract variation and preparing 
necessary  documentations 
the  Government  and  ADB 
in  accordance  with 
requirements, if necessary; 
capacity development (including training of trainers, etc.) in procurement and contract 
management  with the  long-term  objective  of  institutionalizing  a  strong  procurement 
and contract management function within the EA/HPMO; and  
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
d. 
Wastewater  and  Water  Specialist  (International,  4  person-month;  National,  8 
person-months) 
13. 
The specialists will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
review wastewater and water related technical sections in the design documents; 
review  technical  specifications  and  BOQ  in  the  bidding  documents  in  aspect  of 
wastewater and water design; 
assist  the  Design  Institute  in  optimizing  the  design  documents  of  wastewater  and 
water sectors to ensure high design quality and investment control; 
participate in bid evaluation, if necessary; 
review of the contractor's construction program and provision of technical support for 
on-site construction technology; 
provide  training  on  water  supply,  wastewater  management,  and  other  related 
knowledge, if needed; and 
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
e. 
Green  Agriculture  Specialist  (International,  4  person-month;  National,  10  person-
months) 
14. 
The specialists will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
review green agriculture related technical sections in the design documents; 
review technical specifications and BOQ in the bidding documents in aspect of green 
agriculture design; 
assist the Design Institute in optimizing the design documents of green agriculture to 
ensure high design quality and investment control; 
participate in bid evaluation, if necessary; 
review  the  technical  standard  of  green  production  in  tea  gardens  and  assist  in 
completion of the technical standard; 
review the design of green tea production certification system and provide comments 
for improvement; 
assist in the experience dissemination of green tea production;  
provide  training  on  green  agriculture  application  and  other  related  knowledge,  if 
needed; and 
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
101 
f. 
Eco-Compensation Specialist (International, 4 person-month; National, 10 person-
months) 
15. 
The specialists will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
review international eco-compensation schemes to abstract useful experience for the 
project design;  
review the eco-compensation design and provide suggestions for improvement of its 
feasibility and sustainability; 
work  with  the Green  Agriculture  Specialist  to  ensure the  quality  of  Green  Incentive 
Fund designed under the project;  
provide training on eco-compensation and other related knowledge, if needed; and 
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
g. 
 ICT Specialist (International, 3 person-month; National, 10 person-months) 
16. 
The specialists will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
review ICT technical sections in the design documents; 
review technical specifications and BOQ in the bidding documents in aspect of ICT 
design; 
assist  the  Design  Institute  in  optimizing  the  ICT  design  documents  to  ensure  high 
design quality and investment control; 
participate in bid evaluation, if necessary; 
assist in debugging of MIS systems, if necessary;  
provide training on ICT application and other related knowledge, if needed; and 
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
h. 
Environmental Specialist (National, 12 person-months) 
17. 
The specialists will:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
assist the HMG and the IAs to implement the project environmental management plan 
(EMP); 
assist the HPMO and the executing agency to supervise contractors to ensure that 
all activities comply with the domestic laws and regulations, the EMP, and the ADB 
Safeguard Policies Statement (2009) 
assist the HPMO and the executing agency in monitoring environmental processes 
by collecting and updating basic data, and work closely with the HPMO, the executing 
agency and external environmental monitoring agencies. 
review  the  external  monitoring  and  evaluation  report  prepared  by  the  external 
environmental monitoring agency and ADB's comments on the report;  
assist  the  HPMO  in  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the  EMP,  evaluate  key 
implementation issues, develop remedial measures, and take follow-up actions; 
provide  support  to  assess  capacity  development  needs;  as  well  as  plan,  design, 
organize  and  implement  workshops,  symposia,  training  and/or  study  activities  in 
project implementation and environmental monitoring and evaluation; 
provide assistance to the project management specialist to prepare inception report, 
semiannual reports, annual reports, draft final report and final report; and 
undertake other necessary tasks assigned by the team leader. 
102 
i. 
Resettlement Specialist (National, 10 person-months) 
18. 
The specialist will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
assist the HPMO, the implementing agencies, and the design institutes in updating 
the  resettlement  plan  approved  by  ADB,  following  the  ADB  formats  based  on  the 
detailed designs; disclosing it to the affected persons prior to ADB’s approval; and 
obtaining ADB’s approval;  
assist HMG and the implementing agencies in implementing the land acquisition and 
resettlement in accordance with the resettlement plan,  
assist  the  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  in  supervising  the  contractors  to 
ensure their compliance  with the requirements  of the resettlement  plan, applicable 
laws and regulations, and ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);  
assist  the  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  in  supervising  the  processes  of 
resettlement by collecting and updating basic data; and closely coordinating between 
the HPMO, the implementing agencies, and an external resettlement monitor;  
review the external monitoring and evaluation (M&E) reports prepared by the external 
resettlement monitoring agency and ADB’s comments on the reports;  
assist the HPMO in monitoring the compliance with the resettlement plan, assessing 
the key implementation issues, formulating remedial measures, and conducting the 
follow-up actions;  
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  for  assessing  the  needs  for 
capacity  development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and  implementing 
seminars, workshops, training, and/or study tours for the implementation and M&E of 
the resettlement;  
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  for  preparing  the  inception, 
semiannual, annual, draft final, and final reports; and 
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
j. 
Social Development Specialist (National, 6 person-months) 
19. 
The specialist will 
(i) 
(ii) 
assist HMG and the implementing agencies in implementing the social development 
action  plan  (SDAP),  and  the  gender  action  plan  (GAP)  prepared  during  project 
preparation;  
assist  the  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  in  supervising  the  contractors  to 
ensure compliance with requirements of the GAP and the SDAP; and applicable laws 
and regulations;  
(iv) 
(iii)  monitor the compliance with the GAP and the SDAP; assess the degree of impacts 
and  key  implementation  issues;  explain  key  issues  to  the  HPMO  and  the 
implementing  agencies;  and  assist  them  in  conducting  the  follow-up  actions  to 
address the key issues;  
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  for  assessing  the  needs  for 
capacity  development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and  implementing 
seminars, workshops, training, and/or study tours for the implementation and M&E of 
the GAP and the SDAP;  
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  for  preparing  the  inception, 
semiannual, annual, draft final, and final reports; and  
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
(vi) 
(v) 
103 
k. 
Financial Management Specialist (National, 6 person-months) 
20. 
The specialist will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
review  background  documents,  including  the  financial  analysis  of  the  project 
undertaken during project preparation;  
assist  the  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  in  preparing  and  implementing  a 
financial management system;  
assist  the  HPMO  and  the  implementing  agencies  in  preparing  the  withdrawal 
applications and improving the efficiency by streamlining the preparation of withdrawal 
applications;  
conduct financial analysis at the midterm of project implementation, and at physical 
completion of the project, including financial sustainability analysis to assess the fiscal 
sustainability debt repayment capacity of HMG as a whole;  
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  for  assessing  the  needs  for 
capacity  development;  and  planning,  designing,  organizing,  and  implementing 
seminars, workshops, training, and/or study tours for financial analysis, as necessary;  
undertake accounting oversight, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, audit 
planning;  
support the capacity building of financial and accounting staff;  
provide  support  to  the  project  management  specialist  for  preparing  the  inception, 
semiannual, annual, draft final, and final reports; and  
undertake any other necessary work assigned by the team leader. 
The consultant team will also be responsible for undertaking the external environmental 
21. 
monitoring and evaluation to ensure that the project will be implemented in conformity with the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  laws  and  regulations  and  the  Asian  Development  Bank’s 
(ADB’s) Safeguard Policy Statement (2009) requirements on environmental management. The 
estimated budget for external environmental monitoring is 2.57 million CNY.  
22. 
In general, the scope for external environmental monitoring and evaluation includes: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Conduct  independent  review  on  the  performance  of  environmental  management 
under the ADB loan project, identify issues and propose corrective actions; 
Conduct monitoring on the environmental compliance and document findings of the 
monitoring result; at least conduct field survey four times each year. 
Review the EMP compliance and EMP monitoring (sampling and analyzing) reports; 
Identified adverse environmental impacts during implementation, if any, compare with 
predicted  impacts,  assess  the  effectiveness  of  mitigation  measures,  and  propose 
remedial or corrective measures if necessary; 
Review public consultation conducted and GRM handling, if any;  
Provide reporting to HPMO with acceptable format and quality; and 
To recommend corrective actions to address environmental compliance as needed. 
104 
A.  Background 
Indicative Terms of Reference for  
4C-2 Training for Capacity Strengthening 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness.  
This document sets out the tentative terms of reference (TOR) for the consulting services 
3. 
to strengthen the capacity of project agencies in rural wastewater management, green agriculture 
application  and  management,  eco-compensation  implementation,  and  green  investment  fund 
operation. The executing agency for the project is the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). 
The  direct  client  for  the  consulting  services  is  the  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management 
office (HPMO) established in the Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission 
(HDRC). 
B. 
The Objectives and Overall Scope of Services 
4. 
HMG has set up its sustainable economic development objectives in implementation of 
ecological protection, green development, and rural vitalization strategies. To reduce both point 
and non-point source pollutions within Xin’an River Basin and promote green development, a total 
of 84 onsite wastewater treatment facilities will be constructed in 121 villages for rural wastewater 
treatment, and a Green Incentive Fund for tea farming and a Green Investment Fund focusing on 
investment of green development sector will be established in Huangshan Municipality under the 
project. The training program for capacity strengthening is to provide capacity building support to 
HPMO  and  implementing  agencies  in  7  districts/counties  through  organization  of  national  and 
international  study  tours.  International  successful  experience  of  eco-compensation  and  green 
investment  fund  implementation  and  national  successful  experience  of  rural  wastewater 
management and green agriculture application will be introduced to the client. 
C. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The  consulting  service  will  be  carried  out  by  a  team  of  consultants  through  a  firm.  A 
5. 
minimum of 2 person-months of international and 4 person-months of national training specialists 
will be required. The consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), 
and the consulting firm will be recruited by HPMO according to Procurement Regulations for ADB 
Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from time 
105 
to time).35 The consulting firm will be selected by (i) inviting simple technical proposals; and (ii) 
using the quality- and cost-based selection (QCBS) method, with a quality–cost weighting ratio of 
90:10. The consulting services are expected to start in October 1, 2020 and finish in June 30, 
2026.  
D. 
Reporting Requirements 
6. 
The consultant team will produce (i) an inception report within 4 weeks after mobilization; 
(ii) a study tour report 2 weeks after each tour; (iii) a final report at the completion of the consulting 
service. The inception, study tour, and final reports will be subject to reviews by ADB and HPMO. 
The comments received from ADB and HPMO should be incorporated and addressed in the final 
report. All reports are to be written in English and in Chinese. 
7. 
The detail outputs will include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
On-the-job  training  for  eco-compensation  implementation,  green  investment  fund 
operation, rural wastewater management and green agriculture promotion;  
Two international study tours: mainly for eco-compensation implementation and green 
investment fund operation experiences (5 days each tour); 
Four national study tours: mainly for rural wastewater treatment and green agriculture 
application experiences (4 days each tour). 
8.  The  training  tours  and  on-the-job  training  will  be  led  by  the  training  specialists  to  develop 
detailed training plans, identify trainees and trainers, coordinate with various organizations for 
visits,  organize  and  facilitate  the  training  activities,  review  of  training  contents,  and  assess 
training outputs and outcomes. The training targets will provide various trainings for about 500 
staff of EA/IAs. The training costs of the capacity strengthening are estimated USD250,000. 
The total budget of the capacity strengthening would be USD350,000.    
E. 
Key Expertise Required 
9. 
The proposing entities will determine the number and the nature of experts which they will 
require  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  the  consulting  service  in  accordance  with  their  proposed 
approach and  methodology.  However,  ADB  requires a minimum  of  one international  specialist 
and one national specialist.  
Training  Specialist  (international,  2  person-months).  The  specialist  shall  have 
10. 
graduate  degree  or  above  and  over  10  years  of  experience  in  green  economic  development. 
Experience in eco-compensation or green investment fund operation would be preferred. Specific 
tasks will include the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
assess the capacity development demand of project agencies; 
provide  on-the-job  training  for  project  agencies  on  eco-compensation  and  green 
investment fund implementation;  
based on the project needs and best knowledge, identify destinations for international 
study tours;  
develop study tour agenda and submit to HMPO for approval; 
liaise with foreign agencies for organization of the international study tours; 
35 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
106 
(vi) 
(vii) 
work as the facilitator to participate the international study tours;  
prepare inception report, study tour report and final report, and submit to HMPO and 
ADB for approval.  
Training  Specialist  (national,  4  person-months).  The  specialist  shall  have  graduate 
11. 
degree or above and over 8 years of experience in green agriculture. He/she shall be familiar with 
existing green agriculture practices in China. Specific tasks will include the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
assess the capacity development demand of project agencies; 
provide on-the-job training for project agencies on green agriculture promotion; 
based on the project needs and best knowledge, identify destinations for national study 
tours  for  learning  successful  experience  of  green  agriculture  promotion  and 
management;  
develop study tour agenda and submit to HMPO for approval; 
liaise with local agencies for organization of the study tours; 
work as a facilitator to participate the national study tours;  
prepare inception report, study tour report and final report, and submit to HMPO and 
ADB for approval.  
107 
Indicative Terms of Reference for Package 
 4C-3 Construction Supervision Consulting Services 
A.  Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Huangshan is a famous tourist destination in the PRC, largely due to scenic 
values.  The  Xin’an  River  originates  in  Huangshan  Municipality  and  flows  eastward  through 
Zhejiang Province. Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, 
and the growth of tourism are increasing the environmental pressures in the Xin’an River Basin.  
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
2. 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness. 
3. 
This  document  sets  out  the  terms  of  reference  for  construction  supervision  consulting 
services needed to ensure the construction quality, progress and cost well controlled to achieve 
the contractual goals. The implementation agencies for the project is County/District Government. 
The  direct  clients  for  the  consulting  services  are  the  IAs’  project  management  office  (PMO) 
established at each county/district governments. 
B. 
Objective of the Service 
4. 
The  consulting  services  for  construction  supervision  will  be  carried  out  by  a  team  of 
consultants through a firm. A total of 588 person-months of national consulting services will be 
required. The consultants will (i) provide the IAs with the construction supervision of civil works in 
accordance  with  the  regulations  and  construction  contracts;  (ii)  assist  the  client  in  day-to-day 
execution  of  the  project;  and  (iii)  assist  in  monitoring  social  and  environmental  indicators.  The 
consultants  will  act  as  the  Project  Supervisor  defined  in  the  conditions  of  the  contract.  The 
standard Ministry of Finance (MOF) contract version 2015 is enclosed with the TOR for further 
reference  to  the  roles  of  the  construction  supervision  Engineer.  The  consulting  services  are 
expected to start in July 1, 2020 and finish in July 1, 2026. 
C. 
5. 
Scope of Service 
The Construction Supervision Consultant will: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
administrate civil works contracts signed between the Client and Contractor(s) to play 
the role of “the Project Supervisor” as specified in the civil works contracts; 
check and ensure conformance of all bank guarantees of the Contractor with contract 
conditions and track their validity by notifying the Client two months before expiration 
and  request  the  Contractors  to  extend/update  guarantees  if  necessary,  as  per  the 
contract; 
be responsible for checking and acceptance of insurance policies of contractors, as 
well as control of terms of such policies and ensuring their full coverage as per the 
contract; 
108 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
ensure  that  all  works  comply  with the  approved  engineering  designs  and  technical 
specifications,  agreed  schedule  and  contract  price,  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
contracts, standard engineering practice, and ADB’s safeguards policies; 
manage and issue instructions to contractors; 
supervise  and  monitor  implementation  of  the  Environmental  Management  Plan  by 
contractors; 
(vii)  monitor implementation of the land acquisition and resettlement (LARP);  
(viii)  make engineering decisions in consultation with the Client; and 
(ix) 
advise the Client on work progress, quality control, and implementation issues, if any. 
D. 
Reporting Requirements 
The  consultant  team  will  produce  (i)  an  inception  report  within  30  days  after 
6. 
commencement  of  the  consulting  services;  (ii)  the  Construction  Supervision  Contracts 
Administration Manual within 60 days after contract commencement; (iii) monthly progress reports 
by the 7th day of the following month; (iv) a final report at the end of the consulting services; and 
(v) other construction supervision related reports as required by the Client. All reports are to be 
written  in  Chinese.  One  soft  and  two  printed  copies  of  each  report  are  to  be  submitted  to the 
PMOs at district/county level. 
E. 
Qualification and Tasks 
7. 
For  each  of  the  national  consultant  positions,  (i)  possession  of  a  related  degree, 
qualification,  and/or  memberships  of  related  academic  societies;  and/or  past  participation  in 
related training courses; (ii) experience in similar positions for loan, grant, or TA projects; and (iii) 
experience in implementing projects in the People’s Republic of China (PRC); are required. Main 
tasks to be completed by each team member are listed as follows:  
8. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
Project Manager/Chief Supervision Engineer (60 person-months) 
lead  the  review  of  the  detailed  engineering  design,  including  technical  specifications 
(including bill of quantities), drawings, and construction methods. Propose modifications, 
if necessary; 
review and approve contractor’s work program, implementation schedule, methodology, 
and safety plan, and supervise the progress of construction works. Inform the Client of any 
delay or potential delays in the work schedule of the contract, and take necessary actions 
to prevent potential delays; 
issue notice-to-proceed to contractors for sections that have complied with the applicable 
provisions of the environment management plan (EMP); 
issue  notices  to  the  contractor  on  any  non-compliance  with  environmental  mitigation 
measures, as set out in the contract documents; 
issue  notices  to  contractors  for  defects  or  deficiencies,  and  issue  instruction  for  the 
removal or notify on improper performance of the works; 
review, approve within his competency, and issue variation orders (scope, cost, materials, 
time); 
inspect project sites for work progress and quality; 
certify payments for the works against the relevant bill of quantities and issue the interim 
payment certificates, the final payment certificate and other certificates, including delivery-
acceptance certificates, as required under the civil works contract; 
coordinate  and  supervise  the  work  of  field  teams  in  supervising  and  approval  of 
construction following contract conditions; 
109 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
9. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
inspect jointly with Client the completed works and assist in formal taking over and review 
and  approve  or  prepare  as-built  drawings  and  plans  and  provide  reports  confirming 
satisfactory completion of the contracts; 
inspect the completed work periodically during the defect liability period within the terms 
covering the consultant’s agreement, prepare lists of deficiencies (if any), and carry out 
supervision  of  the  remedial  works,  and  issue  defects  liability  certificates  after  the 
rectification of the notified defects by the contractors; and 
advise  the  Client  with  the  day-to-day  coordination  and  supervision  of  civil  works 
construction,  including  implementation  status  and  issues,  and  preparation  of  regular 
progress reports. 
Deputy Project Manager/Technical Manager (2 positions, 60 person-months each) 
review  and  evaluate  detailed  designs  of  sewerage  system,  rural  wastewater  treatment 
facilities and all ancillary structures, and recommend improvements; 
review  and  evaluate  the  hydrological  and  geotechnical  reports  and  data  and  make 
appropriate technical recommendations;  
periodical  supervision  of  sewerage  system  and  rural  wastewater  treatment  facilities 
construction; 
recommend  for  approval  of  the  shop  drawings  for  all  structural  works  submitted  by  the 
Contractor; 
monitor contactors’ work performance against technical specifications and schedules; 
discuss  with  the  PM  and  the  client  on  any  sewerage  system  and  rural  wastewater 
treatment facilities design/construction issues and recommend technical solutions/options; 
inspect  material  specifications  and  the  actual  material  at  the  site  for  placement  and 
workmanship  during  implementation  to  ensure  conformity  with  plans  and  technical 
standards; and 
assist the Team Leader in all matters related to the implementation of the project scope, 
as required. 
10. 
Quantity Surveyors (2 positions, 36 person-months each) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
review the bill of quantities against the technical specifications provided by the Client, and 
recommend modifications, if required; 
control  and  measure  the  quantity  of  materials  and  workers  at  the  construction  site  to 
minimize the amount of materials used, and make sure that the construction costs stay 
within budget; 
review  contractors’  interim  and  final  payment  certificates,  and  check  quantities  billed 
against measurements; 
prepare change orders and variation orders as required; 
prepare and maintain quantity books, and up-to-date rates-list for materials and works; 
prepare and manage monthly financial reports; 
prepare  disbursement  schedule  and  maintain  progress  schedules  and  cash  flow  chart; 
and 
(viii)  maintain current as-built drawings as the work progresses. 
11. 
Quality Engineers (2 positions, 36 person-months each) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
carry out day-to-day supervision of the Contractor’s Quality Assurance system; 
supervise and monitor the contractor’s testing on a day-to-day basis; 
verify whether the works and materials on site comply with material specifications;  
110 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
supervise  the  contractor’s  work,  and  certify  that  the  completed  work  complies  with  the 
contract; 
approve construction materials and sources of supply; 
approve material testing methods; 
recommend acceptance/rejection of the completed works and works in progress to the PM. 
12. 
Environmental, Health and Safety Engineers (24 person-months) 
(i) 
(ii) 
set-up  internal  monitoring  system  on  the  project’s  environmental  issues  and  project 
requirements; 
coordinate  with  relevant  parties,  including  civil  society  organizations,  on  environment 
requirements of the project; 
closely monitor project sites against any unexpected environmental impacts; 
(iii) 
(iv)  monitor contractors' compliance with EMP; and 
(v) 
advise  the  Client  on  environment  problems  and/or  requirements  and  recommend 
mitigating measures. 
13. 
Site supervision engineers (junior) (4 positions, 60 person-months each) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
carry  put  daily  site  inspections  to  ensure  compliance  of  the  works,  procedures  and 
materials with approved work plans, specifications, and contract provisions; 
monitor contractors' work and certify that construction follow contract conditions;  
prepare daily logs, photographs, reports, and maintain records of as-built drawings, item 
quantity  files,  material  testing  results,  inspections  made,  tests  performed,  and  work 
executed; 
prepare and implement on-site procedures for quality assurance and quality control and 
safety; 
prepare and submit daily reports to the PM/DPM; and  
carry out any other tasks assigned by the PM/DPM. 
111 
Indicative Terms of Reference for 
4C-4 External Social and Resettlement Monitoring 
A.  Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Huangshan is a famous tourist destination in the PRC, largely due to scenic 
values.  The  Xin’an  River  originates  in  Huangshan  Municipality  and  flows  eastward  through 
Zhejiang Province. Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, 
and the growth of tourism are increasing the environmental pressures in the Xin’an River Basin.  
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
2. 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness. 
3. 
This document is the indicative terms of reference for an external resettlement and social 
monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  agency  to  ensure  that  the  project  will  be  implemented  in 
conformity  with  the  People’s  Republic  of  China’s  (PRC)  laws  and  regulations  and  the  Asian 
Development  Bank’s  (ADB’s)  Safeguard  Policy  Statement  (2009)  requirements  on  involuntary 
resettlement  and  policies  on  social  and  gender  aspects.  The  direct  client  for  the  consulting 
services  is  the  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office  (PMO)  established  in  the 
Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC).  
B. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The  external  resettlement  and  social  M&E  will  be  carried  out  by  a  team  of  specialists 
4. 
through a competent external monitoring agency (EMA). The M&E will be financed by ADB, and 
the team of specialists will be recruited by the PMO according to ADB’s Procurement Policy (2017, 
as  amended  from  time  to  time)  and  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB  Borrowers  (2017,  as 
amended from time to time). through consultants’ qualifications selection. The PMO and IAs will 
provide assistance to the EMA, particularly in the aspects of field survey, staffing, and logistics.   
C. 
Reporting Requirements 
5. 
The EMA will submit to ADB and PMO semiannual external resettlement and social M&E 
reports during the implementation of social safeguards and social dimensions for the project (for 
each report, a soft copy of the English version to ADB and soft copies of the English and Chinese 
versions to each  of the PMO  and  IAs),  not  later  than 30  days  after the completion of  the  field 
investigations.  
6. 
 The  EMA  will  take  full  responsibility  on  the  content  and  quality  of  the  reports;  and  if 
necessary,  must  revise  reports  based  on  the  comments  of  ADB.  Format  of  the  reports  will  be 
proposed by the EMA in the technical proposal. The EMA may seek guidance from ADB’s relevant 
sourcebooks and from examples of reports on ADB website. 
D. 
7. 
Scope of External Monitoring and Evaluation  
The EMA will externally monitor the implementation of the resettlement plan as well as 
112 
GAP and SDAP; and report findings semiannually during the implementation of relevant social 
safeguard plans. The EMA will establish an M&E team. The main duties of the team are to (i) 
carry  out  the  M&E  on  the  implementation  of  the  RP,  GAP  and  SDAP  to  ensure  they  are 
implemented and complied with; (ii) advise PMO and IAs on the implementation of the RP, GAP 
and SDAP to ensure policies and procedures are complied with; and (iii) provide information and 
data, monitoring results, and observations that the team leader will aggregate into the external 
M&E reports.   
E.  
Specific Tasks of External Monitoring and Evaluation 
8. 
The main tasks to be undertaken by EMA are described but not limited to the following: 
E1: M&E of RP Implementation- Specific Tasks  
9. 
The EMA will be engaged intermittently for the whole duration of RP implementation. The 
EMA  will  (i)  conduct  baseline  survey  (sex-disaggregated)  of  the  affected  persons  (APs)  and 
monitor  to  ensure  implementation  of  the  RP  in  compliance  with  ADB’s  safeguard  policies;  (ii) 
make specific and time-bound recommendations to resolve any issues or problems or potential 
issues or problems on implementation of RP, and advise to improve resettlement implementation 
to PMO and IAs,; (iii) pay special attention to vulnerable groups, including women and the poor 
to assess whether they have participated and fully regained or improved their standard of living; 
(iv) submit the external resettlement and social monitoring reports simultaneously to PMO and 
ADB with high-quality acceptable to ADB every 6 months during project implementation; and (v) 
prepare resettlement due diligent reports, if necessary.  
10. 
The details of work tasks are specified as follows: 
(i) Baseline survey - the Agency will conduct baseline survey on APs, to obtain production and 
living standards (life, production and income levels) of APs as baseline material. Production and 
living  standards  survey  conducted  to  track  changes  in  production  and  living  standards.  Using 
follow-up survey of a representative sample, random interviews and field observations and other 
methods shall be used to take the necessary relevant information.  
(ii)  Regular  monitoring  and  evaluation  -  During  the  implementation  of  the  RP,  the  EMA  will 
conduct  semiannual  monitoring  and  verification  on  resettlement,  through  on-site  observation, 
follow-up survey of sample households, focus group discussions and key informant interviews, 
etc., so as to monitor the following activities:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
timely payment of compensation;  
skill training;  
support for vulnerable groups;  
infrastructure and special facilities reconstruction;  
production, resettlement and recovery;  
compensation for loss of land;  
compensation for loss of property;  
schedule of these activities; 
resettlement organization networks;  
use of collective land compensation fees and resettlement earnings; and  
employment income growth.  
113 
(iii) Public consultation – The EMA will monitor and evaluate the public consultations carried 
out by the IAs and concerned organizations.  
(iv)  Grievance  redress  -  The  EMA  will  visit  the  affected  village  groups  periodically,  RP 
implementing agencies and village/community committees that accept grievances to assess how 
well  grievances  have  been  handled.  It  will  also  meet  complainants.  The  EMA  will  propose 
corrective measures and advice to the PMO for existing issues so as to make the resettlement 
process more effective. In addition, the EMA will verify the data and findings of internal monitoring 
reports.  
(v) Monitoring Indicators - Baseline survey, follow-up monitoring and completion evaluation will 
include but not limited to the following points:  
a) 
• 
For compliance of compensation payment and support provision 
In case of land-for-land compensation, whether the replaced land is equal in area 
and  location  as  well  as production,  living  conditions  compared  with  the affected 
land; in case of cash–for-affected land, whether the replacement cost principle is 
ensured. 
•  Whether  compensation  for  affected  structures  is  equal  to  materials  and  labor 
replacement  cost  according  to  standards and  specification of  the  work; whether 
reused  materials  are  not  deducted  or  discounted;  and  whether  assets  are 
depreciated based on age. 
•  Whether compensation for trees and/or crops takes into account market rates. 
•  Whether  compensation  is  fully  paid  to  affected  persons;  either  through  single 
installment or multiple installments.  
•  Whether  other  assistance  as  specified  in  the  resettlement  plan  is  provided  to 
affected persons, as required. 
b) 
For compliance of information disclosure and community consultation  
•  Whether  project  documents  (resettlement  information  booklet  and  relevant 
documents) are disseminated to communities.  
•  Whether information (results of detailed measurement survey, prices application, 
disbursement  of  payment)  is  promulgated  at  public  places,  and  whether  the 
process was effective. 
•  Whether the affected persons are fully consulted about issues of land recovery, 
policies  on  compensation,  resettlement,  livelihood  restoration,  and  access  to  a 
grievance redress mechanism. 
•  Whether the concerns and recommendations of the affected persons are resolved 
during the implementation of the resettlement plan; as well as the manner by which 
they have been addressed. 
c) 
For relocation plan and implementation (if any) 
•  Resettlement  methods,  participation  in  relocation  planning,  announcement  of 
relocation plan, and support to relocated households. 
d) 
For compliance of LAR implementation for the relocated affected persons (if any) 
•  Housing and living conditions in resettlement sites (such as road, domestic power, 
water  distribution  and/or  drainage  system);  and  restoration  of  community, 
education, and health services. 
•  Whether replacement housing was provided in a complete and timely manner. 
114 
•  Any issues related to transitional housing and/or period. 
•  Whether the new location has had any impact on the affected persons’ livelihoods. 
e) 
For compliance of income restoration and support to livelihood stabilization 
•  Whether support to income restoration is adequately provided, and efficiency of 
the income restoration support (e.g., training, credit assistance). 
•  How affected persons stabilize their life and production. 
•  Problems that affected persons are facing during the income restoration and life 
stabilization. 
•  Compensation and restoration of temporary land occupation.  
f) 
For compliance of the satisfaction of the affected persons  
•  Satisfaction of the determination of losses and compensation valuation. 
•  Satisfaction of compensation payment and other assistance. 
•  Satisfaction of information disclosure and consultation. 
•  Satisfaction on life stabilization and income restoration support activities.  
•  Satisfaction of resettlement site, relocation site, and completeness of facilities (if 
any). 
g) 
For compliance of grievance redress mechanism of the affected persons  
•  Degree  of  efficiency  of  the  grievance  redress  mechanism  (time,  efficiency  of 
resolution). 
•  Results of complaint resolution at various levels. 
•  Satisfaction of the grievance redress mechanism.  
E2: M&E of SDAP and GAP Implementation- Specific Tasks  
11.  Main tasks on SDAP and GAP monitoring are described but not limited to the following: 
(i) 
Liaise with the social focal persons at PMO and IAs, monitor the appointments of town 
level focal points, as well as monitor and evaluate the implementation of the SDAP and 
GAP and other social measures; 
(ii)  Monitor social and poverty alleviation measures and ensure social and poverty targets 
in the  project  planning  documents  are  achieved during  the  project  implementation  as 
stated in SDAP and GAP; 
(iii)  Monitor to ensure labor standards are upheld throughout project implementation; 
(iv)  Monitor to ensure that local residents affected directly and indirectly by the project have 
been meaningfully consulted during all times of project implementation, that women and 
vulnerable  groups  are  consulted  (meeting  SDAP  and  GAP  targets)  and  that  all 
consultation processes are adequately documented; 
(v)  When  necessary,  monitor  training  to  PMO,  IAs,  as  well  as  concerned  township 
authorities  and  village  committees  in  the  gender  disaggregation  of  all  project  related 
activities  and  ensure  that  adequate  records  are  kept  in  accordance  with  good 
implementation practice;  
(vi)  Monitor  to  ensure  women  and  vulnerable  households  are  offered  opportunities  to 
participate in employment and other benefits as stated in SDAP and GAP; 
(vii)  Monitor to ensure that women employed during construction and operation stages are 
offered  appropriate  facilities  (e.g.  separate  toilets,  bathrooms/  showers)  which  are 
considered  adequate  by  women  and  conform  to  occupational  health  and  safety 
requirements, as referenced in the SDAP and GAP;  
115 
(viii)  Monitor  reporting  and  monitoring  forms  for  IAs  and  PMO  regarding  SDAP  and  GAP 
targets and indicators and ensure regular monitoring on these;  
(ix)  Verify  internal  monitoring  reports  on  the  progress  of  SDAP  and  GAP  activities  to  be 
provided to the PMO and ADB; 
(x)  Monitor social and gender indicators included in the DMF; and 
(xi)  Perform  any  other  tasks  deemed  necessary  to  externally  monitor  social  safeguard 
issues and social dimension as they apply to the project.  
G.   Methodology of M&E 
 The EMA will apply both qualitative and quantitative methods during monitoring, including 
12. 
the following. 
(i) 
Quantitative methods 
a)  Conduct  baseline  survey  (prior  to  start  of  LAR)  covering  a  representative  sample  of 
affected  persons,  focusing  more  on  those  seriously  affected  and  vulnerable  affected 
persons. 
b)  Conduct annual questionnaire survey during project implementation for 50% of severely 
affected households and 20% of all other affected households.  
c)  Use  the  existing  statistical  data  at  local  levels,  and  data  from  district  and/or  county 
resettlement bureaus. 
d)  Survey affected businesses and workers, if any. 
e)  Conduct final M&E of LAR implementation (prior to project completion) by conducting a 
sample  survey  on  50%  of  severely  affected  households  and  20%  of  all  other  affected 
households. 
(ii) 
Qualitative methods 
a)  Review project documents (feasibility study reports and resettlement plan), ADB relevant 
policies, laws and regulations of the PRC, Province, City. 
b)  Consult  and  discuss  with  different  stakeholders  and  social  organizations  through 
consultation meetings, in-depth interviews, and group discussions. 
c)  Undertake focused group discussions, in-depth interviews with the target affected persons; 
and/or  groups  such  as  severely  affected  households,  vulnerable  households,  and 
women’s groups.  
(iii) 
Site visits  
a)  Conduct  site  visits  to  project  sites  to  check  impacts  on  local  people  during  civil  works 
construction. 
13. 
All information and data collected will be processed, analyzed, and included in the baseline 
or  subsequent  M&E  reports.  The  EMA  must  store the  processed  data  to  be  used  for  the  next 
M&E. These data will belong to (and will be the asset of) the PMO and will be made available to 
ADB and the PMO on request. All documentation will be transferred to the PMO at the completion 
of the contract. 
H.  
Qualification Requirements   
14. 
The EMA should be a registered social organization (research institution, design institute, 
consulting  institution  and/or  firm,  university  or  nongovernment  organizations)  without  direct 
administrative subordination relations with the Province and City Government. The EMA should 
have 5 or more qualified technical staff members. Professional staff members of the EMA should 
116 
have degree in economics, sociology and/or anthropology, or relevant field of social sciences; are 
familiar with ADB’s resettlement policies and procedures; and have previous experience in M&E 
of LAR for projects funded by ADB. The EMA should also have experience in undertaking similar 
projects  in  the  PRC.  Three  (3)  national  specialist  positions  will  provide  consulting  services  to 
support extremal resettlement M&E. The key responsibilities are proposed but not limited to the 
following: 
(i) 
Resettlement Specialist and Team Leader 
15. 
The specialist will undertake the following tasks: (i) lead all the activities of the team; (ii) 
lead and set up the monitoring methodology, including design of baseline and tracer surveys; (iii) 
work and coordinate with relevant agencies and/or bodies within the project to implement the task 
of M&E activities; (iv) lead and conduct the M&E activities and required surveys to collect data 
and information at office and project sites, and then analyze the findings; (v) prepare external and 
social resettlement M&E reports which include conclusions and recommendations; (vi) discuss 
findings with the PMO and IAs to reach agreement on follow-up actions; and (vii) participate in 
ADB review missions. 
(ii) 
Social Evaluation Specialist  
The  specialist  will  undertake  the  following  tasks:  (i)  monitor  activities  mentioned  in  the 
16. 
social and safeguard plans to ensure they are being carried out as approved by ADB; (ii) provide 
inputs  to  the  external  resettlement  and  social  M&E  reports,  which  would  include  progress, 
challenges  and/or  bottlenecks  during 
implementation;  and  propose  solutions  and/or 
recommendations to address these issues; (iii) participate in ADB review missions, if required; 
and (iv) conduct any other duties assigned by the resettlement specialist/team leader.  
(iii) 
Field Surveyors 
17. 
The surveyors will (i) assist the resettlement and social evaluation specialists in carrying 
out  the  monitoring  on  the  implementation  of  the  social  safeguard  plans  to  ensure  their 
implementation  is  in  compliance  with  ADB-approved  plans;  (ii)  under  the  guidance  of  the 
resettlement  and  social  evaluation  specialists,  carry  out  field  surveys;  (iii)  analyze  the  data 
collected from the field surveys; (iv) provide assistance to the resettlement and social evaluation 
specialists  for  the  preparation  of  the  external  resettlement  and  social  M&E  reports;  and  (v) 
conduct any other duties assigned by the resettlement specialist/team leader. 
117 
Indicative Terms of Reference for  
4C-5 Project Experience Dissemination Program 
A.  Background 
1. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Xin’an River, originating in Huangshan Municipality, is the main drinking 
water source for 10 million urban and rural residents in downstream areas in Zhejiang Province. 
Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, and the growth of 
tourism in the area have increased both environmental and ecological pressures across the Xin’an 
River  Basin.  Both  point  sources  (urban  and  rural  sewage)  and  non-point  sources (agriculture-
based and run-off) have impaired the water safety in Xin’an River.  
2. 
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness.  
This document sets out the tentative terms of reference (TOR) for the consulting services 
3. 
to disseminate the environmental protection and green development experience gained from the 
project  to  other  municipalities/provinces  to  achieve  sustainable  economic  development.  The 
executing agency for the project is the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). The direct client 
for  the  consulting  services  is  the  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office  (HPMO) 
established in the Huangshan Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC). 
B. 
The Objectives and Overall Scope of Services 
4. 
HMG has set up its sustainable economic development objectives in implementation of 
ecological protection, green development, and rural vitalization strategies. The project experience 
dissemination program is to provide feasible and sustainable green development approaches for 
other  regions  in  China,  including  innovative  stormwater  management,  rural  wastewater 
management, integrated ICT application for smart environmental management, Green Incentive 
Fund for tea farming, as well as green investment fund design and implementation.  
C. 
Implementation Arrangements 
5. 
The consulting service will be carried out by a team of consultants through a firm. A total 
of  11  person-months  of  national  specialists  will  be  required.  The  consulting  services  will  be 
financed  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  and  the  consulting  firm  will  be  recruited  by 
HPMO  according  to  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB  Borrowers  -  Goods,  Works,  Non-
consulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from time to time).36 The consulting firm 
will be selected by (i) inviting simple technical proposals; and (ii) using the quality-based selection 
(QBS) method. The consulting services are expected to start in July 1, 2025 and finish in June 
30, 2026.  
36 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
118 
D. 
Reporting Requirements 
6. 
The consultant team will produce (i) an inception report, including an implementation plan 
within 4 weeks after mobilization; (ii) dissemination and public education materials 3 months after 
mobilization; (iii) detailed agendas for seminars 3 months after mobilization; (iv) a draft final report 
to  summarize  all  project  experience  disseminated  and  the  activities  undertaken  under  the 
program;  (v)  a final  report  incorporating  ADB  and  HPMO’s  comments  at  the  completion  of the 
consulting service. All reports are to be written in English and translated into Chinese. One soft 
and  two  printed  copies  of  each  report  are  to  be  submitted  to  ADB  (English  version  only)  and 
HPMO (both Chinese and English versions). 
7. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The detail outputs will include: 
preparation of a series of dissemination materials to introduce key project experience in 
innovative stormwater management, rural wastewater management, smart environmental 
management,  Green  Incentive  Fund  for  tea  farming,  as  well  as  green  investment  fund 
design  and  management.  All  dissemination  materials  will  be  published  on  the  official 
website of Huangshan Municipal Government with public access;  
preparation of public education materials on (a) rural wastewater management to improve 
rural residents’ understanding on the importance of rural wastewater treatment, key issues 
on  facility  operation  and  maintenance,  efforts  can  be  made  by  villagers;  (b)  Green 
Incentive  Fund  for  tea  farming  to  encourage  tea  farmers  adopting  green  agriculture 
practices. The materials shall be written in a simple and understandable way for villagers 
and farmers;  
organization of seminars with participants from other municipalities within Yangtze River 
Basin to share the green development experience and lessons learnt. The themes shall 
include Green Incentive Fund for tea farming, green investment fund design, and others 
proposed by the HMPO, as needed.  
E. 
Key Expertise Required 
The proposing entities will determine the number and the nature of experts which they will 
8. 
require  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  the  consulting  service  in  accordance  with  their  proposed 
approach and methodology. However, ADB requires a minimum of two national experts.  
Knowledge Management Specialist (national, 3 person-month). The specialist shall 
9. 
have  graduate  degree  or  above  and  prior  experience  in  preparing  dissemination  materials, 
organizing seminars, and other related activities for more than 10 years and fluency in English 
and Chinese is required. Experience in environmental management, or eco-compensation and 
green investment fund design would be preferred. Specific tasks will include the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
discuss with HPMO to identify the client’s demand and develop an implementation plan 
for the program; 
prepare the dissemination and public education materials based on the project documents 
provided by HPMO, and make revisions as needed to fit program needs; 
prepare seminar agendas and conference materials and obtain approval from HPMO;  
lead the organization of seminars; and  
prepare and submit required reports to HPMO and ADB, etc.  
119 
Project Assistant (national, 8 person-months). The project assistant shall have prior 
10. 
experience in preparing dissemination materials, organizing seminars, and other related activities 
for more than 5 years and fluency in English and Chinese is required. He/she will assist the project 
manager in following tasks: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
prepare the dissemination and public education materials based on the project documents 
provided by HPMO, and make revisions as needed to fit program needs; 
prepare material dissemination plan and assist the HPMO in implementing;  
prepare conference materials for the seminars; 
organize seminars in accordance with the approved agenda; 
prepare invitations for seminars to participants;  
ensure provision of logistical and administrative support during seminars; 
assist the team leader in preparing required reports; and  
undertake other tasks assigned by the project manager, as needed. 
120 
Indicative Terms of Reference for  
4C-6 Project Start-up Consultancy before Loan Implementation 
1. 
Three national specialists will be hired through the individual consultant selection (ICS): 
international  project  management  and  rural  wastewater  specialist  (4  person-months);  social 
specialist  (5  person-months);  and  environmental  specialist  (5  person-months).  The  indicative 
terms  of  reference  for  consulting  services  for  the  Package  No.  Serv-HSC-18:  Project 
Implementation Start-Up Support are as follow: 
A.  Background 
2. 
Huangshan is a prefecture-level municipality in the southern part of Anhui Province, with 
a population in 2018 of 1.48 million. It comprises three urban districts and four counties and has 
an area of 9,807 km2. Huangshan is a famous tourist destination in the PRC, largely due to scenic 
values.  The  Xin’an  River  originates  in  Huangshan  Municipality  and  flows  eastward  through 
Zhejiang Province. Rapid economic development, urbanization, intensive agriculture production, 
and the growth of tourism are increasing the environmental pressures in the Xin’an River Basin.  
3. 
The Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project 
(the  project)  aims  to  demonstrate  water  pollution  reduction  in  the  Xin’an  River  Basin  through 
improving urban and rural wastewater management, reducing soil erosion and agriculture-related 
non-point  source  pollution,  and  strengthening  financing  mechanisms,  capacities,  and  public 
awareness. 
This  document  sets  out indicative  terms  of reference for  consulting  services needed to 
4. 
ensure the smooth implementation start-up of the project. The executing agency for the project is 
the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). The direct client for the consulting services is the 
Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office  (HPMO)  established  in  the  Huangshan 
Municipal Development and Reform Commission (HDRC).  
B. 
Implementation Arrangements 
The  consulting  services  will  be  carried  out  by  the  following  individual  consultants: 
5. 
international  project  management  and  rural  wastewater  specialist  (4  person-months);  social 
specialist (5 person-months); and environmental specialist (5 person-months), with a total of 14 
person-months. The consulting services will be financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), 
and the consultants will be recruited by the HPMO according to Procurement Regulations for ADB 
Borrowers  -  Goods,  Works,  Non-consulting  and  Consulting  Services  (2017,  as  amended  from 
time to time).37 The consultant will be selected using the individual consultant selection method. 
The  consulting  services  are  expected  to  start  on  October  1,  2019  and continue  until  June  30, 
2020. 
C. 
Reporting Requirements 
During the assignment, each consultant will submit monthly reports (maximum of 2 pages) 
6. 
in  Chinese  to  the  HPMO.  The  reports  will  describe  what  was  planned  and  accomplished,  the 
problems and obstacles encountered, and what are planned for the following month. 
37 Checklists for actions required to contract consultants by method available in e-Handbook on Project Implementation 
at: http://www.adb.org/documents/handbooks/project-implementation/.  
121 
At the end of the assignment, each consultant will submit a report on his/her activities to 
7. 
ADB and the HPMO (a soft copy of the English version to ADB and soft copies of the English and 
Chinese versions to the HPMO).  
D. 
Scope of Services and Consultants’ Inputs 
The  national  project  management  and  rural  wastewater  specialist  (4  person-months) 
8. 
specialist will undertake the following tasks:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
establish initial project management system including internal procedures of routine 
data filling and communication among the HMG, HPMO, IAs, and other agencies for 
required reporting on project progress and safeguards; 
prepare needed project implementation arrangement setup, operational procedures, 
work plan, and guide and facilitate the initial phase of project implementation;  
promote project implementation in the initial phase, and submit work reports to the 
HPMO; 
collect necessary information for reporting requirement of ADB including, semiannual 
implementation progress report, and PAM update for inception mission;  
closely work with the HPMO, and directly support the IAs of each subproject;  
review  and  provide  recommendations  on  the  detailed  design  for  rural  wastewater 
management and sewer update subprojects to optimize the project design;  
provide guidance to design institutes to prepare bidding documents for civil works and 
work with PMO staff to develop RFP for consulting services; 
lead the start-up consultants’ team and ensure the compliance with ADB guidelines 
and  requirements  for  project  implementation,  particularly  for  the  initial  phase, 
including (a) project performance management system (PPMS); (b) procurement of 
goods  and  works,  (c)  disbursement  and  contract  management;  (d)  construction 
planning, supervision and monitoring; (e) reporting requirements; and (f) safeguards 
management and monitoring. 
9. 
The social specialist will undertake the following tasks: (5 person-months) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
assist the HPMO, the IAs, and designated institute in updating the resettlement plan 
(RP), social development action plan (SDAP) and gender action plan (GAP) approved 
by ADB, following the ADB format and based on the detailed designs; disclosing them 
to  the  affected  persons  prior  to  ADB’s  approval;  and  obtaining  ADB’s  approval  of 
them; 
assist the HPMO and the IAs in establishing effective grievance redress mechanism 
(GRM),  including  procedures  to  ensure  the  documentation  and  reporting  of 
complaints, follow-up actions, and results;  
provide training to relevant staff of the HPMO and the IAs so that they will understand 
ADB’s policies and compliance requirements for land acquisition, resettlement, social 
development, and gender-inclusive measures, including record keeping;  
prepare or update the social related guidance documents, including procedures and 
forms;   
assist in establishing an internal monitoring and reporting system; 
provide hands-on guidance in preparing the first social report;  
provide  a  written  report  for  the  project  implementation  consulting  firm  about  the 
accomplished work in aspect of social management; and 
122 
(viii) 
perform any other land acquisition, resettlement, and social related tasks during the 
start-up of the project. 
10. 
The environmental specialist will undertake the following tasks: (5 person-months) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
assist  the  HPMO,  the  IAs,  and  designated  institute  in  updating  the  initial 
environmental  examination  (IEE),  including  the  environmental  management  plan 
(EMP), and the environmental and social management system (ESMS) approved by 
ADB for the project, following the ADB format and based on the detailed designs; and 
obtaining ADB’s approval;  
assist the HPMO and the IAs in establishing effective GRM, including procedures to 
ensure documentation and reporting of complaints, follow-up actions, and results; 
provide training to relevant staff of the HPMO and the IAs so that they will understand 
ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), policies, and compliance requirements for 
environmental  management;  national  and  local  regulations  and  standards  for 
environmental protection, health, labor, and occupational safety; and the project IEE, 
EMP and ESMS; 
prepare  or  update  environmental  management  related  guidance  manual,  including 
the forms and templates;  
provide hands-on guidance in preparing the first environmental report;  
provide  a  written  report  for  the  project  implementation  consulting  firm  about  the 
accomplished work in aspects of environmental management; and 
perform any other environmental management related tasks during these phases of 
the project. 
E. 
Consultant Qualifications 
11. 
The consultants will have the following qualifications:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
International  project  management  and  rural  wastewater  specialist:  a  master 
degree  or  higher  in  environmental  engineering,  civil  engineering,  project 
management, or related fields;  
National social specialist: a university degree or higher in sociology, social impact 
assessment, or social development related fields;  
National environmental specialist: a university degree or higher in environmental 
management, environmental science, or related fields; 
proficiency  (reading,  writing,  speaking,  comprehension  skills)  in  English  and 
Chinese; 
at  least  15  years  (international  specialist)  or  8  years  (national  specialists)  of 
experience in implementing projects in the PRC that are funded by ADB or other 
international funding agencies; and 
relevant knowledge of specific ADB policies and guidelines for their expertise. 
123 
APPENDIX 3: ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT PLAN (EMP)  
A. 
Objectives 
This  environmental  management  plan  (EMP)  is  for  the  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River 
1. 
Ecological  Protection  and  Green  Development  Project  (the  project).  The  EMP  is  to  be 
implemented in all phases of the project: design, pre-construction, construction, and operation. 
The EMP is to ensure project compliance with PRC environmental laws and ADB’s Safeguard 
Policy  Statement  (SPS  2009).  The  EMP  describes:  the  roles  and responsibilities  of  all  project 
agencies  to  implement  this  EMP;  anticipated  impacts  and  mitigation  measures;  inspection, 
monitoring,  and  reporting  arrangements;  training  and  institutional  strengthening;  grievance 
redress mechanism (GRM); and future public consultation.  
2. 
In  the  engineering  design  stage,  the  Huangshan  Municipal  Project  Management  Office 
(HPMO) will pass this EMP to the design institutes for incorporating mitigation measures into the 
detailed  engineering  designs.  The  EMP  will  be  updated  at  the  end  of  the  detailed  design,  as 
needed. To ensure that bidders will respond to the EMP’s provisions, the HPMO and the IAs of 
the  three  districts  and  four  counties  will  prepare  and  provide  the  specification  clauses  for 
incorporation into the bidding documents: (i) a list of environmental management requirements to 
be  budgeted  by  the  bidders  in  their  bids;  (ii)  environmental  clauses  for  contractual  terms  and 
conditions; and (iii) the project domestic EIA report and updated EMP. 
B. 
Organizations and Their Responsibilities for EMP Implementation 
The Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG) is the executing agency of the project. At 
3. 
the municipal-level, HMG has established the: (i) Huangshan Municipal Project Leading Group 
(HPLG), to provide policy guidance, overall oversight and coordination for the project. The group 
is chaired by the HMG executive vice mayor and comprised of officers from Huangshan Municipal 
Development  and  Reform  Commission,  Huangshan  Finance  Bureau,  and  other  municipality 
bureaus;  and (ii)  HPMO,  to  manage,  supervise  and  coordinate  overall  project  implementation. 
The  HPMO  is  established  with  membership  of  all  key  agencies  and  departments  involved  in 
project management and implementation. The project activities will be carried out at the city level 
or county or district level. 
4. 
For  the  project  activities  at  city  level  (e.g.  capacity  development  and  forest  health 
protection), HPMO will be the implementing agency, except for the Green Investment Fund, which 
will be implemented by the Huangshan Trust Investment Company (HTIC). For subprojects to be 
implemented  at  the  county  or  district  level,  the  county  or  district  governments  will  be  the 
implementing  agency.  Each  county  or  district  government  has  set  up  an  IA,  which  will  be 
responsible  for  daily  project  implementation  with  guidance  of  HPMO.  The  project  will  have  8 
implementing agencies: HTIC; and, the local governments of the three districts and four counties. 
EMP  implementation  arrangements  and  responsibilities  are  summarized  in  Table  EMP-1. 
Environmental and social safeguards for the Green Investment Fund (output 3) will be managed 
under an environmental and social management system.  
124 
Table EMP-1: Institutional Responsibilities for Implementation of the Project Environmental 
Safeguards 
Agency 
Huangshan Municipal Project 
Leading Group 
Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Ensure timely national, provincial, and inter-agency coordination 
and support for the project as needed 
Huangshan Municipal 
Government 
Huangshan Municipal Project 
Management Office 
•  High-level support to executing agency 
•  Provide advice on project implementation 
•  Review project progress 
•  Project executing agency 
•  Overall accountability and responsibility for project planning, 
management, and implementation 
•  Ensure timely and effective execution of the loan agreements 
•  Coordinate with ADB 
•  Supervise and manage daily project implementation 
•  Recruit  and  manage  design 
institutes,  procurement  agents, 
consultants, contractors, CSCs, in accordance with government and 
ADB regulations 
•  Submit bidding documents, bid evaluation reports and other 
documents as needed to ADB for endorsement 
•  Supervise construction and monitor quality control 
•  Coordinate with ADB on all aspects of project implementation 
Environment safeguards – all project outputs 
•  Engage the LIEC; and, EMA for external environmental monitoring  
•  Assign 1 Environment Officer and 1 HPMO Social Officer 
•  Respond to any unanticipated safeguard issues and take corrective 
actions as needed 
•  Ensure  project  compliance  with  the  loan  and  project  agreements 
(including all safeguard provisions), EMP, and ESMS 
•  Prepare semiannual environment monitoring reports to ADB 
IEE and EMP – all project outputs except Green Investment Fund 
(output 3) 
•  Update IEE and/or EMP as needed, especially during the stage of 
detailed engineering designs 
•  Ensure that the EMP, especially all relevant mitigation measures, are 
included in the detailed engineering designs 
•  Establish the EMP grievance redress mechanism 
ESMS – for Green Investment Fund (output 3) 
•  Support HTIC to finalize the ESMS; and submit updated draft ESMS 
to ADB for endorsement 
•  Support HTIC to implement the Green Investment Fund and ESMS 
•  For  the  first  batch  of  each  subproject  type  (see  ESMS)  from  each 
project county and district, submit the draft safeguard screening and 
categorization documents to ADB for endorsement 
•  Facilitate safeguard training for HTIC 
•  Establish the ESMS grievance redress mechanism 
•  Incorporate monitoring and progress on ESMS implementation from 
HTIC in the semiannual environment monitoring reports to ADB 
125 
Agency 
Huangshan District Government 
Huizhou District Government  
Tunxi District Government 
Xiuning County Government 
She County Government 
Yi County Government 
Qimen County Government 
Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Implement subprojects, including finance, administration, technical 
and procurement matters, monitoring, evaluation, safeguards 
•  Coordinate with HPMO for project implementation 
•  Assign IA environment officer (1 per IA) 
•  Prepare tendering contracts; and submit bidding documents, bid 
evaluation reports and other documents to HPMO 
•  Recruit design institutes, contractors, CSCs; and manage 
and 
their respective Project 
Implementing Units 
(all project outputs except 
Green Investment Fund under 
output 3) 
Huangshan Trust Investment 
Company 
Project Facility Operators - the 
municipal agencies, town / village 
governments, or district/county 
Housing and Urban-Rural 
Development Bureaus, Urban 
Construction and Investment 
Companies, Ecology and 
Environment Bureau, 
Commission of Tourism, and 
commission of industrial parks  
“Start-up” environment safeguard 
consultant 
contractors and suppliers 
•  Incorporate EMP into bidding documents 
•  Supervise and monitor EMP implementation 
•  Participate in capacity building and training programs 
•  Construction supervision and quality control 
•  Submit withdrawal applications to finance bureau 
•  Commission the constructed facilities 
•  Implementing agency for the Green Investment Fund (project 
output 3) 
•  Establish, manage, and implement the Green Investment Fund and 
ESMS 
•  Prepare semiannual environment monitoring reports to HPMO, for 
consolidation within progress reports by HPMO to ADB 
•  With IAs, commission the constructed facilities 
•  Operate and maintain the completed facilities, including 
environmental management, monitoring and reporting 
responsibilities 
•  Short-term national position to support HPMO and IAs with start-up 
support for EMP and ESMS establishment while the LIEC is being 
recruited 
•  Assess whether the detailed engineering designs are within the 
scope of the EMP and/or whether new safeguard assessments are 
required 
•  Help integrate the EMP within the project bidding documents  
•  Assist HPMO and HTIC to establish the GRMs for the EMP and 
ESMS respectively 
•  Provide initial training to project agencies for EMP and ESMS 
implementation 
126 
Agency 
Loan Implementation 
Environmental Consultant 
Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Support the executing and implementing agencies in their tasks to 
coordinate and implement the EMP and ESMS 
•  Provide ongoing training for EMP and ESMS implementation, 
including the EMP capacity building described in Table EMP-6 
•  Review the detailed engineering designs and assess whether the 
IEE and/or EMP requires updating 
•  Support the updating of the IEE and/or EMP as needed 
•  Review bidding documents to ensure that EMP clauses are 
incorporated 
•  Review site-specific EMPs (prepared by contractors) to ensure 
compliance with the EMP 
•  Conduct site inspections to assess compliance with the EMP 
•  Review environment monitoring reports prepared by contractors 
•  Assist HPMO to prepare the semiannual environmental monitoring 
reports to ADB 
External environment monitoring 
agency 
•  Certified agency that will conduct the external environment 
monitoring described in Table EMP-5 
Contractors 
Construction supervision 
company 
Asian Development Bank 
•  Monitor compliance of the identified parameters with the required 
project targets and standards; identify non-compliance 
•  Submit independent progress reports to HPMO, IAs, ADB 
•  Ensure sufficient funding and human resources for full 
implementation of mitigation and monitoring measures in the EMP 
•  Develop site-specific EMPs based on this EMP, including the 
specific contractor performance targets listed in Table EMP-2 
•  Timely and effective implementation of EMP measures for works 
•  Ensure sufficient funding and human resources for supervising and 
instructing contractors for proper and timely implementation of 
required mitigation and monitoring measures in the EMP 
•  Supervise construction progress and quality 
•  Appoint EHS officer for regular onsite supervision of contractors 
•  Supervise the contractor’s EMP implementation performance 
•  Undertake simple and cost-effective on-site quantitative 
measurements to regularly check that construction complies with 
the project environmental monitoring standards and targets, 
especially for noise and air quality (especially during excavation of 
pipe trenches in urban area and villages), using a basic hand-held 
meter 
•  Submit monthly EMP monitoring reports to IA and HPMO 
•  Oversee project administration and timely execution of the loan 
agreements by the executing and implementing agencies 
•  Disburse loan proceeds 
•  Review procurement, consultant recruitment, progress reports, and 
audit reports 
•  Review project compliance and targets against the design and 
monitoring framework, EMP, ESMS, social plans, and project 
administration manual 
•  Review and endorse updated IEE, EMP and/or ESMS as needed 
•  Monitors project progress and conducts review missions 
•  Discloses monitoring reports on ADB public website 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CSC = construction supervision company, EHS = environment, health and safety, 
EMA  =  environment monitoring  agency,  EMP =  environment  management  plan,  ESMS  = environmental  and  social 
management system, GRM = grievance redress mechanism, HTIC = Huangshan Trust Investment Company, LIEC = 
loan implementation environment consultant, HPMO = Huangshan Municipality project management office. 
127 
Environment staff within HPMO and IAs. One full-time HPMO environment officer and 
5. 
seven district or county IA environment officers (one per implementing agency) will be appointed. 
These  personnel  will  be  responsible  for  coordination  and  implementation  of  the  EMP;  and  will 
also  support  the  environmental  and  social  staff  to  be  recruited  for  the  ESMS.  The  HPMO 
Environment Officer will  be responsible for overall EMP coordination. The officer will work full-
time  for  the  project  and  will  take  charge  of:  (i)  supervising  the  implementation  of  mitigation 
measures  during  project  design,  construction  and  operation;  (ii)  ensuring  that  environmental 
management,  monitoring,  and  mitigation  measures  are  incorporated  into  bidding  documents, 
construction  contracts  and  operation  management  manuals;  (iii)  submitting  semi-annual  EMP 
monitoring and progress reports to ADB; (iv) coordinating the GRM; and (v) responding to any 
unforeseen adverse impacts. The HPMO Environment Officer will be technically supported by the 
loan implementation environment consultant. Each IA will nominate one environmental officer and 
one social officer to check the overall implementation of environmental management provisions 
of the EMP, and to work in close coordination with the HPMO Environmental Officer. 
Loan 
implementation  consultants.  HPMO  will  engage  a 
6. 
implementation 
environmental consultant (LIEC) and loan implementation social consultant (LISC), as part of the 
loan  consultancy  implementation  services.  The  consultants  will  support  the  HPMO  to  provide 
capacity  building  for,  and  coordination  of,  the  EMP  and  ESMS  implementation.  The  need  to 
extend  consultant  support  for  the  HTIC  will  be  reviewed  after  about  24  months  of  project 
implementation.  
loan 
7. 
Draft  terms  of  reference  for  the  positions  of  HPMO  Environment  Officer,  HPMO  Social 
Officer,  IA  Environment  Officer,  and  the  LIEC,  are  described  in  Appendix  EMP-1.  Terms  of 
reference for the HTIC environment and social positions are described in the ESMS (Appendix 
2). 
C. 
Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
8. 
Tables EMP-2 and EMP-3 list the potential impacts of the subprojects in the three districts 
and four counties during project preparation, design, construction and operation, and proposed 
mitigation measures. The mitigation measures will be incorporated into detailed design, bidding 
documents,  construction  contracts  and  operational  management  manuals,  by  the  design 
institutes (during detailed design) and contractors (during construction), under the supervision of 
CSCs and IAs, with technical support from the LIECs. The effectiveness of these measures will 
be  evaluated  based  on  environmental  inspections  and  monitoring  to  determine  whether  they 
should be continued, improved or adjusted. 
.
128 
Table EMP-2: Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures during Pre-construction and Construction Phases 
Item 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Mitigation measures 
A. DESIGN AND PRE-CONSTRUCTION PHASES 
Detailed design 
stage 
Institutional 
strengthening for EMP 
Implementation and 
supervision 
• At  least  1  month  before  construction:  (i)  reconfirm  the  full-time  status  of  the  HPMO 
Environmental Officer for the project; (ii) appoint at least one environment officer in each of 
the  7  IAs  (excluding  HTIC,  which  will  separately  engage  an  environment  officer  for  the 
ESMS).  
Updating the EMP 
Construction 
Preparation 
Environmental 
monitoring plan 
Bidding and contract 
documents 
EMP training 
• At least 2 months before any construction, engage LIEC. 
• At  least  2  months  before  any  construction,  provide  training  to  all  environmental  staff  for 
EMP implementation. 
• Confirm that at least one certified EMA has been recruited for the project at least 2 months 
before any construction. 
• When the contractors and CSCs have been engaged, conduct training on the project EMP. 
• Update the mitigation measures defined in this EMP based on final detailed design. This 
will  include  the  specific  designs  for  the  use  of  biopesticides  which  have  been  prepared 
during the detailed designs (see IEE Section V.D.6 and Section X).  
• Asbestos.  Under ADB’s List of Prohibited Investment Activities (SPS, 2009), the use of 
asbestos  is  prohibited  except  for  the  “purchase  and  use  of  bonded  asbestos  cement 
sheeting where the asbestos content is <20%” (SPS 2009: 76). However: (i) in practice it 
is difficult to assess whether asbestos content is <20%; and (ii) international development 
banks  are  increasingly  banning  the  use  of  all  asbestos  from  their  projects.  To  ensure 
international best practice for human health and safety for this project: no asbestos of any 
kind will be used in any materials supported by the project. 
• Check with the design institute and HPMO to ensure the proposed materials do not include 
the use of asbestos. 
• Submit the updated EMP to ADB for review; 
• In case of major changes of project location and/or additional physical components, form a 
DEIA team to conduct additional DEIA and public consultation. The revised DEIA should 
be submitted to Huangshan and district/county EEBs and ADB for approval and disclosure. 
To determine if the change is minor or major the HPMO will consult with ADB. 
• Prior to construction, the HPMO will hire an EMA for environmental monitoring;  
• Prepare detailed monitoring plan in accordance with the monitoring plan in this EMP. 
• Mitigation measures in the EMP are incorporated in all bidding documents; 
• Bidding documents are sent to ADB for review; 
• Prepare environmental contract clauses for contractors. 
• LIEC,  or  invited  environment  specialists  and/or  officials  from  EEBs  provide  training  on 
construction environmental management, implementation, supervision, to contractors and 
Implement  Supervis
e 
HPMO, IAs  EA, ADB 
HPMO, 
LIEC 
EEBs, 
ADB 
HPMO 
DIs, 
HPMO, IAs 
LIEC, 
EEBs 
HPMO, 
IAs 
LIEC, 
ADB  
HPMO 
Item 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Mitigation measures 
CSCs, in accordance with the training plan in this EMP 
129 
Implement  Supervis
e 
Establish GRM 
• Responsibility  for  GRM  implementation  is  assigned  to  the  HPMO  and  IA  Environmental 
HPMO, IAs 
LIEC 
Officers and HPMO Social Officers, and is included in their terms of reference; 
• HPMO and IA personnel will be aware of, and trained in, the GRM, and will help support 
the environmental and social officers when necessary. 
• Key contact details for the GRM (phone number, fax, address, email) will be provided on 
the HPMO, IAs and/or EEB public websites and information boards at construction sites. 
Site EMPs 
• Prior to any works, prepare site-specific EMP for individual construction sites 
• Review and ensure site EMP complies with the measures in this EMP 
Contractor 
HPMO, IA 
CSC 
B. CONSTRUCTION PHASE 
Construction 
Wastewater 
wastewater 
management 
domestic 
generated 
construction activities 
and 
wastewater 
from 
•  Sedimentation tanks will be installed on site and,  after settling out of solids, the upper 
clear liquid will be recycled for spraying the construction site (dust control), and the waste 
residue in the tank will be cleared and transported to the construction spoil disposal sites.  
•  Oil-water separators will be installed before the sedimentation tank for oily wastewater 
Contractor
s 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
treatment.  
•  All  sites  for  washing  of  construction  equipment  will  be  equipped  with  water  collection 
basins and sediment traps. 
•  Domestic wastewater generated from construction camps will be disposed in three ways: 
(i) for project sites nearing septic tanks in surrounding villages, domestic wastewater will 
be  treated  by  the  septic  tanks  before  being  used  for  irrigation;  (ii)  for  project  sites 
accessible to municipal sewerage systems, domestic wastewater will be discharged into 
the nearest sewerage system; (iii) for project sites neither close to villages nor sewerage 
systems,  temporary  septic  tanks  will  be  constructed  for  the  centralized  treatment  of 
domestic wastewater.  
•  Fuel  storage,  machinery  maintenance  workshop  and  vehicle  cleaning  areas  must  be 
stationed at least 500 m away from the waterbody.  
•  Storage facilities for fuels, oil, and other hazardous materials will be within secured areas 
on impermeable surfaces and provided with bunds and cleanup installations.  
•  Contractors will develop actions for control of oil and other dangerous substances as part 
of their site EMPs. 
•  Contractors’ fuel suppliers must be properly licensed. They shall follow proper protocol 
for  transferring  fuel  and  the  PRC  standard  of  JT3145-91  (Transportation,  Loading  and 
Unloading of Dangerous or Harmful Goods. revised). 
•  Labor camps will be located at least 500 m from waterbody. 
•  Portable  toilets  and  on-site  wastewater  pre-treatment  systems  will  be  installed  at 
construction camps along with proper maintenance protocols. 
130 
Item 
Water supply 
Ambient Air 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Interruption to existing 
water supply due to 
works 
Dust generated by 
construction activities, 
gaseous air pollution 
(CO, CH and NO2) from 
construction machinery, 
and fugitive emission of 
odor (NH3 and H2S) 
from existing sewage 
pipes 
Mitigation measures 
Implement  Supervis
•  Ensure  that  existing  water  and  wastewater  services  continue  to  be  provided  to 
communities during the civil works. 
•  Any  interruptions  to  such  services  as  a  result  of  the  project  works  are  as  limited  as 
possible. 
•  Prior to any such interruptions, consultations are held with all affected communities. 
•  Establish  a  series  of  measures  for  dust  control  in  construction  sites  before  work 
commencement.   
•  Install barriers at the boundary of construction sites with a height no less than 2.5m.  
•  Spraying water daily on construction sites where fugitive dust is being generated. Before 
excavation,  proper  spraying  shall  be  performed  on  the  working  surface  to  maintain  a 
certain humidity to reduce dust generation.  
•  Cover stockpiles with dust shrouds or tarpaulin to avoid spillage or dust generation. For 
the  earthwork  management  for  backfill,  measures  will  include  surface  press  and 
periodical spraying and covering. Extra earth will be cleared from the project site in time 
to avoid long term stockpiling. 
•  Vehicles  with  a  closed  load-carrying  case  shall  be  used  to  transport  potentially  dust-
producing materials. 
Contractor
s 
e 
CSCs, 
IAs, 
HPMO 
Contractor
s, EMAs 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
•  Design haulage routes and schedules to avoid transport occurring in the central areas, 
traffic intensive areas or residential areas.  
•  Install vehicle washing equipment or conduct wheel washing manually at each exit of the 
work area to prevent trucks carrying mud and soils onto public roads.  
•  Keep construction vehicles and machinery in good working order, regularly service and 
turn off engines when not in use. Ensure vehicle and machinery emissions comply with 
PRC standards of GB18352-2005, GB17691-2005, GB11340-2005, and GB18285-2005.  
•  During  high  wind,  dust-generating  operations  shall  not  be  performed  and  onsite 
construction materials shall be covered with shrouds. When wind speed exceeds PRC 
Levels  4  or  5,  excavation,  soil  transportation  and  demolition  works  are  not  permitted. 
Special  precautions  need  to  be  applied  in  the  vicinity  of  sensitive  receptors  such  as 
schools, kindergartens and hospitals.  
•  Transport  the  sludge  from  existing  sewer  pipes  offsite  timely  to  reduce  fugitive  odor 
emission.  
•  Use  exhaust  fans  at  welding  sites  to  increase  ventilation  and  promote  the  diffusion  of 
organic exhaust gas onsite.  
•  Timely monitoring of air quality and inspections during construction. 
Item 
Noise 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Noise generated from 
construction and 
transportation activities 
131 
Implement  Supervis
Contractor
s, EMAs 
e 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
Mitigation measures 
•  Construction  activities  will  be  planned  in  consultation  with  local  authorities  and 
communities so that activities with the greatest potential to generate noise are planned 
during periods of the day that will result in the least disturbance. 
•  Construction  works  will  be  limited  to  daytime  and  will  be  strictly  prohibited  during  the 
nighttime  (22:00  h  to  06:00  h)  and  noon  (12:00  h  to  14:00  h).  Exceptions  will  only  be 
allowed  in  exceptional  cases,  and  only  after  getting  the  approval  of  the  surrounding 
residents, local environmental authority and other relevant departments. The contractor 
shall apply for the approval seven days before the construction works. Nearby residents 
will be notified of such nighttime activities well in advance. 
•  When preparing construction planning, simultaneous high-noise activities will be avoided. 
High noise activities will be scheduled during the day rather than evening hours. Similarly, 
the construction sites will be planned to avoid multiple high noise activities or equipment 
from operating at the same location. 
•  Movable noise barriers will be adopted during construction at daytime. The barriers will: 
(i)  be  of  adequate  size  and  thickness  to  reduce  construction  noise  to  the  required 
standards; and (ii) be placed to maximize noise absorption.  
•  Low-noise equipment will be selected as much as possible. Equipment and machinery 
will be equipped with mufflers and will be properly maintained to minimize noise. 
•  Transportation routes and delivery schedules will be planned to avoid densely populated 
and sensitive areas and high traffic times. Vehicles transporting construction materials or 
waste will slow down and not use their horn when passing through or nearby sensitive 
locations,  such  as  residential  communities,  schools  and  hospitals.  No  honking  is 
permitted during nighttime.  
•  Monitor  noise  at  sensitive  areas  at  regular  intervals.  If  noise  standards  are  exceeded, 
equipment and construction conditions shall be checked, and mitigation measures shall 
be implemented to rectify the situation.  
•  Conduct  regular  interviews  with  residents/villagers  adjacent  to  construction  sites  to 
identify noise disturbance. Community feedback will be used to adjust work hours of noisy 
machinery. 
•  For the households that will be within 60 m of construction works (Section V.D.3 of IEE), 
particular  attention  will  be  provided.  This  will  include:  (a)  follow-up  consultations  with 
these households prior to the start of any works, to specify the exact planned dates and 
schedule of works, nature of works, equipment to be used, safety measures, and public 
access  during  construction;  (b)  installation  of  noise  barriers  to  reduce  as  much  of  the 
emissions  as  possible,  and/or  installation  of  additional  layers  on  the  windows  of  the 
affected homes as necessary, based on the assessment of the most technically effective 
method and feedback from the community consultations; (c) agreement on the duration 
of daily works. 
132 
Item 
Soil erosion 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Soil erosion caused by 
construction activities, 
earthworks 
Solid Waste 
Solid waste generated 
by construction activities 
and from workers’ 
camps 
Mitigation measures 
•  Prepare site soil erosion management plans before works begin.  
•  Level the ground for the temporary spoil storage sites with proper blocking measures. 
•  During  construction  phase,  the  earthwork  will  be  reasonably  planned  and  balanced  to 
reduce the stockpiling of spoil onsite as much as possible. Spoil will be reused onsite to 
the  maximum  extent  feasible  as  fill.  The  spoil  sites  will  be  away  from  roads  and  be 
restored after storage activities. 
•  Limit construction during rainy season and high winds. Appropriate stormwater drainage 
systems  and  slope  protection  measures  will  be  implemented  to  minimize  soil  erosion, 
such as perimeter bunds and temporary detention and settling ponds to control  topsoil 
runoff.  
•  The construction schedule will be well designed to minimize the exposure time of bare 
land surface and stabilize all earthwork disturbance areas timely after the earthworks are 
completed.  
•  Minimize open excavation areas and slope during trenching. 
•  Construction camps, storage areas and access roads will be located within the acquired 
land to minimize the impacts on the soil and land vegetation in surrounding area. 
•  Landscaping will only use native plant species. 
•  Construct intercepting channels and drains to prevent runoff entering construction sites 
and  divert  runoff  from  sites  to  existing  drainage  or  open  ground  for  watering  the 
vegetation. 
•  Rock material for the gabion cages for river revetment will be sourced from: (i) licensed 
suppliers of construction materials; and (ii) the old revetment material extracted from the 
Caocun River as part of the project works. 
•  Provide  appropriate  waste  collection  and  storage  containers  at  locations  away  from 
surface water or sensitive spots; 
•  Arrange with municipal waste collection services for regular collection of waste; 
•  Properly remove and dispose residual materials, wastes and contaminated soils. Paving 
or vegetating shall be done as soon as the materials are removed to stabilize the soil;  
•  Burning of waste is strictly prohibited; 
•  Provide sufficient garbage bins at strategic locations and ensure that they are protected 
from birds and vermin, and emptied regularly by the municipal waste collection systems. 
CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE TARGET:  
•  No uncollected waste at close of construction activities each day.  
Implement  Supervis
Contractor
s 
e 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
Contractor
s 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
Item 
Ecology 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Protection of flora and 
fauna around 
construction sites 
Mitigation measures 
•  Minimize  damage  to  vegetation.  Minimize  the  damage  to  existing  vegetation  and 
recover the vegetation timely after the completion  of  construction works. Native  plant 
species will be used for replanting and site rehabilitation.  
The surface soil (0-30 cm) will be stored separately for reuse for landscape greening or 
agriculture. The stockpiling shall have a height less than 5m and a slope less than 1:1.5 
with proper compaction to avoid soil erosion.  
• 
133 
Implement  Supervis
Contractor
s 
e 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
• 
• 
•  Minimize damage to aquatic habitats. For the stone debris removal from river channel 
in Caocun River, only debris from previous river revetment works will be removed, and 
all works shall be conducted manually without intervention of any mechanical equipment 
to prevent mechanical damage to the riverbed.  
All river channel related works will be carried out during dry season (October to March) 
to minimize potential impacts on the aquatic habitat. 
Landscaping and site rehabilitation. All planting activities under the project, including 
re-vegetation,  landscaping, and rehabilitation of construction sites, will  only use  plant 
species which are (i) native (i.e. naturally occurring) to the Xin’an River basin, and (ii) 
are sourced from local stock within Huangshan Municipality. 
In the event that non-native seedlings are required for rapid stabilization of exposed soils 
and sites, HMG will and will cause the IAs to ensure that only sterile seedlings are used 
to prevent the spread of weeds. 
Training. Provide trainings to contractors and workers to increase their awareness on 
the  need  to  protect  the  environment,  wildlife  and  vegetation  around  the  construction 
sites. 
Site inspection.  The CSCs and the environmental officer of the  HPMO will regularly 
inspect construction sites to ensure that habitats are well demarcated, and workers are 
fully informed of “no-go” areas. 
• 
• 
• 
•  Biopesticides.  Before  any  use  of  biopesticides,  confirm  that:  (a)  a  complete 
inventory  of  the  pest  species  to  be  addressed  for  each  demonstration  site  has  been 
prepared;  (b)  any  “pest”  species  which  are  rare,  threatened,  restricted  range,  or 
protected species have be excluded from the pest management program; (c) the specific 
organisms or other agents to be used as biopesticides have been identified during the 
detailed engineering designs; (d) each proposed agent or method has been confirmed 
to be  highly crop-specific and will only act on the intended pest species,  and will not 
affect local flora and fauna (e.g. the use of water mixed with tobacco will not be used as 
it may impact aquatic organisms in nearby streams); (e) specific application procedures, 
volumes,  and  post-application  monitoring  have  been  detailed,  to  ensure  safe  and 
responsible use of the biopesticides. 
134 
Item 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Mitigation measures 
Protected Area  Damage to protected 
• Engineering design will be in line with the Taiping Lake Scenic Zone Master Plan (2015-
area during construction 
2030) and Huashan Mysterious Grottoes Scenic Zone Master Plan (2007-2025);  
Implement  Supervis
Contractor
s 
e 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
• All works will be conducted within the confirmed ecological red line only;  
• Avoid setting up temporary storage sites for construction waste within scenic zones, and 
all waste generated will be transported out for disposal timely;  
• For  subprojects  near  riverway,  proper  onsite  wastewater  treatment  facilities  (e.g. 
sedimentation tank) will be set up to avoid direct discharge of wastewater and impairing of 
aquatic ecosystem along the river;  
• Design the location and shape of spoil piles before construction;  
• Vehicles will slow down within scenic zones and frequent water spraying  in construction 
sites will be performed to minimize dust;  
• Recover  the  vegetation  in  construction  sites  timely  after  the  completion  of  construction 
works to minimize soil erosion and visual landscape impact in scenic zones. 
Physical 
cultural 
resources 
Damage to known or 
unknown above or 
below-ground cultural 
relics 
• Establish chance-find procedures for physical cultural resources; 
• If a new site is unearthed, work shall be stopped immediately and the IA, HPMO and local 
CRB promptly notified. The construction will resume only after a thorough investigation and 
with the permission of appropriate authority.  
Contractor
s 
Community 
and 
occupational 
health and 
safety 
Site and access safety  • Erect  signs  will  be  placed  at  construction  sites  in  view  of  the  public,  warning  people  of 
potential  dangers  such  as  moving  vehicles  and  excavations,  and  raising  awareness  on 
safety issues; 
Contractor
s 
• Assign personnel to direct pedestrians around dangerous work areas; 
• Ensure that all sites are secure, discouraging access through appropriate fencing; 
• Place clear signs at construction sites in view of the people at risk (including workers and 
nearby  communities),  warning  people  of  potential  dangers  such  as  moving  vehicles, 
hazardous materials, excavations, and raising awareness on safety issues; 
• At the end of each day, all sites and equipment will be made secure (through fencing and/or 
lock-down of equipment) to prevent public access; 
• Erect safety barricades around all excavations; 
• Hold  a  public  consultation  meeting  prior  to  commencing  construction  to  discuss  issues 
associated with  ensuring the safety of nearby communities in vicinity of the construction 
site. 
CSCs, IAs 
LIEC, 
cultural 
relic 
bureaus 
CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
Item 
Potential impacts / 
issues 
Occupational health 
Mitigation measures 
135 
Implement  Supervis
e 
• Provide personal protection equipment to workers as needed, e.g. safety boots, helmets, 
gloves, protective clothing, goggles, ear protection  in  accordance with  health and safety 
regulations. 
Contractors  CSCs, 
IAs, LIEC 
• An  emergency  response  plan  to  take  actions  on  accidents  and  emergencies,  including 
environmental and public health emergencies associated with hazardous material spills and 
similar events will be prepared, and submitted to the  IA for review and appraisal. A fully 
equipped first-aid base in each construction site will be provided. 
• A Records Management System will be established to document occupational accidents, 
diseases, and incidents, that: (a) includes a tracking system to ensure that incidents are 
followed-up;  (b)  can  easily  retrieve  records;  and  (c)  can  be  used  during  compliance 
monitoring and audits. The system will be backed up on at least one external hard drive to 
protect records against loss or damage. 
• Ensure that safety, rescue and industrial health matters are given a high degree of publicity 
to all persons regularly or occasionally on the Site. Posters drawing attention to site safety, 
rescue  and  industrial  health  regulations  will  be  made  or  obtained  from  the  appropriate 
sources and will be displayed prominently in relevant areas of the site. 
• Train  all  workers  in  basic  sanitation  and  health  care  issues,  general  health  and  safety 
matters,  and  on  the  specific  hazards  of  their  work  and  sites  and  the  requirements  for 
community safety. 
• Asbestos. In the event that materials containing asbestos are suspected: (i) the contractor 
will immediately inform the IA, who will inform the HPMO; (ii) the contractor will subcontract 
the municipal center for hazardous waste, who will be responsible for the safe handling, 
transport, and disposal of the materials; (iii) such materials will only be disposed in a landfill 
site certified and designed to receive hazardous materials. 
CSC = construction supervision company, CRB = cultural relic bureau, DI = design institute, EA = executing agency, EEB = ecology and environment bureau, EMA 
= Environmental Monitoring Agency,  HPMO = Huangshan Municipal project management office (municipal-level PMO), IA = implementing agency, LIEC = loan 
implementation environment consultant. 
136 
Item 
Point 
source 
water 
pollution 
Sludge 
disposal 
Treated 
effluent from 
rural onsite 
wastewater 
treatment 
stations and 
domestic 
wastewater 
from tourism 
toilets 
Inadequate 
disposal of 
sludge from the 
5 project-
supported 
WWTS 
Non-point 
source 
pollution 
Soil and water 
pollution due to 
use of agri-
chemicals 
Ambient 
air 
Exhaust gas 
from vehicles 
and odor from 
WWTS with 
associated 
septic tanks 
and pumping 
stations, 
tourism toilets, 
and garbage 
bins  
Table EMP-3: Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures during Operation 
Potential 
impacts / 
issues 
Mitigation Measures and/or Safeguards 
Implement  Supervi
• Establish O&M procedures for rural WWTS. 
• Conduct  routine  inspection  on  the  performance  of 
WWTS. 
se 
IAs 
O&M units of 
the relevant 
MAB. A third-
party will be 
commissioned 
by MAB for 
daily work.   
As above 
IAs 
O&M units 
IAs 
• In accordance with national regulations, the raw sludge 
will be transported by sealed truck one to two times per 
year to the five county and district wastewater treatment 
plants  that  are  operating  in  each  project  county  and 
district 
• Due  diligence  has  been  conducted  on  these  plants 
(Section  III.D).  All  are  operating  in  compliance  with 
regulatory requirements 
• The treated sludge will be disposed in landfill or used as 
fertilizer for landscaping 
• All use of agricultural chemicals under the project will be 
subject to the project training and  measures to reduce 
the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides 
• No  agricultural  chemicals  listed  as  hazardous  under 
Classes  I  or  II  by  the  World  Health  Organization 38 or 
listed as prohibited or strictly controlled use under PRC 
national  regulations  for  pesticide  management  (see 
Appendix 1-2) will not be used for any project-supported 
activities  
Tourist facilities (parking lots, toilets, bins) 
• Design  and  implement  strict  and  clear  procedures  for 
O&M  of  the  public  tourism  toilets,  including  daily 
cleaning,  to  maintain  hygiene  and  minimize  disease 
risks.  
O&M Units: 
management 
committee of 
each scenic 
spot   
IAs 
• Install garbage bins at each public toilet. Bins will have 
covers, to prevent flies and rodents accessing the litter. 
• Implement  daily  waste  collection  schedule  for  the 
emptying and removal of litter from the garbage bins. 
• Garbage  bins  with  cover  will  be  used  for  enclosed 
storage of waste 
• Layout  design  of  the  parking  lots  will  facilitate  efficient 
entry  and  exit  of  vehicles,  to  reduce  traffic  congestion 
and gas emissions from vehicle exhaust gas caused by 
idling.  
• Implement procedures for O&M of landscaping around 
the parking lots and toilets. 
• Periodical  inspection on the condition and O&M of the 
public  toilets,  litter  bins,  parking  lots,  landscaping  to 
ensure efficient operation  
38 www.who.int/ipcs/publications/pesticides_hazard_2009.pdf?ua=1 
137 
Item 
Potential 
impacts / 
issues 
Mitigation Measures and/or Safeguards 
Implement  Supervi
se 
Wastewater treatment stations 
• Regular O&M of facilities to ensure optimal performance 
• Periodical inspection on performance 
• Periodical sampling of air quality and odor at established 
distances from each station (Table EMP-5) 
• Consultations  with  nearby  communities  as  needed  to 
assess whether there are odor-related issues 
• Each  station  will  install  low-noise  equipment  and  thick 
walls. 
• The pumps will be equipped with anti-vibration pad.  
• Sound insulation windows and doors will be used in the 
stations. 
• Station  operators  will  maintain  the  equipment  in  good 
working  condition  as  part  of  standard  operating 
procedures.  Periodical  check  and  maintenance  will  be 
required.  When  mal-function  of  the  equipment  occurs, 
the related accessories or parts will be replaced timely 
to avoid noise from abnormal operation of pumps.  
• Arrange  with  municipal  waste  collection  services  for 
regular collection of the tourism waste. 
• Burning of waste is strictly prohibited. 
• Ensure the garbage bins in tourism area are protected 
from  birds  and  vermin,  and  emptied  daily  by  the 
municipal waste collection systems. 
IAs 
IAs 
O&M units of 
the relevant 
MAB. A third-
party will be 
commissioned 
by MAB for 
daily work. 
O&M units of 
the 
management 
committee of 
each scenic 
spot 
Noise 
Noise from the 
23 wastewater 
pumping 
stations 
Solid 
waste 
Domestic 
waste from 
tourists 
MAB = municipal administration bureau, O&M = operation and maintenance, WWTS = wastewater treatment station. 
D. 
Environmental Monitoring, Inspection and Reporting 
9. 
Three types of project monitoring will be conducted under the EMP: (i) internal monitoring 
–  to  be conducted  by the seven  IAs  and  the  CSCs; (ii)  external monitoring  –  of  air,  water  and 
noise standards – to be conducted by the certificated EMA in each project county/district; and (iii) 
compliance monitoring – to be conducted by both the EMA and LIEC, to ensure the EMP is being 
implemented. 
10. 
The  project  monitoring  program  focuses  on  the  environment  in  the  project  areas  of 
influence  in  the  seven  county/districts  (Table  EMP-5).  The  program  covers  the  scope  of 
monitoring, monitoring parameters, time and frequency, implementing and supervising agencies, 
and estimated costs. The monitoring shall comply with the methodology provided in the relevant 
national environmental monitoring standards. Other associated standards to be followed are the 
national environmental quality standards of ambient air, surface water and noise, and the pollutant 
discharge standards. 
11. 
Internal monitoring. During construction, the CSCs and seven IAs will be responsible for 
conducting internal environmental monitoring in accordance with the monitoring plan (Table EMP-
5). Results will be reported through the CSC monthly reports to the IAs and HPMO.  
12. 
External monitoring. The IAs will contract at least one EMA to conduct environmental 
monitoring in accordance with the monitoring program (Table EMP-5). A detailed cost breakdown 
will be provided by the EMA when the environmental monitoring program is updated at the start 
of  each  component  implementation.  Monitoring  will  be  conducted  during  construction  and 
138 
operation periods, until a project completion report is issued. Semi-annual monitoring reports will 
be prepared by the EMAs and submitted to HPMO and the IAs. 
13. 
Compliance monitoring for EMP and progress reporting. The LIEC will review project 
progress and compliance with the EMP based on field visits, and the review of the environmental 
monitoring reports provided by the EMAs. The findings of the LIEC will be reported to ADB through 
the semi-annual EMP monitoring and progress reports. The reports will include (i) progress made 
in EMP implementation, (ii) overall effectiveness of the EMP implementation (including public and 
occupational health and safety), (iii) environmental monitoring and compliance, (iv) institutional 
strengthening  and  training,  (v)  public  consultation  (including  GRM),  and  (vi)  any  problems 
encountered during construction and operation, and the relevant corrective actions undertaken. 
The  LIECs  will  help  the  HPMO  prepare  the  reports  and  submit  the  English  report  to  ADB  for 
disclosure. 
14. 
Project  completion  environmental audits. Within  three months after  each  subproject 
completion, environmental acceptance monitoring and audit reports of each subproject shall be 
(i)  prepared  by  the  construction  unit  or  a  capable  technical  agency  commissioned  by  the 
construction unit in accordance with the Tentative Procedure of Project Completion Environmental 
Inspection and Acceptance for Construction Project  (2017); (ii) disclosed to the public within 5 
days after report completion with a duration no less than 20 working days; and (iii) reported to 
ADB through the semiannual EMP monitoring and progress reporting process.  
Quality assurance (QA) /quality control (QC) for compliance monitoring. To ensure 
15. 
accuracy of the monitoring, QA/QC procedures will be conducted in accordance with the following 
regulations: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Regulations  of  QA/AC  Management  for  Environmental  Monitoring  issued  by  the  State 
Environmental Protection Administration in July 2006;  
QA/QC  Manual  for  Environmental  Water  Monitoring  (Second  edition),  published  by  the 
State Environmental Monitoring Centre in 2001; and  
QA/QC  Manual  for  Environmental  Air  Monitoring  published  by  the  State  Environmental 
Monitoring Centre in 2001. 
Table EMP-4: Environmental Reporting Plan 
Report 
From 
To 
Frequency of Reporting 
CSCs 
EMAs 
IAs 
IAs, HPMO 
A. Construction Phase 
Internal progress reports 
External reports 
Compliance monitoring with EMP – 
progress reports 
Environmental acceptance 
monitoring and audit reports 
B. Operation Phase  
EMP progress reports  
CSC = construction supervision company, EEB = ecology and environment bureau, EMA = environmental monitoring 
agency, EEB = the municipal and district/county environment protection bureau, HPMO = Huangshan Municipal project 
management  office  (municipal-level  PMO),  IA  =  implementing  agency,  LIEC  =  loan  implementation  environment 
consultant. 
Within three months after subproject 
completion 
Monthly 
Semi-annual 
construction 
units 
EEBs, IAs, 
HPMO 
HPMO / LIEC 
Semi-annual 
Semi-annual 
HPMO 
ADB 
ADB 
Subject 
Parameter 
Location 
Frequency 
Implement  Supervise 
Table EMP-5: Environmental Monitoring Program 
139 
1. Construction phase – compliance with measures in Table EMP-2 
Internal monitoring (contractors, CSCs, HPMO and IA Environment Officers) 
Ambient air 
quality 
Noise 
Visual inspection at all 
construction sites 
• At each construction site 
• LAeq: measured with 
Dust mitigation 
1 time / week 
hand-held meter 
• Consultations with 
affected residents  
Solid waste 
Domestic and 
construction waste 
Soil erosion  On-site management 
of soil erosion 
boundary 
• Settlements within 60 m 
of construction works – 
see Table EMP-2 and 
IEE Section V.3 
Visual inspection at all 
construction sites and 
work-camps 
Visual inspection at spoil 
sites and all construction 
sites  
Construction sites and 
public roads and paths  
Community 
health and 
safety 
Measures for traffic 
management and on-
site safety described in 
in Table EMP-2 
Camp hygiene, safety, 
availability of clean 
water 
Occupational 
health and 
safety 
External monitoring (certified environment monitoring agency) 
Water quality  SS, petroleum 
Inspection at all 
construction sites and 
work-camps 
Ambient air 
quality 
Dust: TSP 
Noise 
LAeq 
Onsite treated 
construction wastewater 
(by oil-water separator 
and/or sedimentation 
tank) 
All construction sites (at 
least 1 point upwind and 1 
point downwind) and the 
nearest sensitive receptor 
Boundaries of all 
construction sites and the 
nearest sensitive receptor 
for each construction site 
Daily 
measurements 
and consultations 
or as needed 
during peak 
construction levels 
at individual sites 
Daily 
1 time / week; and 
immediately after 
heavy rainfall 
Daily during 
construction at all 
individual sites 
1 time / week  
1 time / month 
during construction 
Contractors, 
CSCs 
Contractors, 
CSCs 
IA, LIEC 
IA, LIEC 
Contractors, 
CSCs 
Contractors, 
CSCs 
Contractors, 
CSCs 
IA, LIEC 
IA, LIEC 
IA, LIEC 
Contractors, 
CSCs 
IA, LIEC 
EMA 
EEB, IA, 
LIEC 
1 time / month 
during construction 
EMA 
EEB, IA, 
LIEC 
EMA 
EEB, IA, 
LIEC 
1 time / month 
(twice a day: once 
in daytime and 
once at nighttime, 
for 2 consecutive 
days) during 
construction 
2. Operation phase 
Water quality 
of effluent 
from WWTS  
Ambient air 
quality 
pH, CODcr, SS, NH3-N, 
TP 
Odor: NH3 and H2S 
Noise 
LAeq 
Influent and effluent from 
WWTS 
4 times / year 
EMA; facility 
operator 
EEB, IA 
At the nearest sensitive 
receptor from WWTS (1 
point upwind and 2 points 
downwind) 
At boundary of pump 
stations (IEE Section V.E) 
and the nearest sensitive 
receptor  
2 times / year 
EMA; facility 
operator 
EEB, IA 
2 times / year 
(twice a day: once 
in daytime and 
once at nighttime 
EMA; facility 
operator 
EEB, IA 
140 
Subject 
Parameter 
Location 
Frequency 
Implement  Supervise 
for 2 consecutive 
days) 
BOD5 = 5-day biochemical oxygen demand, CODcr = chemical oxygen demand, CSC = construction supervision company, EMA 
= environmental monitoring agency; EEB = ecology and environmental bureau, LAeq = equivalent continuous A-weighted sound 
pressure level, LIEC = loan implementation environment consultant, NH3-N = ammonia nitrogen, PM10 = particles measuring 
<10μm;  HPMO  =  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office;  SS  =  suspended  solids;  TN  =  total  nitrogen;  TP  =  total 
phosphorus; TSP = total suspended particle, WWTS = wastewater treatment station. 
E. 
Training and Capacity Building 
16.  Project agencies in the three districts and four counties in Huangshan Municipality have no 
previous experience with ADB-funded projects and safeguard requirements. The experience of 
individual  staff  within  the  district  and  county  EEBs  for  environmental  management  varies 
considerably. Domestic procedures for EIA preparation and project approval do not, in general, 
have a strong focus on practical and time-based mitigation measures or corrective actions, and 
there  is  not  yet  a regulatory  requirement  in the PRC  for  EMPs  of the  scope required  by ADB. 
Implementation of the current EMP represents a significant new task for the local agencies.  
17.  A capacity building program will be implemented on: (i) the EMP, including the mitigation 
measures,  monitoring,  and  reporting;  (ii)  the  grievance  redress  mechanism,  including  roles, 
responsibilities and procedures;  (iii)  procurement  and contract management,  focusing  on  EMP 
incorporation  and  implementation;  (iv)  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  WWTS;  and  (v) 
measures  for  improved efficiency  in  the  use  of  agricultural  chemicals  and  water  resources  for 
agriculture. Training will be provided by the LIEC with the support of other experts under the loan 
implementation consultant services. Trainees will be the  HPMO, IAs, Project Managers of IAs, 
contractors and CSCs. The HPMO will arrange the training programs, supported by the LIEC and 
other loan implementation consultants.  
Table EMP-6: Project Environment Training Program 
Training program 
Scope of Training 
Procurement and 
contract 
management 
(emphasize EMP 
implementation)  
Implementation of 
EMP 
• ADB procurement guidelines 
• Bidding document and contract preparation, 
including EMP clauses 
• Risk of improper procurement and mitigation 
measures, and handling variation orders and 
contract management 
• Roles, responsibilities, monitoring, inspection, 
LIEC 
reporting in EMP 
• Environment monitoring program; 
• Public consultation and participation; 
• GRM implementation, coordination and 
reporting; 
• Environment, health and safety during project 
construction and operation for workers and 
the community; 
• Prevention and control of transmissible 
Grievance redress 
mechanism 
diseases and HIV/AIDS 
• Roles and responsibilities; 
• Procedures 
LIEC 
Trainer 
LIC 
2 
2 
Trainee  Time  Days  Persons 
HPMO, 
IAs, 
Project 
Managers 
of IAs 
40 
2 
2 
40 
2 
2 
40 
HPMO, 
IAs, 
Project 
Managers 
of IAs, 
Contractor
s, CSCs 
HPMO, 
IAs, 
Project 
Managers 
of IAs, 
Contractor
s, CSCs 
Scope of Training 
Trainer 
Trainee  Time  Days  Persons 
141 
Training program 
O&M of WWTS 
• Operation of WWTS; 
• Environmental management requirements 
• Key issues and best practices.  
Green agriculture 
• Agricultural non-point source pollution 
control; 
• Environmental management requirements 
• Key issues and best practices. 
LIEC and LIC  HPMO, 
2 
2 
30 
IAs, 
Project 
Managers 
of IAs 
LIEC and LIC  HPMO, 
IAs, 
Project 
Managers 
of IAs 
2 
2 
30 
Total 
180 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CSC = construction supervision company, EMP = environment management plan, 
GRM  =  grievance  redress  mechanism,  IA  =  implementing  agency,  LIC  =  loan  implementation  consultant,  O&M  = 
operation  and  maintenance,  HPMO  =  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office,  WWTS  =  wastewater 
treatment station.  
10 
10 
F. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
18.  This  project  grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRM)  is  a  joint  GRM  for:  (i)  the  initial 
identification,  documentation,  and  preliminary  management  of  both  environmental  and  social 
safeguard-related  grievances; (ii)  the  resolving  of  environmental safeguard-related grievances; 
and (iii) the resolving of, and/or referral of, social safeguard-related grievances. Environmental 
and social safeguard-related grievances may differ considerably in the nature of grievances and 
agencies, procedures, and timing required to address them: the GRM provides a simple, time-
based mechanism to meet project needs as required. Social safeguard issues beyond the scope 
of the GRM procedures will be referred to relevant agencies as needed.   
19.  The environment and social officers of the HPMO and seven IAs in the three districts and 
four counties will be the lead coordinators for GRM implementation. However, all project agencies 
and staff will be trained in the GRM and will take an active role in supporting these staff as and 
when necessary. At the HPMO level, the HPMO environment officer and HPMO social officer will 
establish  a  GRM  tracking  and  documentation  system,  conduct  daily  coordination  with  the  IA 
officers, arrange meetings and conduct site visits as necessary, maintain the overall project GRM 
database,  and  prepare  the  reporting  inputs  for  progress  reports  to  ADB.  At  the  IA  level,  the 
environment and social officers will instruct contractors and CSCs on the GRM procedures, and 
coordinate with the local EEBs and other government divisions as necessary. HPMO and IA staff 
will be trained and supported by the LIEC and loan implementation social consultant. 
20.  The  contact  persons  for  different  GRM  entry  points,  such  as  the  HPMO  and  IA 
environmental  and  social  officers, contractors,  operators  of  project  facilities,  and EEBs,  will  be 
identified  prior  to  construction.  The  contact  details  for  the  entry  points  (phone  numbers, 
addresses, e-mail addresses) will be publicly disclosed on information boards at construction sites 
and on the websites of the local EEBs.  
21. 
If a complaint is received and filed, the HPMO and IA officers will identify if the complaint is 
eligible for management under the GRM. Eligible complaints under the GRM include those where: 
(i) the complaint pertains to the project; and (ii) the issues arising in the complaint fall within the 
scope  of  environmental  and/or  social  issues  that  the  GRM  is  authorized  to  address.  Ineligible 
complaints include those where: (i) the complaint is not project-related; (ii) the nature of the issue 
is  outside  the mandate of the GRM  (such  as  fraud  or  corruption);  and/or  (iii)  other  procedures 
would be more appropriate to address the issue. Ineligible complaints will be documented and 
provided  to  the  relevant  authorities  and  the  complainant  will  be  informed  of  these  steps.  The 
142 
procedure and timeframe for the GRM is as follows and summarized in Figure EMP-1.  
•  Stage 1 (5 calendar days): If a concern arises during construction or operation, the affected 
person  may  submit  a  written  or  oral  complaint  to  the  contractor  (construction  phase)  or 
operator  of  the  project  facility  (operation  phase).  The  contractor  will:  (i)  respectfully 
acknowledge  the  issue  and  immediately  stop  the  causal  activity  (e.g.  on-site  construction 
causing  high  noise  levels  to  a  nearby  household);  (ii)  not  resume  the  activity  until  the 
complaint has been resolved; (iii) inform the Project Managers of IAs of the incident on the 
same day of the incident occurring and how the contractor has responded or will respond; 
(iv)  give  a  clear  reply  to  the  affected  person  within  two  calendar  days;  and  (v)  as  far  as 
possible,  resolve  the  problem  within  five  calendar  days  from  receiving  the  complaint.  The 
contractor  will  keep  the  Project  Managers  of  IAs  fully  informed  at  all  stages.  The  Project 
Managers  of  IAs  will:  inform  the  HPMO,  local  village  committee,  and  Ecology  and 
Environment  Bureau  of  the  incident  within  one  working  day  of  being  informed  by  the 
contractor; and, subsequently keep these parties informed at all stages. 
•  Stage 2 (5 calendar days): If the issue cannot be resolved in Stage 1, after five calendar 
days,  the  IAs  and/or  HPMO  will  take  over  responsibility.  Eligibility  of  the  complaint  will  be 
assessed, and a recommended solution given to the complainant and contractors within two 
calendar  days.  If  the  solution  is  agreed  by the  complainant,  the  contractors  and/or  facility 
operators (in operation) will implement the solution within five calendar days from the IA or 
HPMO taking over responsibility of the complaint. Written records will be made of all stages 
and outcomes. At the expiration of Stage 2, HPMO will inform ADB of the outcome. 
•  Stage 3 (15 calendar days): If no solution can be identified by the HPMO and/or IA, and/or 
the  complainant  is  not  satisfied  with  the  proposed  solution,  the  HPMO  and/or  HPMO  will 
organize, within seven (7) calendar days, a stakeholder meeting (including the complainant, 
contractor and/or operator of the facility, EEB, IA, HPMO). A solution acceptable to all shall 
be identified including clear steps. The contractors (during construction) and facility operators 
(during operation) will immediately implement the agreed solution. All attempts will be made 
to fully resolve the issue within 15 calendar days. Written records will be made of all stages 
and outcomes. At the expiration of Stage 3, HPMO will inform ADB of the outcome. 
143 
Affected Person(s) 
Stage 1 
5 days 
Complaint 
Solution  
Implemented 
Complaint 
Contractor, CSC 
IAs, local EEB, 
Village committee 
Reporting 
Stage 2 
5 days 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
IA and/or PMO Environment 
and/or Social Officers 
(recording and coordination) 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
Stakeholder  Meeting 
PMO 
Action Plan 
Stage 3 
15 days 
Solution Implemented 
Reporting by 
 PMO to ADB 
ADB 
Figure EMP-1: Operation Chart of the Grievance Redress Mechanism 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CSC = construction supervision company, EEB = ecology and environmental bureau, 
GRM = grievance redress mechanism, IA = implementing agency, HPMO = Huangshan Municipal project management 
office. 
22.  The GRM does not affect the right of an affected person to submit their complaints to any 
agency they wish to, for example the local village committee, community leaders, courts, HPMO, 
IA, HMG, district/county government, and/or ADB. 
23.  The  HPMO  and  IAs  shall  bear  any  and  all  costs  of  implementing  the  GRM,  including 
meeting, travel, and/or accommodation costs of the project staff or affected person. The GRM will 
be implemented throughout project construction and at least the first year of operation for each 
project facility. 
144 
G. 
Public Consultation and Awareness Raising 
24.  Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during project preparation (Section VII 
of  the IEE).  During construction,  the project  will continue to  seek  public consultation  and  raise 
awareness of project activities, especially those may impact the public such as noise and dust 
from excavation of pipe trenches. The public consultation plan is in Table EMP-7 and includes 
public participation in evaluating environmental benefits and impacts. The IAs are responsible for 
public  participation  during  project  implementation.  They  will  be  supported  by  the  HPMO 
Environment and Social Officers and the LIEC. 
Table EMP-7: Public Consultation and Participation Plan  
Approach 
Times/Frequency 
Subjects 
Participants 
Organizer 
Construction 
HPMO, 
IAs, 
LIEC 
Site visits, informal 
interviews 
At least once a week 
during peak 
construction 
Site-specific basis  At least one month 
before the start of 
construction at any 
new site 
Public workshops  At least once during 
peak construction 
period 
Operation 
HPMO, IAs, 
OPFs 
Consultation and 
site visits 
At least once in first 
year of operation 
Public workshop 
Public survey 
As needed based on 
consultations 
At least once after 1 
year of operation 
Construction impacts; 
adjusting mitigation 
measures if necessary; 
feedback 
Anticipated risks – 
noise, dust, etc. 
Affected persons 
Workers 
Affected persons 
EMP implementation 
progress; construction 
impacts; adjusting 
mitigation measures if 
necessary; feedback 
Effects of mitigation 
measures, impacts of 
operation, feedback 
As above 
Comments and 
suggestions 
Affected persons 
Affected persons 
As above 
Project beneficiaries 
EMP = environmental management plan, OPF = operator of project facilities,  HPMO = Huangshan Municipal project 
management office, LIEC = loan implementation environmental consultant. 
H. 
Cost Estimates 
25.  This section provides an estimate of the cost of EMP implementation. The cost comprises 
three categories: mitigation measures (Tables EMP-2; EMP-3); monitoring (Table EMP-5); and 
training (Table EMP-6). Costs are presented for the construction phase of five years and the first 
year of operation (i.e. a total of six years). The costs do not include: (i) detailed design revisions 
and adjustments; (ii) internal monitoring/inspection during construction, as this will be included in 
the  construction  supervision  contracts;  and  (iii)  salaries  of  HPMO  and  HPMO  staff.  Costs  for 
mitigation  measures  and  trainings  are  based  on  estimates  of  the  DEIA  institute  and/or  the 
experience of the TRTA consultants from other similar projects. All costs were discussed with the 
DEIA Institute, HPMO and IAs. 
Table EMP-8. Estimated Cost for EMP Implementation for Five Years Construction and First Year Operation (x CNY10,000) 
145 
No. 
Item 
HPMO  Huangshan  Huizhou  Tunxi 
She 
Yi 
Xiuning  Qimen 
LIEC 
A  Mitigation measures 
A1  Consulting service (cost to be paid by HPMO) 
A1 
A2  Public consultation 
A3  GRM 
A2  Physical and management mitigation measures (cost to be paid by the contractors) 
A2.1  Wastewater management 
A2.2  Air pollution control (dust) 
A2.3  Noise 
A2.4  Soil erosion 
A2.5  Solid waste 
A2.6  Ecology protection 
54 
48 
36 
76 
30 
12 
44 
39 
29 
61 
25 
10 
29 
26 
19 
40 
16 
6 
72 
10 
1 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
1 
1 
1 
130 
115 
87 
180 
72 
29 
/ 
/ 
1 
A2.7 
Community and occupational health 
& safety 
/ 
24 
161 
Environmental monitoring (cost to be paid by each IA) 
Subtotal 
83 
B 
B1  External monitoring during construction 
/ 
B1.1  Construction wastewater quality 
/ 
B1.2  Ambient air quality 
/ 
B1.3  Noise 
Subtotal 
0 
B2  Monitoring during operation (cost to be paid by each facility operator) 
B2.1  Water quality (WWTS) 
B2.2  Ambient air quality (WWTS) 
B2.3  Noise (pumping stations) 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Subtotal 
Training (cost to be paid by HPMO) 
C 
0 
45 
304 
37 
246 
108 
723 
6 
6 
5 
18 
4 
4 
4 
12 
15 
4 
0 
19 
12 
3 
0 
16 
6 
6 
5 
18 
4 
1 
2.2 
7 
15 
15 
13 
43 
24 
6 
0 
30 
/ 
/ 
1 
28 
25 
18 
38 
15 
6 
23 
155 
6 
6 
5 
18 
0 
0 
0 
0 
/ 
/ 
1 
98 
87 
66 
136 
55 
22 
82 
547 
4 
4 
4 
12 
26 
6 
0.2 
33 
Total 
Cost 
72 
10 
8 
423 
376 
282 
587 
235 
94 
352 
/ 
/ 
1 
39 
35 
26 
55 
22 
9 
33 
219 
2438 
11 
11 
9 
31 
0 
0 
0 
0 
54 
54 
45 
153 
82 
20 
2 
104 
146 
No. 
Item 
HPMO  Huangshan  Huizhou  Tunxi 
She 
Yi 
Xiuning  Qimen 
C1 
Procurement and contract 
management - emphasize EMP 
implementation 
C2  EMP implementation 
C3  GRM 
C4 
C5 
WWTS - operation and env. 
management 
Green agriculture - env. 
management 
Subtotal 
Grand Total (x10,000 CNY) 
Total x10,000 EURO (1 
EURO=7.6576 CNY) 
Proportion of total (%) 
9.6 
9.6 
9.6 
7.2 
7.2 
43.2 
126.2 
16.5 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
198.8 
331.4 
271.4 
795.7 
173.1 
591.7 
249.7 
2694.9 
26.0 
43.3 
35.4 
103.9 
22.6 
77.3 
32.6 
351.9 
Total 
Cost 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
CSC = construction supervision company, DI = design institute, EA = executing agency, EEB = ecology and environment bureau, EMA = Environmental Monitoring 
Agency,  IA  =  implementing agency,  LIEC  =  loan  implementation  environment  consultant,  HPMO  =  Huangshan  Municipal  project  management  office,  WWTS  = 
wastewater treatment station.  
aCostings were based on the following assumptions: (i) a construction duration for each project site of 1.5 years; (ii) a construction season of 6 
months per year; and (iii) an operational duration of one year (first year of operation). 
4.68% 
7.38% 
12.30%  10.07%  29.53%  6.42% 
21.96% 
9.27% 
100.00% 
147 
I. 
Mechanisms for Feedback and Adjustment 
26. 
Based  on  environmental  inspection  and  monitoring  reports,  the  HPMO  and  IAs  shall 
decide,  in  consultation with the  LIEC,  whether (i) further mitigation measures  are required  as 
corrective  actions,  or  (ii)  some  improvements  are  required  for  environmental  management 
practices. The effectiveness of mitigation measures and monitoring plans will be evaluated by a 
feedback  reporting system.  Adjustment  to the  EMP  and/or  ESMS  will  be  made,  if  necessary. 
The  HPMO  Environmental  Officer  and  the  LIEC  will  play  critical  roles  in  the  feedback  and 
adjustment mechanism. 
27. 
If during inspection and monitoring, substantial deviation from the EMP and/or ESMS is 
observed  or  any  changes  are  made  to  the  project  that  may  cause  substantial  adverse 
environmental impacts or increase the number of affected people, then the HPMO and IAs will 
immediately  consult  with  ADB  and  form  an  environmental  assessment  team  to  conduct 
additional  environmental  assessment.  If  necessary,  further  public  consultation  will  be 
undertaken.  The  revised  DEIAs  and  project  IEE,  including  this  EMP  and/or  ESMS,  will  be 
submitted  to  the  ADB  for  review,  appraisal,  and  public  disclosure.  The  revised  EMP  and/or 
ESMS as relevant will be passed to the contractors, CSCs and operators of project facilities for 
implementation. 
148 
APPENDIX EMP-1. DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL POSITIONS 
1. 
HUANGSHAN MUNICIPAL PMO ENVIRONMENT OFFICER 
A. 
Background 
1. 
Development projects supported by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) routinely include a 
project management office (PMO). For this project, the Huangshan Municipal PMO is responsible for 
project implementation and comprises the municipal agencies involved in the project. Compliance 
with the loan and project agreements include implementation of: (i) an environment management 
plan  (EMP),  which  is  prepared  as  part  of  the  project  initial  environment  examination;  and  (ii)  an 
environmental and social management system (ESMS). The EMP is the critical guiding document to 
manage, monitor, and report upon potential project environmental impacts. Implementation of the 
EMP  is  a  full-time  task.  The  ESMS  will  be  implemented  for  output  3  of  the  project.  The  HPMO 
environment officer will oversee the implementation of the EMP and ESMS. These terms of reference 
describe the position requirements. 
B. 
Scope and Duration of Work 
The officer will work on behalf of the HPMO to implement the project EMP. The officer will 
2. 
report directly to the HPMO. The position is full-time for the entire project duration. 
C. 
Qualifications 
3. 
The officer will have: (i) a master’s degree or higher in environmental management or related 
field; (ii) at least 10 years of experience in environmental management, monitoring, and/or impact 
assessment, including specific experience on the management and monitoring of green agriculture 
projects;  (iii)  ability  to  communicate  and  work  effectively  with  local  communities,  contractors,  and 
government agencies; (iv) ability to analyze data and prepare technical reports; (v) willingness and 
health  to  regularly  visit  the  project  construction  sites  and  in  different  seasons;  and  (vi)  ideally, 
proficiency in spoken and written English.  
D. 
Detailed Tasks 
The HPMO Environment Officer will have a detailed understanding of the project EMP and 
4. 
ESMS and supporting documents, including the domestic environmental reports, the project initial 
environmental examination (IEE), and project environmental assurances. The officer will have the 
following tasks.  
For the EMP 
(i)  Assess whether the EMP requires updating due to any changes in project design, which may 
have occurred after the EMP was prepared. 
(ii)  Distribute  the  Chinese  language  version  of  the  EMP  to  all  relevant  agencies,  including  the 
implementing agencies, and municipal agencies for environment protection. This should occur 
at least 3 months before construction begins. 
(iii)  Conduct  meetings  with  agencies  as  necessary  to  ensure  they  understand  their  specific 
responsibilities described in the EMP. 
(iv)  Ensure that relevant mitigation, monitoring, and reporting measures in the EMP are included in 
the bidding documents, contracts, and relevant construction plans. 
(v)  Confirm  that  the  implementing  agencies  responsible  for  the  internal  environment  monitoring 
described  in  the  EMP  understand  their  tasks  and  will  implement  the  monitoring  in  a  timely 
fashion.  
(vi)  At least 2 months before construction begins, establish and implement the project grievance 
redress mechanism (GRM) described in the EMP. This will include: (a) preparation of a simple 
149 
table  and  budget  identifying  the  type,  number,  and  cost  of  materials  needed  to  inform  local 
communities about the GRM and starting dates and scope of construction; (b) design, prepare, 
and distribute these materials, and plan and conduct the community meetings; (c) prepare a 
form  to  record  any  public  complaints;  (d)  preparation  of  a  summary  table  to  record  all 
complaints, including dates, issues, and how they were resolved; and (e) ensure that all relevant 
agencies, including contractors, understand their role in the GRM. 
(vii)  Prior  to  construction,  ensure  that  the  implementation  agencies  and  their  contractors  have 
informed their personnel, including all construction workers, of the EMP requirements. This will 
include  all  mitigation  measures  relating  to  impacts  to  air,  water,  noise,  soil,  sensitive  sites, 
ecological values, cultural values, worker and community health and safety, respectful behavior 
when communicating with local communities, and responding to and reporting any complaints. 
(viii)  During project construction, make regular site visits with the loan implementation environment 
consultant  (LIEC)  to  assess  progress,  meet  with  contractors  and/or  local  communities,  and 
assess compliance with the EMP. 
For the ESMS 
(ix)  Distribute the Chinese language version of the ESMS to all relevant agencies, including HTIC, 
at least three months before the ADB loan comes into effect. 
(x)  Assist HTIC and all other relevant agencies to implement the ESMS. 
(xi)  Coordinate  and  provide  support  as  needed  for  the  HTIC  environmental  and  social  officers 
recruited by the implementing agency for project output 3. 
(xii)  Conduct meetings with HTIC and other agencies as necessary to ensure they understand their 
specific responsibilities described in the ESMS. 
(xiii)  Provide training to HTIC, potential equity investment applicants, and other project agencies as 
necessary to facilitate implementation of the ESMS. 
(xiv)  Assist HTIC to ensure that candidate subprojects are correctly categorized and comply with the 
selection criteria for environment.  
(xv)  With  the  HPMO  Social  Officer,  implement  the  project  grievance  redress mechanism  (GRM), 
including: (i) instruct the other project agencies on their responsibilities in the GRM; (ii) establish 
a simple registry system, to document and track grievances received (including forms to record 
complaints and how they have been resolved); and (iii) prepare reports on progress of the GRM 
for inclusion in the semi-annual environmental and social monitoring and progress reports to 
ADB. 
(xvi)  Ensure the officers provide progress reports on a semi-annual basis, in time for consolidation 
with the overall environment monitoring report to be submitted by HPMO to ADB. 
Overall 
(xvii) Ensure that all relevant agencies submit required progress reports and information, including 
environmental monitoring and reports of any issues or grievances. 
(xviii)  Compile,  review,  and  store  environmental  progress  reports  from  the  implementation 
agencies, records of any grievances, and any other relevant issues. Maintain digital copies of 
all  information.  When  necessary,  enter  data  into  summary  tables  in  digital  format  (e.g.,  to 
transfer records of grievances from hard copy forms). Ensure that all information is stored in the 
HPMO filing system, backed up, and can be easily retrieved. 
(xix)  Prepare semiannual environment progress reports. 
(xx)  Work  closely  with  the  HPMO,  district  and  county  IAs,  loan  implementation  consultants,  and 
other agencies as necessary to conduct these tasks. 
E. 
Reporting Requirements 
Semiannual  environment  monitoring  reports  using  the  template  provided  by  ADB  or  a 
5. 
domestic format reviewed and approved by ADB. 
F. 
Logistical Support Provided by the HPMO to the Environment Officer  
150 
(i)  Provision  of  hard  and  soft  copies  of  the  project  EMP  and  ESMS,  domestic  and  project 
environmental reports, feasibility study reports, loan and project agreements, maps, and other 
supporting materials as necessary to ensure the officer can implement the tasks. 
(ii)  Vehicle transport, office materials, and other logistical support, as necessary for the officer to 
visit the project construction sites and local communities, arrange and conduct meetings, and 
prepare and distribute consultation materials. 
(iii)  Overall  coordination,  including  review  of  the  draft  semiannual  monitoring  reports,  and  final 
responsibility for submission of the monitoring reports to ADB. 
2. 
I. 
HPMO SOCIAL OFFICER (tasks for the ESMS) 
BACKGROUND 
Part of the ADB  project loan will be on-lent from the government to the Huangshan Trust 
6. 
Investment  Company  (HTIC)to  establish  a  Green  Investment  Fund.  HTIC  will  on-lend  the  funds 
directly to qualified investees (small and medium-sized enterprises in areas of green farming and 
ecotourism. To oversee the project implementation, the Huangshan Municipal project management 
office (HPMO) has been established in the Huangshan Municipal Government. An Environmental 
and Social Management System (ESMS) has been developed by the government and HTIC. HTIC 
will establish the ESMS within their business procedures. The ESMS is the key guiding document to 
assess and manage the potential environmental and social impacts of subprojects. This is the first 
ESMS to be conducted by the HTIC. The HPMO will appoint or recruit a full-time environmental officer 
to help implement the project safeguards, including the ESMS. These terms of reference describe 
the requirements for this position. 
II. 
SCOPE AND DURATION OF WORK 
7. 
The officer will work on behalf of the HPMO with HTIC environmental and social officers, to 
implement  the  project  ESMS.  The  officer  will  report  directly  to  the  HPMO.  The  position  is  for  the 
overall project duration of 6 years. 
III.  QUALIFICATIONS 
8. 
The officer will have: (i) an undergraduate degree or higher in applied social science; (ii) at 
least  five  years  of  experience  in  social  management,  monitoring,  and/or  impact  assessment;  (iii) 
ability  to  communicate  and  work  effectively  with  local  communities,  contractors,  and  government 
agencies;  (iv)  ability  to  analyze  data  and  prepare  technical  reports;  (v)  willingness  and  health  to 
regularly visit the subproject sites; and (vi) ideally, proficiency in spoken and written English. 
IV.  DETAILED TASKS 
The officer will have a detailed understanding of the ESMS and the supporting documents to 
9. 
be  produced  (land  acquisition/resettlement  and  ethnic  minority  people 
impact  checklists, 
categorization forms, land use rights transfer framework, social and gender action plan). Working 
closely  with  the  HPMO  Environment  Officer,  HTIC  environmental  and  social  officers,  and  other 
agencies, the officer will: 
(i)  Distribute the Chinese language version of the ESMS to all relevant agencies, including HTIC, 
at least three months before the ADB loan comes into effect. 
(ii)  Assist HTIC and all other relevant agencies to establish and implement the ESMS. 
(iii)  Meet  with  HTIC  and  other  agencies  as  necessary  to  ensure  they  understand  their  specific 
responsibilities described in the ESMS. 
(iv)  Provide training to HTIC and other project agencies as necessary to implement the ESMS. 
(v)  Assist HTIC to ensure that candidate subprojects are correctly categorized and comply with the 
social selection criteria.  
(vi)  With  the  HPMO  Environment  Officer,  implement  the  project  grievance  redress  mechanism 
(GRM), including: (i) instruct the other project agencies on their responsibilities in the GRM; (ii) 
establish a simple registry system, to document and track grievances received (including forms 
151 
to record complaints and how they have been resolved); and (iii) prepare reports on progress 
of the GRM for inclusion in the semi-annual environmental and social monitoring and progress 
reports to ADB. 
(vii)  Prepare semi-annual social progress reports for the HPMO to submit to ADB. 
(viii)  Provide social and gender indicators and targets for the project performance monitoring system. 
(ix)  Regularly visit subprojects where there are special social or ethnic issues, impacts or benefits.  
(x)  Prepare semi-annual social progress reports, and other ESMS issues that may arise. 
V. 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
Semi-annual  monitoring  reports  on  the  implementation  and  progress  of  the  ESMS  should  be 
submitted to ADB within 1 months after each reporting period, using the template provided by ADB 
or a domestic format reviewed and approved by ADB. 
3. 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTING AGENCY ENVIRONMENT OFFICERS 
A. 
Background 
1. 
The project will be coordinated by the Huangshan Municipal PMO. Compliance with the loan 
and  project  agreements  include  implementation  of:  (i)  an  environment  management  plan  (EMP), 
which is prepared as part of the project initial environment examination; and (ii) an environmental 
and  social  management  system  (ESMS).  The  EMP  is  the  critical  guiding  document  to  manage, 
monitor, and report upon potential project environmental impacts. Implementation of the EMP is a 
full-time task. The ESMS will be implemented for output 3 of the project. Overall coordination of the 
project EMP is the responsibility of the HPMO environment officer. At the field level, implementation 
of the EMP will be undertaken by the Project Managers of the implementing agencies in the three 
districts and four counties. For this purpose, each IA requires a IA Environment Officer.  
B. 
Scope and Duration of Work 
2. 
The seven IA Environment Officers will work on behalf of the IAs to implement the project 
EMP in Huangshan District, Huizhou District, Tunxi District, She County, Yi County, Xiuning County 
and Qimen County, respectively. The officers will report directly to each of their  IA managers and 
work  closely  with  the  district  or  county  environment  protection  bureaus  (EEBs),  environment 
monitoring agencies (EMAs), and HPMO Environment Officer. The positions are for the entire project 
duration (6 years). 
C. 
Qualifications 
The officers will have: (i) a bachelor degree in environmental management or related field, 
3. 
and/or  equivalent  experience;  (ii)  at  least  5  years  of  experience  in  environmental  management, 
monitoring,  and/or  impact  assessment,  including  specific  experience  on  the  management  and 
monitoring of green agriculture projects; (iii) ability to communicate and work effectively with local 
communities,  contractors,  and  government  agencies;  (iv)  ability  to  analyze  data  and  prepare 
technical reports; and (v) willingness and health to regularly visit the project construction sites and in 
different seasons. 
D. 
Detailed Tasks 
4. 
The  IA  Environment  Officers  will  have  a  detailed  understanding  of  the  project  EMP  and 
supporting  documents,  including  the  domestic  environmental  reports,  project  IEE,  and  project 
environmental assurances. The officers will have the following tasks. 
152 
For the EMP 
(i)  Work  closely  with  the  HPMO  Environment  Officer,  EEB,  environment  monitoring  agency, 
contractors, construction supervision companies, and all other relevant agencies to implement 
the EMP. 
(ii)  Distribute  the  Chinese  language  version  of  the  EMP  to  all  relevant  agencies,  including  the 
implementing agencies, municipal agencies for environment protection. This should occur at 
least 3 months before construction begins. 
(iii)  Conduct  meetings  with  agencies  as  necessary  to  ensure  they  understand  their  specific 
responsibilities described in the EMP. 
(iv)  Ensure that contractors implement the relevant mitigation measures in the EMP. 
(v) 
Implement the monitoring and reporting requirements in the EMP, including timely submission 
of progress reports to the HPMO Environment Officer. 
Implement the project GRM. 
(vi) 
(vii)  Make regular inspections of construction sites to assess progress, meet with contractors and/or 
local communities, and assess compliance with the EMP. 
(viii)  Maintain digital records of all progress and information. 
For the ESMS 
(xxi)  Coordinate  and  provide  support  as  needed  for  the  ESMS  environmental  and  social  officers 
recruited by the implementing agency for project output 3. 
(xxii) Ensure the officers provide progress reports on a semi-annual basis, in time for consolidation 
with the overall environment monitoring report to be submitted by HPMO to ADB. 
Overall 
(ix)  Support the HPMO environment officer in all their tasks. 
E. 
Reporting Requirements 
Monthly reports to the HPMO Environment Officer. 
LOAN IMPLEMENTATION ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTANT 
5. 
4. 
A. 
Background 
1. 
The  project  will  be  coordinated  by  the  Huangshan  Municipal  PMO,  whose  overall 
responsibility  includes  implementation  of  the  project  EMP.  At  the  field  level,  the  project  will  be 
implemented by IAs in the three districts and four counties. The HPMO and IAs will be assisted by a 
loan implementation consultant team. The loan implementation environmental consultant (LIEC) will 
be a part of this team and will support the HPMO and IAs to implement the project EMP and oversee 
the environmental and social management system (ESMS). 
B. 
Scope and Duration of Work 
2. 
This position could be a firm or an individual engaged by the  HPMO. It is an independent 
position. It is not part of the HPMO in-house environmental team or the implementing agencies. The 
specialist will report directly to the HPMO. The position will be spread over the entire project duration 
of 6 years of construction. The LIEC should be recruited as soon as possible after loan effectiveness, 
as the first task is to confirm project environmental readiness.  
C. 
Qualifications 
3. 
The  specialist  will  have:  (i)  a  master’s  degree  or  higher  in  environmental  management  or 
related field; (ii) at least 12 years of experience in environmental management, monitoring, and/or 
153 
impact  assessment,  including  specific  experience  on  the  management  and  monitoring  of  green 
agriculture  projects;  (iii)  familiarity  with  ADB  project  management  requirements  and  national 
environmental management procedures; (iv) ability to communicate and work effectively with local 
communities, contractors, and government agencies; (v) ability to analyze data and prepare technical 
reports; (vi) willingness and health to regularly visit the subproject sites; and (vii) proficiency in spoken 
and written English.  
D. 
Tasks 
Working  closely  with  the  HPMO  and  HPMO  Environmental  Officers,  the  LIEC  will  do  the 
4. 
following.  
For the EMP 
5. 
Before construction:  
(i)  Ensure project environmental readiness, including: (i) all contractor contracts include, and will 
comply with, the EMP; and (iii) relevant sections of the EMP are incorporated in construction 
plans and contracts. 
(ii)  Assist the HPMO and IAs to implement the GRM, including: (i) establish and publicize the GRM; 
and (ii) collate and evaluate grievances received. 
(iii)  Develop procedures to: (i) monitor EMP implementation progress; (ii) collate and evaluate data 
collected  in  the  EMP  environmental  monitoring  program;  and  (iii)  prepare  and  submit  the 
semiannual  environmental  monitoring  reports  to  ADB  (to  continue  until  project  completion 
report). 
(iv)  Undertake training of project agencies as required by the EMP training plan. 
(v)  Provide hands-on support and on-the-job training to the HPMO, implementing agencies, and 
contractors on the specific requirements of the EMP as required. 
6. 
During project implementation: 
(i)  Undertake site visits to all implementing agencies during subproject construction and operating 
phase. 
(ii)  Assist in the ongoing public consultation process as described in the project IEE. 
(iii)  Conduct  EMP  compliance  assessments,  identify  any  environment-related  implementation 
issues, and propose necessary responses in corrective action plans. 
(iv)  Undertake training of project agencies as required by the EMP training plan. 
(v)  Undertake simple and cost-effective on-site quantitative measurements to regularly check that 
the construction complies with the environmental monitoring standards and targets, especially 
for noise and dust (during the pipe trenches construction), using a basic hand-held meter 
For the ESMS 
(vi)  Support  the  HPMO  environment  officer  and  the  ESMS  environmental  and  social  officers  to 
oversee implementation of the ESMS. 
(vii)  Ensure that the steps of the ESMS are incorporated into the business procedures of HTIC. 
(viii)  Deliver 
for  screening,  categorizing  and  assessing 
environmental  impact;  (ii)  the  setting  and  monitoring  of  environmental  safeguards  in  loan 
conditions; and (iii) ESMS record-keeping and reporting. 
in  (i)  ESMS  procedures 
training 
(ix)  Assist HTIC to establish and publicize the grievance redress mechanism (GRM) for subprojects, 
ensuring that the GRM publicity is appropriate to the scale and complexity of the subproject and 
includes, as a minimum, the disclosure of all contact persons for lodging complaints. 
(x)  Review the operation of the GRM for a range of subprojects and locations and make revisions 
to GRM procedures as required. 
(xi)  Conduct regular checks on ESMS compliance by HTIC: review ESMS workbooks, undertake 
site visits as required, identify problems, and propose necessary corrective action. 
(xii)  Assist the HPMO to prepare semi-annual project monitoring progress reports for submission to 
154 
ADB within 1 months after each reporting period. 
Overall 
(xiii)  Assist  the  HPMO  to  prepare  semiannual  environmental  monitoring  progress  reports  for 
submission to ADB. 
(xiv)  Work  closely  with  the  HPMO,  district  and  county  IAs,  loan  implementation  consultants,  and 
other agencies as necessary to conduct these tasks. 
5. 
LOAN IMPLEMENTATION SOCIAL CONSULTANT 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
The Huangshan Municipal Government will apply a $100 million loan from Asian Development Bank 
(ADB)  to  implement  the  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River  Ecological  Protection  and  Green 
Development  Project.  Overall  project  implementation  will  be  coordinated  by  the  Huangshan 
Municipal project management office (HPMO). Of the loan, $8 million will be on-lent to the Huangshan 
Trust Investment Company (HTIC), to establish a Green Investment Fund with an amount of CNY100 
million.  HTIC  will  on-lend  the  funds  directly  to  qualified  investees  (small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  in  green  farming  and  ecotourism.  An  Environmental  and  Social  Management  System 
(ESMS)  has  been  developed  to  regulate  safeguards  for  the  Green  Investment  Fund  and  will  be 
established by HTIC within their business procedures. The ESMS is the key guiding  document to 
assess and manage the potential environmental and social impacts of subprojects. This is the first 
ESMS to be conducted by the HTIC. HTIC will appoint or recruit specific staff to be responsible for 
implementing the ESMS. The HPMO will recruit a loan implementation social consultant (LISC) to 
help implement the ESMS. These terms of reference describe the requirements for the LISC. 
II. 
SCOPE AND DURATION OF WORK 
External position recruited as an individual or through a firm. The specialist will report directly to the 
HPMO. Duration: at least 10 person-months, within the first 48 months of project implementation. 
III.  QUALIFICATIONS 
The specialist will have: (i) an undergraduate degree or higher in social, gender, or related field; (ii) 
at least 10 years of experience in social management, monitoring, and/or impact assessment; (iii) 
familiarity with ADB Project management requirements and national social management procedures; 
(iv) ability to communicate and work effectively with local communities, contractors, and government 
agencies;  (v)  ability  to  analyze  data  and  prepare  technical  reports;  (vi)  willingness  and  health  to 
regularly visit the subproject sites; and (vii) proficiency in spoken and written English.  
IV.  TASKS 
Working closely with the HPMO Social Officer, HTIC Social Officer and other relevant personnel and 
agencies, the consultant will assist in all aspects of the implementation of the ESMS. The consultant 
will: 
1.  Ensure that the steps of the ESMS are incorporated into the business procedures of the HTIC. 
2.  Deliver  training  in  (i)  ESMS  procedures  for  screening,  categorizing  and  assessing  social 
impacts; (ii) the setting and monitoring of social safeguards in loan conditions; and (iii) ESMS 
record-keeping and reporting. 
3.  Assist  HTIC  to  establish  and  publicize  the  grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRM)  for 
subprojects, ensuring that the GRM publicity is appropriate to the scale and complexity of the 
subproject  and  includes,  as  a  minimum,  the  disclosure  of  all  contact  persons  for  lodging 
complaints. 
4.  Review the operation of the GRM for a range of subprojects and locations and revise GRM 
procedures as required. 
5.  Conduct regular checks on ESMS compliance by HTIC: review ESMS workbooks, undertake 
site visits as required, identify problems, and propose necessary corrective action. 
6.  Assist the HPMO to prepare semi-annual project monitoring progress reports for submission 
to ADB within 1 months after each reporting period. 
V. 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
Assist the HPMO and HTIC to prepare their safeguard reporting requirements. 
155 
156 
APPENDIX EMP-2: RESTRICTED-USE PESTICIDES IN THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 
Pesticide use in the PRC is guided by a wide range of regulations. Key regulations and sources are as follows. 
Directory for restricted use pesticides (2017) issued by the former Ministry of Agriculture (MoA); now the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Affairs: 
Order 2567 of former MoA issued in August 2017: http://www.moa.gov.cn/govpublic/ZZYGLS/201709/t20170911_5810706.htm 
Prohibited pesticides in China which are issued in different orders from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and former 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA): 
Order 194 of former MoA issued in April 2002 : http://jiuban.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/tzgg/gg/200210/t20021016_14307.htm 
Order 199 of former MoA issued in June 2002 : http://jiuban.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/tzgg/gg/200210/t20021016_14307.htm 
Order 274 of former MoA issued in April 2003 : The link is missing in MoA's website. 
Order 322 of former MoA issued in December 2003: The link is missing in MoA's website. 
Order 747 of former MoA issued in Nobember 2006: http://jiuban.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/tzgg/gg/200612/t20061213_739003.htm 
Order 1157 of former MoA issued in Februrary 2009: http://jiuban.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/tzgg/gg/200902/t20090227_1226994.htm 
Order 1586 of former MoA issued in July 2011: http://jiuban.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/tzgg/gg/201107/t20110705_2045813.htm 
Order 2032 of former MoA issued in December 2013: http://www.moa.gov.cn/govpublic/ZZYGLS/201312/t20131219_3718683.htm 
Order 2289 of former MoA issued in August 2015: http://www.moa.gov.cn/govpublic/ZZYGLS/201508/t20150825_4803203.htm 
Order 2445 of former MoA issued in September 2016: http://jiuban.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/tzgg/gg/201609/t20160913_5273423.htm 
Order 2552 of former MoA issued in September 2017: http://www.moa.gov.cn/govpublic/ZZYGLS/201707/t20170721_5757240.htm 
APPENDIX 4-A: POTENTIAL SUBPROJECT LIST 
157 
No 
Investee 
Subproject Name 
Project Description 
Liubaili Monkey Tea 
Company 
Liubaili Organic Tea Farming 
Promotion Project 
Proposed equity 
financing 
40 million CNY 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Younong Organic 
Agricultural Farming 
40 million CNY 
Younong Organic Grain&Oil 
Farming Promotion Project 
Huangshan 
Shanshui Rural 
Development 
Company 
60 million CNY 
Shanshui Rural Development 
Project 
Huangshan Huixiang 
Rural Development 
Company 
60 million CNY 
Huixiang Beautiful Village 
Demonstration Project 
1. Expand organic tea farming production 
2.  Promote  eco-tourism  through  nature  tea 
garden and green tea culture 
1. Expand organic rice and rapeseed farming 
production of 6700 ha 
2.  Building  5  service  centers  to  provide 
organic farming services 
1.  Rural  village  environment  improvement, 
including  solid  waste  management,  water 
resource rehabilitation and  non-point source 
pollution control. 
2. Establish organic agricultural base  
3.  Promote  eco-tourism  in  the  villages  with 
revitalized environment. 
1.  Rural  village  environment  improvement, 
including  solid  waste  management,  water 
resource rehabilitation and  non-point source 
pollution control. 
2.  Promote  eco-tourism  in  the  villages  with 
revitalized environment. 
158 
APPENDIX 4-B: DRAFT TERM SHEETS 
Partners: Huangshan Trust Investment Company (HTIC) will be the Limited Partner (LP) and its 
subsidiary Huangshan Xintou Investment Company (HXIC) will be General Partner (GP).  
Fund structure: Limited Liability Partnership 
Fund  manager  and General  Partner:  Huangshan  Xintou  Investment  Company,  subsidiary  of 
HTIC, will be the Fund Manager and GP. 
Target fund size: The initial fund size is 200 million CNY. Commitment from HTIC including 100 
million CNY from ADB loan, 50 million CNY from KfW loan and 50 million CNY from Xin’an River 
Eco-compensation Fund. 
Investment period: The initial fund is expected to be fully utilized within 5 years from the launch 
date of the Fund. 
Reinvestment: Funds are reinvested provided that GIF maintain sufficient levels of liquidity to 
meet HTIC’s debt service obligations to HMG (for ADB/KfW loans) and Eco-compensation fund, 
and as approved by Investment Decision Committee.  
External investors:  Parallel  LPs  can  potentially  be  set  up  by the  Fund to attract  commitment 
from external investors. The fund-setup is based on market practice. The fund-setup might allow 
e.g. private investors to gain additional return in the return-waterfall within the hurdle rate (see 
Payments), to cater for their relatively higher cost of capital.   
Final  Repayment  Date:  All  investments  must  be  liquidated,  and  money  paid  as  provided  in 
“Payments,” below, by the 25th anniversary of the Fund’s launch date unless the Partners agree 
to an extension. 
Investment  profile:  The fund  will  provide  equity investment  to  companies targeting  ecological 
agriculture,  green  and  environmental  protection  and  eco-tourism.  Financing  provided  to  a 
company will  be  of  no  one  more  than  30%  of the fund size.  Equity  finance from the fund to a 
company cannot exceed more 50% of a company’s total equity. Tenure of financing is expected 
of averagely 4-7 years.  
Investment restrictions: Financing from the Fund must be provided for the purpose of ecological 
protection and/or green economic development. GIF may not finance companies in which HTIC 
has  an  interest.  All  companies  receiving  finance  will  be  required  to  comply  with  ADB 
environmental, social, integrity and other requirements and to report on their compliance. 
Governance:  GIF  will  have  an  Investment  Decision  Committee  (IDC)  of  five  persons:  2 
representatives from the HPMO, 2 representatives of the Xin’an River Ecological Compensation 
Fund, and 1 representative of HXIC, the fund manager. An Investor Board will be established with 
other Limited Partners committing capital to GIF. Decisions will require the affirmative vote of five 
IDC  members.  Limited  partners  may  attend  investment  committee  meetings  as  non-voting 
participants. GIF will be audited annually in accordance with ADB requirements.  
Repayment dates: __________in each year. 
Payments: 
159 
Interest, dividends, and other returns to the Fund in excess of equity investment amount will be 
applied: 1st to pay any taxes owing by the Fund; 2nd to pay the costs incurred in respect of any 
third-party consultants or experts engaged by HXIC; 3rd to pay HXIC’s Fees; 4th to HTIC, HXIC 
and any other investors in proportion to their respective investments.   
Returns of its equity investment received by the Fund that are not reinvested within 6 months after 
receipt and returns of principal received by the Fund after the end of the reinvestment period will 
be applied: to HTIC, to HXIC and any other partner of the GIF until they have been repaid their 
contribution in full. 
Amounts received by the Fund in excess of the amounts specified in the preceding paragraphs 
will be paid, after paying any taxes, consulting and experts’ costs and HXIC’s Fees, the HTIC, 
HXIC, and any other investors until they to the HTIC, HXIC, and other investors in proportion to 
their respective contributed amounts. 
Fund Manager Fees: The fund manager fee is at 3%. Expenses to be borne by HXIC/GP include: 
Establishment of GIF; Operation of GIF including due diligence of financing opportunities including 
related fees e.g. for legal and auditing services, administration of finance provided, divestment; 
termination of GIF. External cost related to equity investments, e.g. for legal and auditing services, 
can be held by the individual investment, in agreement with the Investment Decision Committee.  
Calls  on  investor  commitments:  HXIC  require  investors  to  provide  money  to  the  Fund,  in 
proportion to their commitments to the Fund and in no event in excess of their respective total 
commitments, only as and when investments have been approved by the investment committee. 
HXIC will give investors not less than 30 days’ notice to provide money to the Fund, specifying 
the date by which money must be provided. HXIC will not require money to be provided more 
than 30 business days before it reasonably expects to provide the money to an investee. 
Temporary  placement  of  funds:  All  money  temporarily  held  by  the  Fund  will  be  held  in  an 
interest-bearing  bank  account  at  (X)  bank  or  money  market  product  issued  by  (X)  bank  that 
provides  entrusted  bank  services  for  the  Fund,  and  interest  will  be  paid  out  as  describe  in 
“Payments.” 
160 
APPENDIX 4-C: SUBPROJECT SELECTION CRITERIA 
Selection Criteria for Subprojects and Investees 
HXIC will review the candidate subprojects and respective investees, and conduct due diligence 
on them. The subprojects and investees supported by the GIF must meet the technical, financial, 
economic, environmental, and social criteria below as well as the criteria in the Loan Agreement 
and  the  Project  Agreement  and  elsewhere  in  this  project  administration  manual  (PAM).  The 
subprojects must focus on the following sectors: ecological agriculture, ecotourism, and pollution 
control.  Selected  subprojects  must  provide  adequate  financial  returns  to  the  investor  and 
substantial benefits to the economy, society, and environment. The following criteria will apply. 
Technical Criteria 
All subprojects must meet the following technical criteria:  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
All subprojects should result in net benefits achieved within at least one of the 
following green eligibility criteria without imposing adverse impact on the other 
criteria: Pollution Source Control (a. reduction of pollutants discharged to water 
bodies;  b.  reduction  of  chemical,  fertilizer,  pesticides  to  farmland);  Green 
Economy Development (c. farmland turned into green farming; d. jobs added in 
the green economy e.  additional green/ECO tourist attracted to Huangshan); 
Climate  Change  Adaptation/Mitigation  (f.  land  made  more  resilient  to  climate 
change;  infrastructure  made  more  resilient  to  climate  change;  reduction  of 
GHG); or others which may be approved by Asian Development Bank (ADB). 
Baseline for benefits to be achieved shall be established before the subprojects 
are  implemented.  Benefits  produced  by  the  subproject  after  implementation 
shall be monitored and recorded. 
Preference shall be given to subprojects with lowest unit “pollution discharged 
to water bodies” reduction cost ($/ton). 
All  subprojects must  use  commercially  available  technologies/techniques with 
reliable,  measurable,  and  verifiable  results  that  will  contribute  to  the  benefits 
achieved from the subprojects. 
All subprojects must not be on the government’s overcapacity list. 
Any  proposed  technologies  to  be  used  shall  be  the  advanced  available 
technologies where feasible. 
All  subprojects  shall  comply  with  the  industry  policies  of  the  subproject’s 
location. Preference will be given to subprojects that belong to the encouraged 
and  prioritized  sectors  of  the  national/local  government’s  list/plan,  local  key 
supported projects or pilot project identified by the national/local government. 
(viii)  All subprojects shall contribute to at least one of the output indicators set in the 
Project’s design and monitoring framework; and 
All subprojects must be located geographically in Huangshan Municipality. 
(ix) 
Financial Criteria 
All subprojects must be financially viable. The financial internal rate of return shall be greater 
than the cost of capital. The financial internal rate return should also exceed the cost of capital 
under several plausible adverse scenarios.  
All investees must be financially creditworthy and do not have a poor credit record. The investee 
must  contribute  a  minimum  of  20%  of  the  total  subproject  investment  cost  as  counterpart 
financing. 
Subprojects Environmental and Social Safeguards Criteria 
All subproject must meet the following criteria: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Each  subproject  shall  meet  requirements  of  the  environmental  and  social 
management system developed for the Project. 
The  subproject  shall  not  have  significant  adverse  environmental  impacts  that 
are 
irreversible,  diverse,  or  unprecedented.  Environment  Category  A 
subprojects,  and  Category  A  and  B  on  resettlement  and  indigenous  peoples, 
within the meaning of the SPS, will be excluded from the Project. 
Social  assessment  shall  be  prepared  for  all subprojects,  including  identifying 
social benefits and respective beneficiaries including women, the poor, and low-
income people. 
Each  subproject  must  acquire  proper  approvals  from  relevant  national, 
provincial, and local authorities. 
The subproject must not be located in any designated environmental protection 
zone, ecological sensitive area, or cultural heritage site. 
Each  subproject must  be designed,  constructed,  and operated  in  accordance 
with  relevant  national  and  provincial  social  and  environmental  laws  and 
regulations. 
The subproject must not involve any land acquisition or housing demolition.39 
(vii) 
(viii)  The subproject must not have any negative impacts on ethnic minorities.40  
(ix) 
The  subprojects  must  not  support  enterprises  which  have  activities  involving 
commercial  development  of  cultural  resources  of  Indigenous  Peoples  without 
their consent for the commercialization of such resources. 
The subprojects shall not result in labor retrenchment or labor redundancies. 
(x) 
In the event that a potential subproject has good pollution reduction potential, but does not meet 
one or more of these criteria, HXIC may consider and recommend it to ADB, in which case ADB 
will review and may approve or disapprove in its discretion.41 
Criteria for Investment and Investees 
The investment focus will be on small- and medium-sized enterprises in Huangshan, which need 
capital for continuous growth, scaling up, corporate acquisitions, particularly for enhancing the 
environmental  sustainability  of  the  company’s  operations.  Capital  from  the  GIF  for  equity 
investment must  be to an investee  who  will  undertake  a  qualified  subproject  and  may  not  be 
used to purchase equity interests from existing investors. 
Minimum  Due  Diligence  Requirements.  The  due  diligence  for  all  investments shall  at  least 
comprise, but not be limited to, the following: 
(i) 
A  detailed  appraisal  and  assessment  of  business  and  financial  risks  of  the 
39 The investment proposal will be screened through an involuntary resettlement impact screening checklist which is 
included  in  an  Appendix  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  System  (ESMS)  in  accordance  with 
procedures contained in the project’s ESMS. 
40 The subproject proposal will be screened through an ethnic minorities impact screening checklist. 
41  Process  for  changes  into  the  selection  criteria  for  any  subproject  should  follow  ADB’s  Project  Administration 
Instructions (PAI 5.02). 
162 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
eligible investee.  
A detailed appraisal and assessment of key technology and growth potential of 
the eligible investee. 
A  detailed  appraisal  and  assessment  of  the  eligible  investee’s  management 
team;  including  its  relevant  experiences,  expertise,  management  culture, 
attitude to risk, and psychology. 
A detailed review, identification, and assessment of feasibility of identified exit 
routes.  In  case  of  a  support  to  a  project  with  an  agreed  put  option,  the  Fund 
should obtain a legal opinion of the possibility to execute the put. 
A  detailed  corporate  governance  assessment  and  integrity  due  diligence 
covering  anti-money  laundering  compliance  to  match  the  requirements  of 
national  law  and  regulations  as  well  as  international  standards  at  operational 
level. 
Investment criteria. All equity investments must be in investees that: 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Conduct businesses with environmental/social return, which can also generate 
an enhanced financial return; and 
The subproject exit horizon does not exceed 7 years. 
Subproject requirement. Equity Investment must meet the following requirements: 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii) 
Investments  will  be  in  companies  at  growth  or  expansion  stage  which  need 
capital to enable significant and strategic expansion where “growth stage” refers 
to consistent source of income and regularly taking on new customers with profit 
improving,  and  “expansion  stage”  refers  to  rapid  growth  in  both  revenue  and 
cash flow. 
The investee must have good growth potential with feasible technology/business 
model. 
The investee should be ready for fast growth or further scaling up of production. 
Investments  will  be  made  in  an  amount  not  greater  than  30%  of  the  Fund 
commitments (CNY60 million). Investments will not be of more than 50% of the 
total equity of the investee.  
The target return of equity must be greater than the cost of capital. 
APPEDNIX 4-D: SAMPLE STATEMENT OF UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
A. 
Opening cash balance 
B.  Sources of funds 
1  ADB loan proceeds 
2  KfW loan proceeds 
3  Return (from previous equity 
investments) 
4  Own funds  
5  Others 
Total (sum 1 to 5) 
C.  Uses of funds 
201x  
x
x 
xx 
xx 
x
x 
1  Equity investments to qualified enterprises (EI 1) 
ADB share 
KfW share 
Own share 
xx 
xx 
xx 
2  Equity investments to qualified enterprises (EI 2) 
ADB share 
KfW share 
Own share 
Total (sum 1 to 2) 
D.  Net cash activity (B - C) 
E.  Ending cash balance (A + D) 
xx 
x
x
x 
x 
xx 
  201x 
Cumulative 
xx 
xx   
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx   
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx   
xx   
xx   
xx 
xx 
NOTES: Include basis of preparation, reporting currency, undrawn external assistance, and details of subloans such 
as amounts committed, disbursed up to the previous year, disbursed during the current reporting period, cumulative 
disbursement, undisbursed commitments, percentage of loan utilized, etc. 
164 
APPENDIX 4-E: PROCUREMENT MANNUAL 
A. 
Introduction 
This procurement manual is prepared to regulate the procurement activities of the Green 
1. 
Investment  Fund  component  in  the  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River  Ecological  Protection  and 
Green  Development  Project,  which  will  utilize  an  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  loan.  ADB 
expects that for the GIF, the procurement is undertaken by the respective loan beneficiaries in 
accordance with established private sector or commercial practices, and which are acceptable to 
ADB. 
2. 
First objective of the manual is to draw attention to Qualified Investees that they have the 
responsibility to ensure the procurement activities they undertake to implement their Subprojects 
must: 
(i) 
Comply with any relevant laws and regulations of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
and the municipal or provincial governments in the greater Huangshan are where the project is 
located and 
(ii) 
this GIF project. 
Adhere to procurement principles and guidance determined by ADB to be applicable to 
Second objective of the manual is to offer specific guidance on how procurement activities 
3. 
can be undertaken that will ensure compliance with ADB principles and regulations. 
4. 
It is not appropriate for this ADB manual to offer specific advice on compliance with the 
specific  requirements  of  the  PRC  and  local  governments’  laws  and  regulations.  Such  legal 
compliance is the responsibility of invest companies and applies not just to procurement activities 
but is an all-embracing responsibility they have in how they conduct to all their business activities. 
Notwithstanding  the  above  statement,  all  the  guidance  provided  in  this  manual  is 
5. 
considered  to  be  compatible  with  current  applicable  PRC  law—and  specifically  the  PRC 
Tendering and Bidding Law 1999 (effective from 1 Jan 2000), the scope and applicability of which 
includes  all  investment  projects  that  utilize  foreign  capital  funds.  Qualified  Investees  should 
therefore ensure that their procurement staff are familiar with the requirements of this law and its 
applicable regulations, in addition to being provided with this procurement manual. 
6. 
It is also not the intention of this manual to force changes in the procurement procedures 
of  the  investees  where  they  already  substantially  comply  with  required  ADB  procurement 
principles.  However,  it  is  expected  that  the  investees  will  review  their  own  procurement 
procedures using the contents of this manual as a guide and adjust their procedures to ensure 
the required substantial compliance. 
7. 
The  contents  of  this  procurement  manual  will  be  kept  under  review  during  project 
implementation and can be revised at any time according to the project requirements, or changes 
in applicable laws and regulations. Any changes in the manual will be jointly approved by HMG 
and ADB. 
B. 
Procurement Objectives 
The aim of any procurement process is to ensure the resulting procurement provides the 
8. 
purchaser with goods, works or services that: 
Are fit for the intended purpose–i.e., they meet required quality, durability and performance 
(i) 
criteria; 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Provide value for money to the purchaser; and 
Are procured in a timely and efficient manner. 
9. 
These objectives are wholly compatible with best commercial practice and endorsed by 
ADB. However, the objectives are not mutually exclusive, and they can conflict to a degree. For 
example, sophisticated procurement procedures may well be justified for large scale or technically 
complex  procurement  but  would  not  be  justified  on  efficiency  grounds  for  simpler  small-scale 
procurement.  ADB  procurement  regulations  and  commercial  best  practice  procurement 
regulations  recognize  the  need  for  an  efficient  procurement  process  by  providing  simpler 
procedures for small-scale procurement. 
10. 
Another  crosscutting  objective  of  any  procurement  process  is  to  adequately  safeguard 
investees  against  the  risks  of  corruption  and  fraud  that  could  damage  the  level  of  subproject 
performance (as measured in financial terms and/or energy/emissions savings), and potentially 
the competitiveness of the entire business. 
C. 
ADB Core Procurement Principles 
 The  specific  procurement  rules  and  procedures  to  be  applied  in  implementation  of  a 
11. 
project depend on the circumstances of the particular case, but the following six core procurement 
principles (“Core Procurement Principles”) guide ADB requirements: 
12. 
 Economy.  The  principle  of  economy  means  taking  into  account  factors  such  as  price, 
quality, and any nonprice attributes, as appropriate, without adversely affecting the viability of the 
project. 
13. 
Efficiency. The principle of efficiency ensures that procurement processes are proportional 
to the value and risks of the required outcome and underlying project activities, taking into account 
implementation capacity, time constraints, and cost-effectiveness. 
14. 
Fairness. The principle of fairness means (a) equal opportunity for and treatment of eligible 
bidders; (b) equitable distribution of rights and obligations between borrowers and bidders; and 
(c) credible mechanisms for addressing procurement-related complaints and providing recourse. 
ADB encourages open competition as the preferred procurement approach, whenever possible, 
to maximize fairness of the opportunity to bid. 
15. 
Transparency.  The  principle  of  transparency  means  ensuring,  through  appropriate 
documentation and review of activities in the procurement process, that (a) relevant procurement 
information is made publicly available to interested parties, in a consistent and timely manner, 
through readily accessible and widely available sources at no (or reasonable) cost; (b) appropriate 
reporting of procurement activity; and (c) use of confidentiality provisions in contracts only where 
justified. 
16. 
Quality.  This  principle  requires  that  the  procurement  arrangements4  are  structured  to 
procure  inputs  and  deliver  outputs  of  appropriate  standard  in a  timely  and  effective manner  to 
achieve the project outcomes and development objectives, taking into account the context, risk, 
value, and complexity of procurement. 
166 
Value for money. This principle enables the borrower to obtain optimal benefits through 
17. 
effective,  efficient,  and  economic  use  of  resources  by  applying,  as  appropriate,  the  Core 
Procurement  Principles  and  related  considerations,  which  may  include  life-cycle  costs  and 
socioeconomic and environmental development objectives of the borrower. Price alone may not 
sufficiently represent value for money. 
18. 
It is generally accepted by procurement experts that these principles, if properly applied, 
will  ensure  the  procurement  objectives  set  out  in Section B  of this  manual  are  realized  by the 
investees and represent best procurement practice. However, in setting the requirement that “GIF 
procurement is undertaken by the respective loan beneficiaries in accordance with established 
private sector or commercial practices, acceptable to ADB,” ADB recognizes that it may be in the 
interests  of  commercial  borrowers  of  ADB  funds  to  apply  these  principles  in  a  more  flexible 
manner than as stipulated in ADB’s detailed procurement regulations that have been designed 
with public procurement primarily in mind. 
D. 
Specific Guidance on GIF Procurement 
19. 
This  section  of  the  manual  builds  on  the  earlier  content  by  providing  some  specific 
guidance  to  investee  companies.  The  section  first  gives  guidance  on  how  generally  accepted 
procurement objectives might be best achieved and then considers each of the ADB procurement 
principles in turn and gives guidance on compliance. 
1. 
Ensuring the Procurement Results are Fit for Purpose 
For potential suppliers to provide equipment or goods or services that meet the needs of 
20. 
the purchaser, it is vital that purchasers clearly articulate their needs and expectations to those 
potential  suppliers.  Therefore,  appropriate  written  information  should  be  provided  to  potential 
suppliers. A good written specification of purchaser needs will enhance the prospects for those 
needs being successfully met and will also provide a basis for any procurement disputes to be 
adjudged and settled in a fair way. 
21. 
Feasibility  study  reports  will  need  to  be  prepared  and  approved  for  all  the  subprojects. 
These feasibility study reports will document the performance expectations of the Subproject and 
therefore,  it  is  important  that,  as  a  minimum,  these  expectations  are  included  in  relevant 
procurement specifications. 
For  the  procurement  of  key  equipment  and/or  civil  works  that  are  critical  to  the 
22. 
performance  of  the  subproject  then  the  procurement  documentation  should  include  a  more 
detailed design specification. This should be prepared by qualified technical staff in conjunction 
with procurement staff. 
23. 
For the procurement of services (such as technical support to assist the implementation 
of the subproject), it is important to ensure the potential service providers are suitably qualified, 
and that the scope of work and the required outputs/deliverables of the service provider are clearly 
defined. 
2. 
Achieving Value for Money 
Value for money (VFM) is normally considered to be achieved if the purchaser feels they 
24. 
have paid a fair price for what they have received. However, some would argue that VFM is only 
achieved if one pays the lowest available price. 
25. 
In reality, VFM is a more complex concept to assess than simply through a purchase price 
comparison alone. For example, for an equipment purchase, the costs or downtime for equipment 
servicing, and the availability of spare parts may be important factors to the purchaser. Additional 
length of a performance guarantee (over and above anything specified by the purchaser) might 
also legitimately influence the purchaser to not purchase based on the cheapest price. If VFM is 
to be  assessed  on  a scientific  basis  then a risk-based  approach over the  equipment  life cycle 
should be used, but even then there will be subjectivity over matters 
such as assessing the level of risk and the value of maintaining a long-lasting and trusted 
26. 
purchaser-supplier relationship. 
27. 
Specific guidance on making VFM judgements is as follows: 
(i)  Consider what factors will affect the VFM judgement in advance of procurement and where 
possible include these into the product specification. Also, ask all potential suppliers to provide 
supplementary  information  considered  relevant  to  the  purchase  decision  in  addition  to  the 
basic supply price (e.g., response time to breakdowns, guarantee terms, service frequencies, 
downtime and costs, delivery periods and costs of spare parts). 
(ii)  Establish  a  company  procurement  committee  to  evaluate  VFM  and make  procurement 
decisions as a means of reducing the individual subjectivity in VFM assessments. Ensure that 
records are kept of decisions made and the reasons for them, so that independent or higher-
level reviews can assess their reasonableness. 
(iii) Use  open  procurement  (see  below)  wherever  possible  so  that  the  lowest  available 
specification compliant price is known thus making the price premium paid for non-quantifiable 
VFM factors readily identifiable. 
(iv) Only  use  sole  supplier  purchasing  where  either  (a)  an  existing  competitively  let  rolling 
supplier  contract  already  exist,  or  (b)  there has been  recent  similar  procurement  made  via 
open procurement, or (c) extenuating circumstances  apply that justify short-cutting normal 
procedures and company standing orders allow for this (note: such a situation under the GIF 
is  extremely  unlikely  and  such  short-cutting  is  normally  only  justified  in  response  to  an 
emergency). 
3. 
Timeliness and Efficiency of Procurement 
28. 
For the procurement process to operate in a timely and efficient manner, the subproject 
will need to be planned and budgeted, so procurement activities are carefully scheduled to be 
compatible with the subproject implementation plan and that financial commitments can be met 
when due. 
29. 
It  follows  that  procurement  plans  should  (i)  be  linked  to  the  financial  plans,  (ii)  allow  a 
realistic time for the completion of individual activities, and (iii) as far as possible avoid a ”log jam” 
of activity in the procurement department. 
30. 
Efficiency  of  procurement  will  be  achieved  where  (i)  companies  develop  standardized 
procedures  and  procurement  documentation,  (ii)  the  number  of  procurement  packages  are 
minimized  without  unduly  restricting  competitiveness,  (iii)  adopting  simplified  procurement 
procedures for small low value procurement, and (iv) the use of existing rolling annual or multi- 
year supplies of services and supplies for which a company has a regular demand. 
168 
4. 
Use of Competitive Procurement 
31. 
Effective  competition  undoubtedly  reduces  prices  by  forcing  suppliers  to  innovate  and 
become more efficient. Purchasers will only be able to benefit from reductions that are available 
if they use procurement procedures based on competitive bidding or shopping. 
Competitive  procurement  is  most  commonly  achieved  in  a  project  setting  through 
32. 
advertising and an open invitation for suppliers to request tender document and submit bids. 
33. 
For some critical and specialist procurement packages a multi-stage procurement process 
may be advantageous whereby potential suppliers are first invited to pre-qualify by demonstrating 
they have the required skills and experience. Then all pre-qualified suppliers would be invited to 
submit bids. 
34. 
Preparing  bids  for  some  procurement  packages  can  impose  a  heavy  workload  and 
expense on potential suppliers, and this can discourage some good quality suppliers from bidding 
if they feel their chance of being successful is low. Purchasers can guard against the risks this 
situation  creates  restricting  the  number  of  suppliers  invited  to  bid  to  a  small  number  (typically 
three to five) of those most qualified to be the supplier. 
However,  before  deciding  on  the  detailed  procurement  procedures  to  use  they  should 
35. 
ensure investee companies should consult any applicable government laws and regulations on 
the procurement methods permissible in specific circumstances. This especially applies to state- 
owned enterprise (SOE) investee companies who will undoubtedly operate in a more regulated 
procurement environment than wholly private enterprises. 
5. 
Fairness and Equal Opportunity 
All eligible bidders should have an equal and fair opportunity. Procurement processes are 
36. 
designed and implemented that avoid preferential or discriminatory measures that might favor or 
adversely affect certain participants. 
Fairness  and  equal  opportunity  goes  hand  in  hand  with  procurement  procedures  that 
37. 
require open competitive  bidding.  It  also  goes  hand  in hand  with transparency  in procurement 
(see below). 
38. 
Further measures to promote fairness and equal opportunity include: 
(i)  Ensuring  that  potential  suppliers  have  adequate  time  to  submit  bids  or  expressions  of 
interest (the actual time allowed should depend on the complexity of the procurement and the 
level of detail requested in bids/expression of interest); 
(ii)  The terms of purchase contracts used are equitable to both sides; 
(iii) The  purchasing  organization  has  a  grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRM)  to  deal  with 
cases  of  alleged  unfairness,  misprocurement,  or  other  abuses.  This  mechanism  should 
operate so as to be independent of the purchasing function; and 
(iv) Subject  only  to  issues  of  commercial  confidentiality,  unsuccessful  bidders  may  request 
and receive feedback on why they were unsuccessful. 
6. 
Transparency in Procurement 
39. 
Transparency of procurement processes are those governed by clear rules that are easily 
accessible and can be consistently applied. This will show that the purchaser is fair and provides 
equal opportunity to all, as evidenced by their open and fair in procurement activity. 
40. 
Transparent  procurement  involves  contract  opportunities  (procurement  plans  and 
individual bid opportunities) being advertised widely, and results are published (or at least made 
available to the unsuccessful bidders). 
(i)  Transparency in procurement has a number of potential benefits to purchasers. 
(ii)  Competition is increased. 
(iii) Suppliers can more readily identify the bids most suited to them allowing them to select 
which bids to make and better tailor bids to meet the purchaser’s needs. From the purchaser 
side  this  reduces  the  number  of  poor  quality  or  unqualified  bids  and  should  increase  bid 
quality. 
(iv) They gain a reputation for openness and fairness in how their businesses are operated 
and if they practise local procurement policies (where allowed by applicable regulations) for 
the support they provide the local community. 
(v)  Open  and  transparent  processes  are  less  susceptible  to  abuse  through  fraud  and 
corruption and such abuse is more likely to be detected. 
E. 
Required Organizational Capacity and Arrangements 
The  investee  companies  need  to  assess  whether  or  not  they  possess  adequate 
41. 
procurement capacity in terms of: 
(i)  functional responsibilities; 
(ii)  internal processes; 
(iii) resources and skills; 
(iv) information management; and 
(v)  experience and performance. 
42. 
For  the  selection  of  qualified  investees,  ADB  has  assessed  organizational  capacity  of 
proposed investee companies. The capacity building suggestions of these assessments may be 
of guidance to others and can be shared by contacting the Management Company for relevant 
guidance.  
If  investee  companies  conclude  it  is  uneconomical  to  build  the  required  internal 
43. 
procurement capacity then they should consider recruiting the services of a procurement agent 
to fill the gap. 
170 
APPENDIX 4-F: ADB LIST OF PROHIBITED INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES 
The use of ADB funds is strictly prohibited for the following activities (ADB Safeguard Policy Statement, 
2009). 
1.  Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor42 or child labor.43 
2.  Production  of  or  trade  in  any  product  or  activity  deemed  illegal  under  host  country  laws  or 
regulations or international conventions and agreements or subject to international phase-outs 
or  bans,  such  as  (a)  pharmaceuticals, 44  pesticides,  and  herbicides, 45  (b)  ozone-depleting 
substances,46  (c)  polychlorinated  biphenyls47  and  other  hazardous  chemicals,48  (d)  wildlife  or 
wildlife products regulated under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
of Wild Fauna and Flora,49 and (e) transboundary trade in waste or waste products.50 
3.  Production of or trade in weapons and munitions, including paramilitary materials. 
4.  Production of or trade in alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine.51 
5.  Production of or trade in tobacco. 
6.  Gambling, casinos, and equivalent enterprises. 
7.  Production  of  or  trade  in  radioactive  materials,52  including  nuclear  reactors  and  components 
thereof. 
8.  Production  of,  trade  in,  or  use  of  unbonded  asbestos  fibers. 53  NOTE:  see  project-specific 
assurance (ESMS Section VII) for use of asbestos.  
9.  Commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment for use in primary tropical 
moist forests or old-growth forests. 
10.  Marine and coastal fishing practices, such as large-scale pelagic drift net fishing and fine mesh 
net  fishing,  harmful  to  vulnerable  and  protected  species  in  large  numbers  and  damaging  to 
marine biodiversity and habitats. 
42 All work or services not voluntarily performed i.e. extracted from individuals under threat of force or penalty. 
43 Employment  of  children  whose  age  is  below  the  host  country’s  statutory  minimum  age  of employment, or,  in 
contravention  of  International  Labor  Organization  Convention  No.  138 “Minimum Age Convention” (www.ilo.org). 
44 A list of pharmaceutical products subject to phaseouts or bans is available at http://www.who.int. 
45 A list of pesticides and herbicides subject to phaseouts or bans is available at http://www.pic.int. 
46A list of the chemical compounds that react with and deplete stratospheric ozone resulting in the widely publicized 
ozone  holes  is  listed  in  the  Montreal  Protocol,  together  with  target  reduction  and  phaseout  dates.  Information  is 
available at http://www.unep.org/ozone/montreal.shtml. 
47 A group of highly toxic chemicals. Likely to be found in oil-filled electrical transformers, capacitors, and switchgear 
dating from 1950 to 1985. 
48 A list of hazardous chemicals is available at http://www.pic.int. 
49 A list is available at http://www.cites.org. 
50 As defined by the Basel Convention; see http://www.basel.int. 
51 Does not apply to  project sponsors  who  are  not  “ substantially involved” in these activities i.e. the activity concerned 
is ancillary to a project sponsor's primary operations. 
52 Does not apply to the purchase of medical equipment, quality control (measurement) equipment, and any equipment 
for which ADB considers the radioactive source to be trivial and adequately shielded. 
53 Does not apply to purchase and use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is <20%. 
APPENDIX 4-G: TEMPLATE OF SEMI-ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT 
Appendix G 
Template of Semi-Annual Progress Report 
介绍及基础数据 (INTRODUCTION AND BASIC DATA) 
报告期 
(Reporting period) 
A. 
1. 项目基础信息 (Basic Project Information) 
项  目  号 
Number) 
项目名称 (Project Title) 
(Project/Loan 
PRC: XXXX 
提交日期 
(Date of Submission) 
PRC: Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection 
and Green Development Project 
(Executing 
People’s Republic of PRC 
Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG) 
接收人 (Recipient) 
执 行  机 构 
Agency) 
项 目 办 (Project 
Management Office) 
项目汇总费用表 (Project Summary Cost Estimates) (€ million) 
Item 
A. Base Cost 
Huangshan Municipal Project Management Office (HPMO) 
Amount 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Contingencies 
C. Financial Charges During 
Implementation Total Project Cost 
(A+B+C) 
项目融资计划 (Project Summary Financing Plan) 
Source 资金来源 
Amount (€ million) 
金额 
Share of Total (%) 
占比 
Asian Development Bank 亚行 
Ordinary Capital Resources 普通资金来源 
Total Project Cost 
2. 项目批准、生效及关闭日 (Project Approval, Effectiveness and Closing Dates) 
批准日期 (Approval date) 
贷款协定、项目协定签字日 
(Loan signing date) 
生效日期 (Loan effective 
date) 
关帐日(原定) (Loan closing 
date) (original) 
项目实施期限 (原) [Elapsed 
project period (original)] 
关 帐日 ( 修 改后 ) (Loan 
closing date) (revised) 
项 目 实 施 期 限   ( 修 改 后 ) 
period 
[Elapsed 
(revised)] 
亚 行上 次项 目检查时 间 
(Date of last ADB review 
mission) 
project 
172 
B. 
UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
Investee 
Companies 
Total 
Investment 
Cost 
US$ 
Table 1: Withdrawal Progress of Subprojects 
Withdrawal Progress 
ADB 
Loan 
Co-financing 
% 
US$ 
Euro 
% 
US$ 
CNY 
Cumulated Up to the 
End of Last Period 
Euro 
US$ 
Amount this Period 
Cumulative Amount 
% 
US$ 
Euro 
CNY 
US$ 
A. Investee 1 
B. Investee 2 
xxx 
Xxx 
xxx 
Xxx 
Total 
Table 2: Payback Progress of Subprojects 
Payback Progress 
Investee Companies 
Total Investment Cost 
ADB loan 
US$ 
% 
US$ 
Euro 
Cumulated Up to the 
End of Last Period 
US$ 
Euro 
Amount this Period 
Cumulative Amount 
% 
US$ 
Euro 
US$ 
Euro 
A. Investee 1 
B. Investee 2 
xxx 
Xxx 
xxx 
Xxx 
Total 
Appendix G 
Template of Semi-Annual Progress Report 
C.  实施进度 (IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS) 
1. 报告期间项目实施进度情况 (Project Implementation Progress during the 
Reporting Period by Output) 
[  
last progress report.)] 
, (State the progress and achievements in implementation by output since the 
2. 项目实施安排 (Project Implementation Arrangements) 
[  
(State  assessment  of  project 
_, 
as establishment, staffing, and funding of the PMO)] 
implementation  arrangements  such
3. 项目进度评价 (Assessment of Project Progress) 
(Assess  progress  in  implementing  the  overall  project  to  date  in  comparison  with  the  original 
implementation schedule—quantifiable and monitorable target, (include simple charts such as bar or 
milestone to illustrate progress, a chart showing actual versus planned expenditure, S-curve graph 
showing  the  relationship  between  physical  and  financial  performance,  and  actual  progress  in 
comparison  with  the  original  schedules  and  budgets,  the  reference  framework  or  guidelines  in 
calculating  the  project  progress  including  examples  are  shown  in  the  project  administration 
memorandum  [PAM])  (You  can  append  existing  chart/table/graph  showing  physical  and  financial 
progress as appendixes, if any.) 
4. 评价主要假设条件及风险的有效性 (Assessment of the Validity of Key Assumptions 
and Risks) 
[评价实现量化后的实施目标所设想的主要假设条件及风险的有效性 (Assess the validity and key 
assumptions and risks in achieving the quantifiable implementation targets)] 
5. Progress of Subborrower 
6. Effectiveness of GIF RFA and the Facility Account 
7. Interest Differential Accumulated and Used, and effectiveness in 
achieving its targeted objectives 
8. Implementation of ESMS 
(Include implementation of activities in the environmental management plan under the ESMS for 
Subprojects) 
9. Selection of Subsequent Batches of Subprojects 
(Include progress in identifying, screening, assessing, and selection future Subprojects). 
174 
D.  项目建设目标 (PROJECT PURPOSES) 
1. 建设内容/实施安排状况 (Status of Project Scope/Implementation Arrangements) 
[  
with those in the project document, and whether major changes have occurred or will need to be 
made.)] 
_, (Assess the status of project scope/implementation arrangements compared 
2. 项目成果实现的可能性及补救措施 
(Likelihood of Achievement of the Project Outcomes and Remedial Measures) 
_,    (Assess    the    likelihood    that    the    immediate    development        objectives  
[  
(project purpose) will be met in part or in full, and whether remedial measures are required based on 
the  current project scope and implementation arrangements.)] 
3. 主要假设和风险变更 (Changes to the Key Assumption and Risks) 
[  
affect attainment of the development objectives.)] 
_,  (If  applicable,  assess  changes  to  the  key  assumptions  and  risks that 
4. 其他建设内容 (Other Project Developments) 
[  
_,  (If  applicable,  state  any  other  project  developments,  including  monitoring 
and  reporting  on  environmental  and  social  requirements  that  might  adversely  affect  the  project's 
viability or accomplishment of immediate objectives.)] 
相关条款的遵从 (COMPLIANCE WITH COVENANTS) 
E. 
[ 
financial, safeguards, and other covenants, particularly, for those covenants on due.)] 
(Summarize  the  status  of  the  borrower’s  and  EA’s  compliance  with     key  
主要问题与困难 (MAJOR PROJECT ISSUES AND PROBLEMS) 
F. 
[如适用，请归纳影响或有可能影响项目实施进度、符合各条款要求，及实现即期目标等的主要问题，
提 
出 解 决 这 些 问 题 的 建 议 （ 如 变 更 建 设 内 容 、 项 目 实 施 安 排 及 贷 款 资 金 的 再 分 配 ） (If 
applicable,  summarize  the  major  problems  and  issues  affecting  or  likely  to  affect  implementation 
progress,  compliance  with  covenants,  and  achievement  of  immediate  development  objectives. 
Recommend actions to overcome these problems and issues (e.g., changes in scope, changes in 
implementation arrangements, and reallocation of loan proceeds) 
G.  下一汇报期工作计划 (WORK PLAN FOR NEXT 6 MONTHS) 
Status of Compliance with Major Loan and Project Covenants 
H. 
贷款协定和项目协定中主要条款的遵守情况 
Schedule Paragraph 
Description 
Status 
Type 
No. 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
APPENDIX 4-H: EXAMPLE OF LIMITED PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT 
General 
According to the Partnership Enterprise Law of The People’s Republic of China (hereinafter 
referred to as Partnership Enterprise Law), Administrative Measures of the People's Republic 
of China for the Registration of Partnership Enterprises (hereinafter referred to as Measures 
on the Registration of Partnership Enterprises) and relevant laws, administrative regulations 
and rules, it is stipulated that this agreement shall be concluded through the consensus of all 
partners to jointly establish a limited partnership enterprise. All partners are willing to abide by 
the relevant laws, regulations and rules of the state, pay taxes according to law. Where the 
terms of this agreement are inconsistent with laws, administrative regulations and rules, the 
provisions  of  laws,  administrative  regulations  and  rules  shall  prevail.  This  agreement  shall 
become  effective  after  being  signed  and  sealed  by  all  partners.  Partners  have  rights  and 
obligations in accordance with legal requirements and partnership agreements. 
The parties have reached the following agreement to abide by: 
1. 
Definition 
Terms 
1.1 
In this Agreement, the following terms have the meanings referred to in this Article, unless the 
context indicates otherwise: 
1.1.1  This  Agreement  means  the  ####  Partnership  (Limited  Partnership)  Limited 
Partnership Agreement and its amendments or modified versions as approved by due 
process. 
1.1.2  The Partnership Enterprise Law refers to the Law of the Partnership Enterprise of 
the  People's  Republic  of  China,  which  was  amended  at  the  23rd  meeting  of  the 
Standing Committee of the Tenth National People's Congress of the People's Republic 
of China on August 27, 2006 and effective since June 1st, 2006, including revisions, 
modifications or re-enactments from time to time prior to the signing of this Agreement. 
1.1.3  A Limited Partnership or Partnership Enterprise refers to #### partnership (limited 
partnership) jointly established by the parties to this Agreement in accordance with the 
Partnership Enterprise Law and relevant laws and regulations and this agreement. 
1.1.4  A General Partner or Manager means an institution that acts as a general partner of 
the partnership and assumes the management functions of the investment business 
of the partnership. At the time of signing this agreement, the general partner / manager 
is Huangshan Xintou Investment Company. 
1.1.5  A  Limited  Partner  is  a party that  signs  this  agreement  as  a  “limited  partner”  and  a 
limited partner who is enlisted by the transfer of a limited partnership interest or the 
subscription of a limited partnership in a subsequent fundraising. 
1.1.6  The  Partners,  unless  otherwise  stated,  means  the  general  partner  and  the  limited 
partner. 
1.1.7  The  Management  Team  refers  to  the  management  team  of  the  manager  who  is 
stationed in the limited partnership. 
1.1.8  Associated persons means any persons, including those controlled by such persons, 
those who control such persons and those who are controlled by the same person with 
such  persons.  Control  here  refers  to the  power  of  one  party  to  dominate  the  other 
party's primary business conduct or personal activity, which may be based on equity, 
voting rights, and other relationships that are generally considered to be dominant. 
1.1.9  Management  Fee  refers  to  the  payment  of  the  investment  management  service 
provided by the third party service agency designated by the administrator and/or the 
manager from the limited partnership. 
1.1.10 Performance Remuneration refers to the income obtained by the general partner in 
accordance with Articles 7.3 and 7.4 of this Agreement. 
1.1.11 The  Limited  Partnership  Fee  refers  to  the  expenses  incurred  by  the  limited 
176 
partnership itself, including the fees listed in Article 2.11.1 of this Agreement (including 
but not limited to management fees). 
1.1.12 Manager's  fees  are  expenses  that  the  Manager  shall  bear  at  his  own  expense, 
including the fees listed in Section 2.12 of this Agreement. 
1.1.13 The Amount of Capital Contribution is the amount of cash that a partner promises 
to pay to a limited partnership and is accepted by the general partner. 
1.1.14 The Total Amount of Capital Contribution is the total amount of cash that all partners 
have promised to pay to the limited partnership and accepted by the general partner. 
1.1.15 The  Amount  of  Paid-in  Capital  refers  to  the  amount  of  cash  actually  paid  by  the 
partners to a limited partnership in accordance with the terms of this agreement. 
1.1.16 The Total Amount of Paid-in Capital is the total amount of cash actually paid by the 
partners to the limited partnership in accordance with the terms of this agreement. 
1.1.17 Limited  Partnership  Interest  refers  to  the  interest  of  the  partner  in  the  limited 
partnership as agreed in this agreement. For the limited partner, it refers to the share 
of  the  property  that  is  held  in  the  limited  partnership  based  on  the  paid-in  capital 
contribution, including the recovery of the paid-in capital, the right to obtain profit and 
the rights and related benefits of the legal provisions and the participation/voting rights 
of the partners conferred by this agreement; for the general partner, in addition to the 
above-mentioned share of the property based on the paid-in capital contribution, it also 
includes  the  execution  and  management  of  partnership  matters  and  the  associated 
benefits. 
1.1.18 Project Investment refers to equity investment conducted by the limited partnership. 
1.1.19 Portfolio Enterprise refers to an enterprise in which a limited partnership has invested 
and holds a share of equity or other property. 
1.1.20 Proposed Investment Target Project refers to the target project that is determined 
by the general partner investment decision-making team and is proposed to conduct 
due diligence. 
1.1.21  Temporary Investment refers to fixed income management products, currency funds, 
wealth management bond funds, cash, notice deposits, bank time deposits and large 
deposit  certificates  within  one  year  (including  one  year),  bonds,  asset-backed 
securities, medium-term notes with remaining maturity (or resale period) less than 397 
natural days; bond repurchase and central bank notes with a term less than one year; 
short-term  financing  bills  and  other  fixed-income  financial  instruments  that  are 
permitted to invest by this limited partnership in the law. 
1.1.22 Subsequent  Investment  refers  to  the  follow-up  capital  investment  to  the  invested 
portfolio enterprise made by the limited partnership, according to the agreements that 
have been signed before the termination of the investment period. 
1.1.23 Investment Cost refers to the investment capital purchased or invested by the limited 
partnership and the expenses incurred for the investment (including but not limited to 
law, audit, evaluation, intermediary fees in the form of financial advisors, but excluding 
management fees). 
1.1.24 Investment  Income  refers  to  the  cash  received  from  the  sale  or  disposal  of  the 
investment  project,  or  the  remaining  portion  of  the  dividends,  interest  and  other  tax 
deducted income from the investments. For the sake of clarity, the investments include 
temporary investments of the limited partnership. 
1.1.25 Investment  Revenue  refers  to  the  remaining  portion  of  investment  income  minus 
investment costs. 
1.1.26 Defaulting Partner means a partner who violates this agreement. 
1.1.27 Observant Partner means a partner who does not have a record of violation of this 
agreement. 
1.1.28 The annual single interest rate of return refers to the annual rate of return. 
1.1.29 CNY, if the currency is not specifically indicated, refers to CNY. 
Title 
1.2 
The  headings  of  the  various  parts  of this  Agreement  are for  convenience only  and  the title 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
should not constitute a definition, limitation or extension of this Agreement and its terms. 
2. 
Limited Partnership 
2.1  Establishment/Change 
2.1.1  The  parties  agree  to  jointly  establish  ####  partnership  (limited  partnership)  in 
accordance  with  the  Partnership  Enterprise  Law  and  the  terms  and  conditions 
stipulated in this Agreement. 
2.1.2  The  parties  agree  and  undertake  that  for  the  purpose  of  registration/change  of 
registration  of  the  limited  partnership,  all  required  documents  will  be  signed  and 
provided,  and  all  necessary  procedures  will  be  performed.  The  date  on  which  the 
limited  partnership  obtains  the  business  license  is  the  date  on  which  the  limited 
partnership  is  established;  after  the  establishment  of  the  limited  partnership,  each 
partner  shall  complete  the  initial  capital  contribution  of  the  limited  partnership  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Annex  I  of  this  agreement,  and  complete  the 
corresponding registration. 
2.1.3  Before the first change of the limited partnership: If any partner violates the agreement, 
resulting  the  limited  partnership  cannot  change  the  registration.  the  general  partner 
could  directly  register  the  change  of  the  limited  partnership  only  with  the  observant 
limited partners. In this case, it is deemed that the defaulting partner will automatically 
quit this agreement, and no other party of this agreement will be liable for this. The 
general partner has the right to require the defaulting partner to bear the liability for 
breach of the agreement on behalf of the observant partner. 
2.2  Name 
2.2.1  The name of the limited partnership is #### partnership (limited partnership) (subject 
to the registration). 
2.2.2  According to the business needs of the limited partnership, the general partner may 
change the name of the limited partnership after the written consent of all partners, but 
should notify the limited partners in writing when it’s decided to change, and go through 
the corresponding registration change procedures. 
2.3  Main Business Premises 
2.3.1  The main business place of the limited partnership is [####] (subject to the registration). 
2.3.2  According to the business needs of the limited partnership, the general partner may 
change the main business premises of the limited partnership after the written consent 
of all partners, and go through the corresponding registration change procedures. 
Purpose 
2.4 
The limited partnership will exploit the advantages of each partner, realize the complementary 
resources, conduct professional equity investment, maximize the investment value-added of 
the partnership enterprise, and finally maximize the value of the investments for the partners. 
Business Scope 
2.5 
The business scope of a limited partnership is project investment and investment management. 
(Subject to the business scope registered at the enterprise registration authority). 
Target Raising Scale 
2.6 
The target raising scale of this limited partnership is XXX million CNY (hereinafter referred to 
as “target raising scale”), which is subject to the actual raising scale. 
Term of Agreement 
2.7 
2.7.1  The duration of a limited partnership is 5 years from the date of the establishment of 
the limited partnership, divided into investment period and withdrawal period. 
2.7.2  The investment period is from the date of establishment of the limited partnership to 
the  earlier  of  the  following  dates:  1)  the  date  of  the  full  five  years  from  the  date  of 
178 
establishment, or 2) the date on which the total amount of the capital contribution of 
the limited partnership is completed. After the expiration of the investment period, the 
limited partner will not be required to fulfil its outstanding investment commitments for 
investment in the new portfolio business, except for the payment of limited partnership 
fees and subsequent investments in existing portfolio companies. 
2.7.3  The  period  from  the  end  of  the  investment  period  to  the  expiration  of  the  limited 
partnership  duration  is  the  withdrawal  period  of  the  limited  partnership.  During  the 
withdrawal period, the general partner shall fully realize the investment of the limited 
partnership  to  the  portfolio  company.  During  the  withdrawal  period,  the  limited 
partnership  should  not  invest  in the  new  portfolio  company  unless  approved  by  the 
investment decision-making committee. However, subsequent investment in existing 
portfolio companies is not subject to this limitation. 
2.7.4  According to the business needs of the limited partnership, the partnership company 
may decide that the withdrawal period of the partnership may be extended by one year 
and  up  to  two  times  at  a  time,  but  the  total  duration  of  the  limited  partnership  is 
extended to a maximum of seven years. 
Partners 
2.8 
2.8.1  The limited partnership has X partners, including general partner X person(s), limited 
partner X person(s). 
2.8.2  The name and address of X general partner(s) are: 
Name/name 
Registered address or residence 
#### 
#### 
2.8.3 
 The name and address of X limited partner(s) are: 
Name/name 
Registered address or residence 
#### 
#### 
Business license 
number 
*************** 
Business license 
number 
*************** 
Partner Register 
2.9 
After the establishment of a limited partnership, the general partner shall place a register of 
partners in its premise, registering the names of the partners, the domicile, the amount of the 
capital  contribution,  the  amount  of  the  paid  contribution  and  other  information  deemed 
necessary by the general partner, the general partner. The partner register should be updated 
at any time based on changes in the above information. 
2.10  Pledge limit 
No partner may pledge, encumbrance or set any third-party rights in its share of the limited 
partnership. 
2.11  Limited Partnership Fee 
2.11.1  The  expenses  to  be  covered  by  the  limited  partnership  include  the  following  fees 
related to the establishment, operation, termination, dissolution, liquidation, etc. of the 
limited partnership: 
(i). 
(ii). 
(iii). 
The start-up fee for a limited partnership includes, but is not limited to, the costs 
associated  with  the  formation  and  establishment  of  a  limited  partnership, 
including preparation costs, registration fees and consulting fees for legal and 
accounting professionals; 
Legal, accounting, auditing, bank custody and other related fees that cannot be 
provided by the manager to the partnership; 
All  legal,  audit,  evaluation,  financial  advisory  and  other  third-party  costs 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
incurred in the investment, holding, operation, sale of the eligible investee or 
project  that  ultimately  achieves  the  investment,  which  can  be  borne  by  the 
project company or project; 
Legal, audit, evaluation and other third-party fees incurred for a target project 
that has been approved by a limited partnership investment decision-making 
commission but ultimately isn’t invested; 
Taxes and handling fees associated with obtaining, acquiring, holding, selling 
and otherwise disposing of partnership property; 
Unconventional 
announcement fees related to limited partnership matters; 
Financial  statements  and  reporting  fees  for  limited  partnerships,  including 
production, printing and delivery costs; 
Management fees and custodian fees; 
Partner conference meeting fee; 
Taxes  and  other  fees  charged  for  the  proceeds  or  assets,  transaction  or 
operation of a limited partnership by the government; 
Limited partnership dissolution and liquidation expenses; 
Other expenses that are not included in the above, but generally should not be 
included in the general partner's daily operation expenses. 
fees,  arbitration 
fees  such  as 
fees,  and 
litigation 
(iv). 
(v). 
(vi). 
(vii). 
(viii). 
(ix). 
(x). 
(xi). 
(xii). 
2.11.2  Before the establishment of a limited partnership, the start-up fees and other expenses 
advanced by the general partner, the general partner's shareholders or their affiliates 
shall  be  reimbursed  or  returned  by  the  limited  partnership  upon  payment  of  the 
conditions after the establishment of the partnership. 
(i). 
(ii). 
2.11.3  Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, as a consideration provided by the 
Manager and/or the third party service agency designated by the Manager to provide 
management and other services to the limited partnership, the parties agree that the 
limited  partnership  shall  be  directed  to  the  Manager  and/or  the  third  party  service 
agency designated by the Manager for the total payment management fee is as follows: 
During  the  investment  period  stipulated  in  this  Agreement,  the  limited 
partnership pays the management fee at 3% per year of the actual contribution 
of  each  partner.  The  calculation  formula  for  the  management  fee  of  each 
partner  is:  investment  period  management  fee  =  partner's  paid-in  capital 
contribution  ×  2%  ×  current  management  fee  calculation  days  /  365;  in  the 
withdrawal period and extension period stipulated in this agreement, the limited 
partnership does not accrue management fees, the general partner does not 
charge management fees. 
If  the  third-party  service  agency  designated  by  the  administrator  and/or  the 
manager  proposes  a  management  fee  payment  plan  higher  than  the  above 
criteria based on a reasonable budget, it can be implemented after the general 
partner report and get approval in the partner meeting. 
The management fee is prepaid every twelve (12) months. The first charging 
period is twelve (12) months from the date of payment of the initial management 
fee  for  the  limited  partnership.  In  the  future,  the  charging  period  will  be 
analogized. The first payment date is the “date of arrival” specified in the notice 
of payment for the first payment of the general partner, and the management 
fee for each charging period thereafter is within the eleventh (11th) business 
day of each charging period (in case of legal holidays, advance payment to the 
most  recent  working  day).  For  the  sake  of  clarity,  the  management  fee  is 
deducted  from  the  capital  contribution  of  the  limited  partner,  and  the  limited 
partner does not need to pay a separate management fee. 
The  exact  amount  of the management  fee for the  third party  service  agency 
designated by the limited partnership to the manager and/or the manager for 
the  limited  time  period  in  the  previous  charging  period  shall  be  settled  in 
(iv). 
(iii). 
180 
accordance  with paragraph  (i)  of this  Article  before  the tenth working  day  of 
each charging period. If the actual payment amount is more than the settlement 
of the amount payable, the difference will be discounted to the management 
fee  of  the  next  charging  period  or  the  capital  contribution  of  the  next  limited 
partner. If it cannot be discounted, the manager and/or the administrator shall 
specify the third-party service agency shall return the difference to the limited 
partnership. 
2.11.4  The manager  confirms  that  although  the  manager  has  the  right  to  hire  a  third-party 
service agency to provide management and other services to the limited partnership 
and  arrange  a  limited  partnership  to  pay  the  corresponding  management  fees,  the 
specific  investment  decision-making  matters  of  the  limited  partnership  shall  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  manager,  and  shouldn’t  be  entrusted  to  a  third  party  service 
agency. 
2.12  Manager fee 
The following expenses incurred by the limited partnership shall be paid by the manager at 
the management fee: 
2.12.1  Management team personnel expenses, including salaries, bonuses and benefits; 
2.12.2  Office rent, property management fees, utilities, communication fees, office facilities 
(such as office equipment, furniture, vehicles, etc.) related to limited partnerships and 
managers; 
2.12.3  Investment decision committee meeting and other meeting fees of the administrator; 
2.12.4  All reasonable travel expenses and reception fees incurred due to investment, holding, 
operation and sale of the proposed investment target project or portfolio company; 
2.12.5  Other daily operating expenses of managers. 
Within the amount of the general partner's management fee receivable, the limited partnership 
directly pays the expenses and deducts the management fees payable to the manager. 
3. 
Funding Method, Amount and Period of Partners 
Amount of capital contribution 
3.1 
3.1.1  The total amount of capital contribution of all partners in the limited partnership is XXX 
CNY.  The  proportion,  payment  method  and  deadline  of  the  committed  capital 
contribution of each partner is listed in Annex I. 
3.1.2  After all partners have completed the first phase of capital contribution or the conditions 
for the initial funding, the general partner applies to the enterprise registration authority 
for registration of the limited partnership. 
3.1.3  The limited partner's paid-in capital contribution shall not be less than XXX 5 million 
CNY, and the general partner's paid-in capital contribution shall be XXX million CNY. 
Contribution of Capital 
3.2 
3.2.1  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement,  each  partner  shall  pay  the 
contributions in accordance with the provisions of this Article 3.3. 
3.2.2  When the general partner requests contribution of the capital, he shall issue a notice 
of payment to all the partners, stating the proportion of the capital contribution payable 
by the partner in the period, the amount to be paid and the deadline for payment. On 
the day of the capital contribution date, each partner shall pay the full amount of the 
capital  contribution  to  the  limited  partnership  account  designated  by  the  general 
partner  as  required  by  the  notice.  The  payment  notice  shall  be  issued  at  least  ten 
working days before the deadline for payment. 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
3.2.3  After the establishment of the limited partnership, the general partner will issue a notice 
of  the  first  payment  to  all  partners  in  accordance  with  the  progress  of  the  limited 
partnership, and require each partner to pay XX% of the committed capital. The initial 
investment shall be from the limited partnership. It will be in place within one month 
from  the  date  of  establishment.  The  general  partner  shall  contribute  to  the  second 
phase according to the operation of the limited partnership (including but not limited to 
the progress of the limited partnership investment, the investment project situation, the 
follow-up options, etc.) within five (5) years from the date of establishment of the limited 
partnership. 
Overdue  
3.3 
3.3.1  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  Agreement,  if  any  partner  fails  to  pay  the  full 
amount  in  accordance  with  Article  3.3  on  or  before  the  closing  date  of  the  capital 
contribution,  the  other  observant  partners  may  determine  that  the  partner  is  a 
“defaulting partner” and the defaulting partner should bear the responsibility for breach 
of contract: 
(ii). 
(i).  The amount of overdue payment from the next day of receipt will be paid to the 
observant partners for overdue liquidated damages at a rate of five tenths per 
day. Next day after deadline, the general partner will issue a written reminder 
to  the  defaulting  partner.  Within  ten  (10)  working  days  from  the  date  of  the 
notification (hereinafter referred to as the credit period), the defaulting partner 
shall perform the obligation to pay the contribution and the liquidated damages 
stipulated in this paragraph. 
If the defaulting partner fails to fulfill the obligation to pay the capital during the 
credit period, the ratio of the liquidated damages will increase to one thousand 
per day after credit period. Next day after credit period, the general partner may 
again give the defaulting partner a fifteen (15) working day as grace period and 
issue a written notice to the defaulting partner. The grace period begins on the 
expiration of the credit period. During the grace period, the defaulting partner 
shall  fulfill  the  obligation  to  pay  the  contribution  and  the  liquidated  damages 
stipulated in paragraph (i) and (ii) of this article. The general partner may also 
waive the breach of contract by the defaulting partner in accordance with the 
terms of the provisions of paragraphs (iv) and (v) of this article. 
(iii).  If the defaulting partner pays all the contributions payable during the credit or 
grace period but fails to pay all the liquidated damages payable, the general 
partner  has  the  right  to  deduct  them  from  the  distribution  of  the  defaulting 
partner. 
(iv).  Responsibilities for all losses caused by the breach of contract to the limited 
partnership  include,  but  are  not  limited  to:  1)  losses  suffered  by  the  limited 
partnership due to failure to meet the investment obligations on time and to the 
third  party;  2)  limited  The  partnership  seeks  from  the  defaulting  partner  the 
costs of judicial proceedings such as liquidated damages, late fees, etc. and 
reasonable legal fees. 
If the defaulting partner fails to fulfill the payment obligation during the credit 
period, or if the defaulting partner is given a grace period, the defaulting partner 
fails to fulfill the payment obligation within the grace period: 
(v). 
a)  The defaulting partner shall not be entitled to pay subsequent contributions as a 
partner.  The  defaulting  partner  shall  lose  voting  rights  for  all  matters 
agreed by the partners under this agreement and shall not be counted in 
the voting base (Except conditions stipulated in the Partnership Enterprise 
Law). 
b)  The general partner has the right to choose to distribute the unpaid contribution 
of the defaulting partner (hereinafter referred to as “unpaid contribution”) 
among the observant partners who intend to subscribe, according to their 
current  paid  contribution  ratio.  ,  or  accept  a  new  partner  to  fulfill  the 
182 
subsequent funding commitments of the defaulting partner, or reduce the 
total subscription contribution of the limited partnership accordingly. In any 
of  the  above  cases,  the  defaulting  partner  shall  still  bear  the  limited 
partnership  fee  (including  the  management  fee)  in  accordance  with  the 
committed capital contribution at the time of signing this agreement during 
the  investment  period;  The  limited  partnership  fee  excluding  the 
management fee corresponding to the capital contribution actually paid by 
the partner is still borne by the default partner. If implementing this article 
will  cause  the  amount  of  capital  contribution  of  defaulting  partner  or  the 
new  partner  less  than  the  minimum  capital  contribution  of  the  limited 
partner  as  stipulated  in  this  Agreement,  all  partners  shall  confirm  and 
agree it. 
3.3.2  The  liquidated  damages  and  late  payment  fees  agreed  in  this  Article  shall  be 
distributed as other income of the limited partnership in accordance with Article 7.4 of 
this Agreement, and shall not be counted as the capital contribution of the partner who 
paid the liquidated damages or late payment, nor the base of the distribution of income 
between a general partner and a limited partner. 
3.3.3  Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, for “defaulting partners” under Section 
3.3.1, the general partner may decide to take the above measures from the perspective 
of facilitating the limited partnership, or choose to take the following measures: 
(i). 
(ii). 
(iii). 
(iv). 
Directly initiate the arbitral procedure to recover from the defaulting partner 1) 
the  amount  of  the  outstanding  capital;  2)  the  overdue  default  of  the  unpaid 
capital  from  the  date  of  receipt  of  the  account,  calculated  as  five  or  one 
thousandth of a day (where applicable); and 3) all costs incurred by the limited 
partnership  for  arbitral  proceedings  and  other  judicial  proceedings,  including 
reasonable attorneys' fees. 
The exemption of the defaulting partner includes the payment obligation and 
rights  of  all  subsequent  contributions  that  have  not  been  paid  in  the  default 
period, and the exemption is subtracted from the initial total contribution of the 
limited partnership. 
A settlement agreement other than the method of accountability stipulated in 
this agreement is reached with the defaulting partner for the breach of contract. 
For  the  breach  of  the  limited  partner,  in  accordance  with  the  foregoing 
procedure, the general partner shall decide and execute the above-mentioned 
breach of contract clause on behalf of the limited partnership; for the breach of 
the general partner, in accordance with the foregoing rules, each of the limited 
partners shall have the right to represent the limited partnership in accordance 
with the foregoing rules.  
3.3.4  Upon the agreement of the Partner Conference, the partner may transfer its share of 
the property in the partnership to other partners, but shall notify the other partners 30 
days in advance.  
Limited Liability 
4.1 
The limited partner shall bear limited liability subject to the amount of its contribution. 
4. 
Limited partner 
Authority Limited Partner 
4.2 
4.2.1  The limited partner has the right to know about the limited partnership in accordance 
with this agreement. 
4.2.2  The limited partners may, in accordance with this agreement, convene, participate in 
or  entrust  other  partners  to  participate  in  the meeting  of the  partners,  and  have the 
right to vote at the meeting of the limited partnership partner. 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
4.2.3  The  limited  partner  has  the  right  to  obtain  income  from  the  limited  partnership  in 
accordance with this agreement. 
4.2.4  The limited partner has the right to supervise the general partner in accordance with 
this  agreement.  Without  prejudice  to  the  normal  operation  of  the  partnership,  the 
limited partner has the right to know the business status of the partnership, consult the 
financial information of the partnership account book, and check its implementation of 
the limited partnership.  
4.2.5  When a general partner exercises his rights, the limited partner has the right to urge 
him to exercise his rights; if the limited partnership needs to file a lawsuit or apply to 
the arbitration institution for arbitration, the limited partner has the right to request the 
general partner to do it by fax, in writing or in other forms. If the general partner refuses 
to file a lawsuit or arbitration after receiving the written request, or does not file a lawsuit 
or  arbitration  within  thirty  (30)  natural  days  from  the  date  of  receipt  of  the  written 
request, the limited partner has the right to file a lawsuit or arbitration in its own name 
for the benefit of a limited partnership. 
4.2.6  A limited partner does not operate daily business of the limited partnership and may 
not represent the limited partnership externally. Except as otherwise provided in this 
Agreement,  no  limited  partner  shall  participate  in  the  management  or  control  of  the 
investment  business  of  the  limited  partnership  and  other  transaction  business 
conducted in the name of a limited partnership, or sign documents on behalf of a limited 
partnership. 
In the course of the operation of a limited partnership, which may have a significant 
impact on the interests of the limited partner, the limited partner has the right to take 
measures  to  adjust  the  scale  of  the  investment  or  to  withdraw  the  partnership  to 
prevent the risk from expanding. 
4.2.7 
4.2.8  The limited partner shall abide by this agreement when exercising the voting rights of 
the delisting, replacement, and selection of the general partner's rights. 
4.2.9  There  is  no  limitation  for  the  limited  partner  to  introduce  investments  to  the  limited 
partnership or operate other investment activities.  
4.3 
4.3.1 
4.3.2 
Statement and Guarantee of Limited Partners 
The limited partners hereby promise and guarantee: 
If it is an institutional investor, it is an entity that is legally established and validly exists; 
If  it  is  an  institutional  investor,  its  signing  of  this  agreement  has  been  effectively 
resolved and fully authorized in accordance with its internal procedures; 
4.3.3  The person signing this Agreement is its legally valid representative; 
4.3.4  Except where it has been expressly disclosed and accepted by the general partner, it 
holds a limited partnership interest for its own interests, and there is no entrustment, 
trust or proxy relationship on the interests, and the duration of the limited partnership 
will  not  change.  All  the  partners  have  unanimously  confirmed  that  the  asset 
management  institution  will  invest  funds  in  this  limited  partnership  with  the  asset 
management  plan  issued  by  it,  and  does  not  constitute  a  violation  of  the  above 
provisions; 
It understands the risks that may be incurred by participating in the limited partnership 
and is capable of undertaking such risks; 
It decides to participate in this limited partnership based on its own independent will 
judgment; 
It has read this Agreement carefully and understands the exact meaning of the terms 
of this Agreement, and there is no material misunderstanding; 
4.3.6 
4.3.7 
4.3.5 
4.3.8  The source of funding paid to the limited partnership is legal; 
4.3.9  All  information  and  materials  submitted  by  the  company  and  its  authorized 
representatives  to  the  limited  partnership  and  the  general  partner,  including 
information about their subject qualifications and legal status, are true, accurate and 
complete. If such information changes, it will be timely notified to the general partner. 
184 
Limited partner withdrawal 
4.4 
4.4.1  A  limited  partner  may,  in  accordance  with  this  Agreement,  transfer  the  limited 
partnership  interest  it  holds  to  withdraw  from the  limited  partnership. Otherwise,  the 
limited partner may not request the withdrawal of the partnership or the early recovery 
of the investment principal. If required by the law and regulation, the limited partner 
should withdrawal from the partnership. 
4.4.2  When a limited partner happens in the following situations, he/she can withdraw from 
the partnership: 
(i).  Revoked business license, ordered to close, revoked, or declared bankrupt; 
(ii).  The limited partnership interest held is enforced by the court; 
(iii).  Other  circumstances  that  are  considered  to  be  deemed  withdrawal  in  the 
Partnership Law. 
When a limited partner withdraws from the partnership in accordance with the above-
mentioned agreement, the limited partnership shall not be dissolved. 
4.4.3  During the duration of the limited partnership, the limited partner may withdrawal when 
one of the following circumstances occurs: 
(i). 
(ii). 
(iii). 
The  reasons  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  partnership  as  stipulated  in  this 
agreement; 
With the consent of the general partner; 
The partner is in serious breach of the obligations set forth in this agreement 
and is unanimously agreed by the partners other than the defaulting partner. 
Unlimited liability 
5.1 
The general partner bears unlimited liability for the limited partnership debt. 
5. 
General partner and manager 
Conditions and selection procedures for executive partner 
5.2 
5.2.1  The executive partner shall have the following conditions: 
(i). 
(ii). 
An institution registered in the territory of the People's Republic of China; 
The  limited  partners  all  agree  to  be  accepted  as  the  general  partner  of  the 
limited partnership. 
5.2.2  The executive partner must meet the above term 5.2.1; the signing of this agreement 
by all partners is deemed to select the general partner as the executive partner of the 
limited partnership. 
5.2.3 
 [#### company] is the general partner and executive partner. The management and 
operation  rights  of  a  limited  partnership  and  its  investments  and  other  activities  are 
exclusively  for  the  general  partner  (by  the  general  partner  directly  or  through  its 
officially  delegated  representative).  The  general  partner  will  lead  an  investment 
decision-making  committee.  The  final  decision  of  the  investment  (and  exit)  of  the 
limited partnership is made by the investment decision-making committee. 
5.3  Manager and management team 
5.3.1  Manager.  The  general  partner  is  the  manager  of  the  partnership.  The  partnership 
enterprise will sign an entrusted management agreement with the manager to agree 
on the rights and duties and obligations of the manager. Notwithstanding the foregoing, 
managing a limited partnership and conducting a limited partnership is an exclusive 
duty  of  the  general  partner,  and  the  decision  to  select  and  dispose  of  the  limited 
partnership  investment  project  shall  be  made  by  the  general  partner  in  accordance 
with the relevant agreement of this agreement. 
5.3.2  Management  team.  Managers  should,  in  accordance  with  international  practice, 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
limited 
incentive  mechanisms  based  on 
formulate  competitive 
partnership  market  conditions,  and  recruit  management  professionals  with  equity 
investment experience through market-based methods. 
the  domestic 
Duties 
5.4 
5.4.1  The General Partner, as an executive partner, owns the exclusive execution rights of 
the Limited Partnership as agreed in this Agreement and Partnership Law, including 
but not limited to: 
(i).  Undertaking the investment management decisions of the partnership and the 
daily management of other businesses; 
(ii).  Representing  the  partnership  in  the  employment  of  a  consultant  to  provide 
investment consulting and management services to the partnership; 
(iii).  Representing 
the  partnership 
in 
the  employment  of  professionals, 
intermediaries and consultants to provide services to the partnership; 
(iv).  Initiating a lawsuit or responding to the interests of the partnership, conducting 
arbitration; reconciling with the other party to resolve the dispute between the 
partnership and the third party; taking all possible actions to protect the property 
security of the partnership and reducing the risks of the partnership, the general 
partner and its property; 
(v).  Representing  a  partnership  to  enter  into  a  management  agreement  and  an 
escrow agreement; 
(vi).  Handling tax-related matters of the partnership enterprise in accordance with 
national tax administration regulations; 
(vii).  Managing and maintaining the assets of a limited partnership; 
(viii).  Opening,  managing  and  revoking  bank  accounts  and  securities  accounts  of 
limited partnerships, issuing cheques and other payment vouchers; 
(ix).  Taking other actions necessary to achieve the purpose of the partnership, to 
maintain or to obtain the legitimate rights and interests of the limited partnership; 
(x).  Signing the document on behalf of the limited partnership. 
(xi).  No transaction may be conducted with this partnership except with the consent 
of the partner meeting. 
(xii).  Regularly  reporting  to  the  limited  partners  on  the  implementation  of  the 
partnership and the operating and financial status of the partnership. 
5.4.2  Based  on  the  provisions  of  Article  5.4.1,  all  partners  hereby  specifically  agree  and 
authorize the general partner to have the rights to decide on the following matters: 
(i).  Appoint or change the representative appointed by the general partner; 
(ii).  Confirm  the  actual  contributions  of  each  partner  and  issue  and  sign  a 
confirmation of capital contribution; 
(iii).  Change the name and premise of the limited partnership; 
(iv).  Select and change the custodian institution on the premise that the custodian 
institution and the escrow agreement are in compliance with applicable laws, 
regulations and regulatory requirements; 
(v).  According  to  this  agreement,  the  existing  limited  partners  or  new  limited 
partners will continue to raise funds until the target raising scale is reached; 
(vi).  Whether  it  agrees  to  the  limited  partner's  transfer  of  the  equity  of  the 
partnership; 
(vii).  Whether to agree to the appointment or withdrawal of a limited partner; 
(viii).  Within  the  normal  business  scope  of  the  partnership,  the  right  to transfer  or 
dispose  of  the  intellectual  property,  real  estate  and  other  property  of  the 
partnership  is  determined,  but  the  rights  of  this  paragraph  are  limited  to  the 
reasonable transfer and disposal of the principal by the general partner for the 
purpose of the partnership; 
(ix).  Modifications  to  this  Agreement  that  do not  affect the substantive content  or 
the wording; 
186 
(x).  Dispose  the  assets  held  by  the  limited  partnership  for  various  reasons  in 
accordance with this agreement. 
Breach 
5.5 
The general partner should seek the best interests for the limited partnership based on the 
principle of good faith. If the limited partnership loses interest or bears debts or liabilities due 
to the intentional or gross negligence of the general partner, the general partner shall be liable 
for compensation. 
Limitation of liability 
5.6 
5.6.1  The  general  partner  should  not  be  required  to  return the  capital  contribution  of  any 
limited partner, nor the investment income of the limited partner; all principal return and 
return  on  investment  should  be  derived  from  the  available  assets  of  the  limited 
partnership. 
5.6.2  Unless due to intentional or gross negligence, the general partner and its management 
team shall not be liable for the loss of the limited partnership, resulting from its act or 
omission. 
Disclaimer 
5.7 
Each  partner  agrees  that  the  management  team  and  the  general  partner,  the  agents  and 
consultants employed by the general partner shall perform their duties to the general partner 
or the limited partnership and handle the limited partnership entrustment. If the general partner 
and  the  above-mentioned  persons  are  subject  to  any  claims,  litigation,  arbitration, 
investigation or other legal proceedings for performing their duties or handling the entrusted 
matters, the limited partnership shall compensate all the losses and expenses incurred by the 
individual.  The  compensation  shall  be  derived  from  the  assets  available  of  the  limited 
partnership,  unless  there  is  evidence  that  the  loss,  expense  and related  legal  proceedings 
were caused by the intentional or gross negligence of that individual. 
General partner layoff and replacement 
5.8 
5.8.1  When  the  general  partner  fails  to  perform  the  capital  contribution  obligation  in 
accordance with this agreement, or its intentional or gross negligence causes loss to 
the  limited  partnership  or  improper  conduct  in  the  execution  of  the  partnership,  the 
limited  partner  may  expel  the  general  partner  in  accordance  with  the  procedures 
stipulated in Article 5.8.2. 
5.8.2  One of the following procedures should be performed to expel the general partner:  
(ii). 
(i). 
According  to  the  arbitration  procedure  stipulated  in  this  agreement,  the 
arbitration institution may decide to expel the general partner as stipulates in 
Article 5.8.1; 
The partner conference made a resolution on the layoff of the general partner. 
If the partner conference fails to reach a unanimous resolution on the acceptance of 
the  new  general  partner  within  30  days  after  the  layoff  resolution,  the  limited 
partnership enters the liquidation process. 
5.8.3 
5.8.4  The general partner replacement should perform the following procedures: 
(i).  The partner conference decides to accept the new general partner at the same 
time as the general partner layoff resolution; 
(ii).  The new general partner signs a written document confirming that it is bound 
by this agreement and fulfills the duties and obligations of this agreement that 
should be performed by the general partner. 
5.8.5  From  the  date  of  completion  of  the  procedures  described  in  the  Article  5.8.2,  the 
general partner withdraws from the limited partnership, ceases to perform the limited 
partnership affairs and hands over the limited partnership affairs to the new general 
partner agreed by the partner conference. 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
General partner withdrawal 
5.9 
5.9.1  The general partner hereby undertakes that, unless otherwise expressly agreed in this 
Agreement, the general partner shall perform the duties under this Agreement until the 
Limited Partnership is dissolved or liquidated in accordance with this Agreement; no 
withdrawal is required until the Limited Partnership is dissolved or liquidated; it will not 
take any action to disband or terminate on its own initiative. 
5.9.2  When the general partner happens in the following situations, it is deemed to withdraw 
from the partnership: 
(i). 
(ii). 
(iii). 
Was revoked business license, ordered to close, revoked, or declared bankrupt; 
The limited partnership interest held by the court is enforced; 
Other circumstances in which the provisions of the Partnerships Law apply to 
the general partner are considered to be deemed withdrawal. 
5.9.3  When  the  general  partner  withdraws  from  the  partnership  in  accordance  with  the 
above-mentioned agreement, the limited partnership enters the liquidation procedure 
unless the limited partnership immediately accepts the new general partner. 
5.9.4  When the general partner has to withdraw due to mismanagement or other reasons, 
the general partner should pay the limited partnership the costs incurred in replacing 
the general partner and other economic losses. 
6. 
Investment Business 
Investment objectives 
6.1 
The limited partnership will fully draw on the operating mode of the international mature market 
equity  investment  fund,  combined  with  the  direction  of  China's  economic  development.  In 
principle, the limited partnership will invest in ecological agriculture, environmental protection 
and eco-tourism during the investment period. 
Investment management 
6.2 
6.2.1  The general partner leads an investment decision-making committee, which is the final 
decision-making body for limited partnership investment. It is responsible for reviewing 
and  making  decisions  on  the  investment  projects  (and  their  exits)  submitted  by  the 
investment management  team.  The investment  decision-making  committee shall  be 
established exclusively for this limited partnership and shall serve specifically for this 
limited partnership. 
In  principle,  a  limited  partner  does  not  participate  in  the  daily  management  and 
operation  of  a  limited  partnership  or  participate  in  an  investment  decision-making 
committee,  but  could  dock  with  the  day-to-day  management  of  the  partnership  and 
recommend investment projects to the partnership. 
6.2.2 
Investment restrictions 
6.3 
Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Limited Partnership shall not: 
6.3.1 
6.3.2  Conducting derivative securities trading such as futures trading, options trading, and 
Investing in stock trading in the secondary market; 
forward contracts; 
6.3.3  Providing capital loans and guarantees to the limited partner or third party (except for 
the  provision  of  investment  target  projects  that  can  be  converted  into  shares  of  the 
company's equity or other assets), or by borrowing liabilities; 
6.3.4  The cumulative investment amount for a single invested enterprise shall not exceed 
30% of the total capital contribution of the limited partnership, except with the consent 
of the investment decision-making committee; 
6.3.5  Control of investment in a single invested enterprise, except with the consent of the 
investment decision-making committee; 
Investment in real estate and infrastructure development and construction; 
Investing in industries that do not comply with national industrial policies; 
6.3.6 
6.3.7 
6.3.8  The  investment  does  not  have  stable  cash  flow  return  expectations  or  asset 
appreciation value, high pollution, high energy consumption, failure to meet national 
188 
energy  conservation  and  environmental  protection  standards,  and  low  technology 
added value; 
6.3.9  Providing loans, sponsorships and donations to anyone (including partners); 
6.3.10  Purchase, possession of real estate, intellectual property, etc., property not related to 
business purposes. 
6.3.11  Engaging in investment activities prohibited by laws and regulations. 
Investment exit method 
6.4 
The  limited  partnership  can  exit  its  equity  investment  through  the  initial  listing,  merges, 
acquisitions, equity repurchase, equity transfer, equity swap and other means. The expiration 
of the limited partnership shall, in principle, be settled in accordance with Article 14.2 of this 
Agreement. At the same time, in the case of the expiration of the limited partnership period, 
the existing funds or newly established funds in Anhui Province may be used to accept and 
purchase the equity investments that have not yet been withdrawn. 
Cash management 
6.5 
All cash assets of a limited partnership, including but not limited to cash to be invested, to be 
allocated and expensed, can be managed for liquidity. Idle funds can participate in the financial 
interbank market business and other low-risk investments. The operational risks are borne by 
the general partner. 
Prohibition of debt and guarantee 
6.6 
During  the  operation  period  of  the  limited  partnership,  it  is  prohibited  to  borrow  debt  and 
engage guarantee business.  
7. 
Capital account, income distribution and loss sharing 
Capital Account 
7.1 
7.1.1  A capital account should be established for each partner in the accounting book of the 
limited partnership. On the last day of each accounting period, each partner's capital 
account balance should be adjusted. 
7.1.2  The following items should be recorded as an addition to the capital account: 1) the 
share of the partner in the current limited partnership income; and 2) the amount of 
capital contributed by the partner during the period. 
7.1.3  The following items should be recorded as a deduction for the capital account: 1) the 
allocated cash drawn by the partner; and 2) the limited partnership loss shared by the 
partner during the accounting period. 
7.1.4  The partner's capital account shall be further adjusted in accordance with other special 
assignments agreed in this Agreement. 
Principle of income distribution and loss sharing 
7.2 
7.2.1  The investment income obtained from the limited partnership shall be allocated in the 
order agreed in Article 7.3 of this Agreement. 
7.2.2  Non-investment  income  other  than  the  income  from  limited  partnership  investment 
shall be distributed among the partners in accordance with the relevant agreement in 
Article 7.4 of this Agreement. 
7.2.3  The  loss  of  the  limited  partnership  within  the  total  subscribed  capital  contribution  is 
shared by all partners on the basis of the subscribed capital contribution, and the loss 
exceeding  the  total  contribution  of  the  limited  partnership  is  borne  by  the  general 
partner.  The  risks  arising  from  the  operation  of  idle  funds  are  borne  by  the  general 
partner.  If  the  idle  fund  operation  generates  a  principal  loss,  the  general  partner  is 
responsible for making up. 
7.2.4  The net profit of the partnership after deducting related costs, expenses, expenses and 
tax liabilities shall be distributed by all partners in proportion to the actual contribution. 
7.2.5  The  general  partner  is  responsible  for  the  specific  implementation  of  the  limited 
partnership  income  distribution.  The  general  partner  shall  liquidate  the  investment 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
income obtained from each proposed investment project and pre-allocate within 30 (30) 
working days after the completion of the liquidation; account for each non-investment 
income  and  pre-allocate  it  within  thirty  (30)  business  after  the  completion  of  the 
accounting.  
Distribution of investment income 
7.3 
During  the  duration  of  the  limited  partnership,  the  investment  income  or  investment  loss 
obtained by each investment project shall be liquidated. The investment income obtained from 
each investment project during the duration of the limited partnership shall be distributed in 
the following order: 
7.3.1  Firstly,  the  general  partner  and  the  limited  partner  are  returned  to  the  actual 
contribution amount calculated according to the actual investment contribution ratio, 
until  the  general  partner  and  the  limited  partner  obtain  the  accumulated  distribution 
amount according to item (1) of this article. Recovering their actual contributions to the 
investment project; 
If there is a balance, it is distributed at a rate of (XX)% of the limited partners and (XX)% 
of the general partners. 
7.3.2 
Distribution of non-investment income 
7.4 
7.4.1  The manager (including his management team) receives the investment management 
fee,  investment  termination  fee,  investment  advisory  fee,  investment  termination 
compensation and other similar forms of expenses due to the investment activities of 
the limited partnership project (in the case of joint investment, such expenses shall be 
common Investors are allocated according to the proportion of investment (hereinafter 
referred to as “cost income”), which is owned by the limited partnership and should be 
first allocated to the limited partnership account when the cash income is obtained; if 
the fee  income is  non-cash  such  as  shares  and  stock  options In the  case  of  asset-
based  payments,  the  Manager  shall  assign  the  non-cash  assets  to  the  Limited 
Partnership Account on the date they are cashed. The above-mentioned fee income 
obtained by the limited partnership is first used to offset the expenditure of the limited 
partnership on the investment plan. (XX)% of the balance should be allocated to the 
manager, and (XX)% should be distributed among all partners according to the actual 
amount of contributions. 
7.4.2  The liquidated damages and late payment fees paid to the limited partnership due to 
the  overdue payment  of  the  limited  partner/asset  principals  shall  be  counted  as the 
income  of  the  limited  partnership  and  shall  be  between  all  the  contracting 
partners/asset  principals  (the  limited  partnership  shall  be  entrusted  with  the 
hypothetical assets) The case where a person directly acts as a limited partner is a 
specific statistical observing partner). 
Non-cash allocation 
7.5 
7.5.1  Under  no  circumstances  may  the  limited  partnership  be  allocated  in  a  non-cash 
manner.  Before  the  limited  partnership  is  liquidated,  the  general  partner  shall  use 
reasonable  efforts  to  realize  the  investment  of  the  limited  partnership  and  avoid 
distribution in a non-cash manner. 
If the general partner fails to make reasonable efforts to realize through reasonable 
means such as the transfer of the agreement, the general partner agrees that the non-
cash assets can be realized through public auction. 
7.5.2 
Income tax 
7.6 
The partner shall pay income tax on the corresponding investment income of the partnership 
in accordance with the Partnership Enterprise Law and other applicable laws. As far as the 
applicable law stipulates that the partnership enterprise shall perform the relevant taxes on 
the  withholding  obligations,  the  partnership  enterprise  has  the  right  to  withhold  and  pay  in 
accordance with the relevant applicable laws. The general partner shall conduct reasonable 
190 
tax  planning  according  to  law,  so that  the  overall  tax  structure  of  the  limited  partnership  is 
optimized. 
8. 
Accounting and reporting 
Bookkeeping 
8.1 
8.1.1  During the duration of the partnership, the general partner shall establish accounting 
books and financial reporting systems in accordance with the law. 
8.1.2  During  the  duration of the  partnership  and  within (3)  years  after the  dissolution,  the 
general partner shall keep or record the full and accurate records of the partnership 
transaction in the appropriate accounting books in the general partner's residence. , 
which should contain all the information required by applicable law. These accounting 
books  should  be  recorded  in  Chinese  in  accordance  with  Chinese  accounting 
standards. The accounting book of this partnership recorded in this way is the basis 
for the preparation of financial reports submitted by the designated partners under this 
Treaty. 
Fiscal year 
8.2 
The fiscal year of the limited partnership is the same as the calendar year; the first fiscal year 
begins on the date of the establishment of the limited partnership and ends on December 31 
of the current year. 
Audit and financial report 
8.3 
8.3.1  The limited partnership shall, after the end of each fiscal year, engage an independent 
auditor  to  audit  the  financial  report  of  the  limited  partnership.  The  selection  or 
replacement of the audit institution shall be carried out by the general partner after the 
proposal of the general partner is confirmed by the limited partner. 
8.3.2  The general partner shall complete the audit of the previous year by April 30 of each 
year  and  submit  the  annual  financial  report  of  the  limited  partnership  to  the  limited 
partner by letter, fax, email or other means, and attach the audit report provided by the 
limited  partnership  audit  institution.  The  general  partner  shall  report  to  the  other 
partners in writing about the operation of the invested company within one month after 
each quarter. 
Review financial books 
8.4 
The limited partner shall have the right to inspect or copy the legitimate matters related to the 
limited partnership interest held by the agent in person within a reasonable time limit during 
normal working hours, within a reasonable time limit of five (5) natural days. The accounting 
book  of  the  partnership.  The  limited  partner  shall  exercise  the  rights  under  this  section  in 
accordance with the confidentiality procedures and agreements established or updated by the 
limited partnership from time to time and shall not affect the normal operation of the limited 
partnership. 
Investment management report 
8.5 
The  general  partner  shall  report  the  limited  partnership  investment  operation  to  the  limited 
partners on a regular and irregular basis, and ensure that the contents of the report are free 
from false, misleading statements or major omissions, and are responsible for the truthfulness 
and completeness of the reported content. 
8.5.1  Periodic reports. The general partner should: 
(1)  Submit  the  investment  management  report  for  the  first  half  of  the  limited 
partnership within the first month of each semi-annual period; 
(2)  The  semi-annual  supervision  of  the  custodian  bank  to  submit  the  limited 
partnership custody report in a timely manner; 
(3)  The  last  annual  limited  partnership  operation  report  is  submitted  within  four 
months after the end of each fiscal year. 
(4)  The semi-annual and annual reports should reflect all significant events during the 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
limited partnership reporting period. 
8.5.2 
Interim report. In the event of a limited partnership operation, when the following events 
may have a significant impact on the interests of other partners, the general partner 
shall promptly notify all partners: 
(1)  The limited partnership suffered a serious loss; 
(2)  Significant  changes  in  the  directors,  supervisors,  senior  management  or  core 
investment team of the general partner; 
(3)  Major events occurred in the projects invested by the limited partnership; 
(4)  The project invested by the limited partnership is withdrawn; 
(5)  The general partner increases, reduces, reduces, divides, dissolves, and decides 
to file for bankruptcy or is filed for bankruptcy; 
(6)  The  limited  partnership proposed investment  project  has  a relationship with the 
general partner and other investment entities or other investors controlled by it; 
(7)  Under the premise of the general partner, the companies invested by the limited 
partnership have significant connected transactions; 
(8)  The  general  partner’s  directors,  supervisors,  senior  management  or  core 
investment team members are subject to criminal or administrative penalties; 
(9)  The general partner is involved in major lawsuits and arbitrations; 
(10) Other major issues that may affect the rights and interests of investors. 
Information disclosure 
8.6 
On the premise that the general partner reasonably estimates its necessity, it should, as far 
as  practicable,  provide  continuous  feedback  and  timely  updated  information  related  to  the 
occurrence  of  important  events  to  the  partners,  and  ensure  that  the  limited  partnerships 
perform the  corresponding  information in accordance with the requirements  of  the relevant 
regulatory authorities. Disclosure obligations. 
Confidentiality 
8.7 
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing, the  Limited  Partner  specifically  confirms that the  obligations 
under this Article shall not cause the General Partner, the Trustee or their respective affiliates 
to  breach  their  confidentiality  obligations  with  respect  to  any  invested  company,  General 
Partner, Trustee Management The organization and its respective affiliates may not disclose 
the  confidential  information  prohibited  under  these  confidentiality  obligations,  and  without 
prejudice to applicable laws and regulations, if the relevant information is disclosed in good 
faith, it does not meet the maximum of the partnership or the invested enterprise. Interest, the 
general partner may not disclose such information. The general partner may edit the highly 
sensitive information covered by this article's report for confidentiality purposes. 
9. 
Implementation of partnership affairs 
Implementation of partnership affairs 
9.1 
9.1.1  A  limited  partnership is a partnership with  a general  partner.  The power to enforce, 
manage,  and  operate  a  limited  partnership  and  its  investment  business  and  other 
activities  belongs  to  the  general  partner  and  is  exercised  directly  by  or  through  its 
delegated representatives. 
9.1.2  The general partner may, in accordance with the terms of this agreement, contract or 
engage in other acts on behalf of the limited partnership to achieve the purpose and 
purpose of the limited partnership. 
9.1.3  The general partner shall exercise the foregoing powers of 9.1.1 and 9.1.2 and other 
powers stipulated in this agreement, and shall strictly abide by the provisions of this 
agreement, and shall not exercise powers beyond the authority or in violation of this 
agreement. 
9.1.4  Where the partners perform partnership affairs separately, the executive partners may 
challenge  the  matters  performed  by  other  partners.  When  an  objection  is  filed,  the 
execution of the transaction should be suspended. In the event of a dispute, a vote 
shall be taken by a partner other than the partner who has filed the objection, and the 
192 
9.1.5 
voting  method  shall  be  adopted  by  the  partner,  one  vote,  one  vote,  and  the  voting 
partner. 
If  the  partner  entrusted  with  the  execution  of  the  partnership  does  not  perform  the 
transaction in accordance with the partnership agreement or the decision of the entire 
partner, the other partners may decide to revoke the commission. 
9.2 
The behavior of the general partner is binding on the limited partnership 
The  general  partner  and  his  delegated  representatives  are  all  binding  on  the  limited 
partnership  for  all  conduct  of  the  partnership firm,  including  business  cooperation  with  any 
third party and representation on the matter. 
Authorization 
9.3 
By signing this Agreement, all limited partners authorize the general partner to sign on behalf 
of all and any limited partners on the following documents: 
(1)  Amendments to this Agreement or a modified partnership agreement. When the 
content of the modification is the relevant content of the independent decision of 
the  general  partner  as  stipulated  in  this  agreement,  the  general  partner  may 
directly sign on behalf of the limited partner; when the content of the modification 
is the relevant content of the resolutions of the partner meeting as stipulated in 
this  agreement,  the  general  partnership  The  person  may  sign  on  behalf  of  the 
limited partner by the resolution of the partner's meeting; when the content of the 
amendment  is  the  relevant  content  of  the  investment  decision  committee's 
resolutions  stipulated  in  this  agreement,  the  general  partner's  written  consent 
document (including but not limited to mail) by the investment decision committee 
resolution , texts, letters, etc.) can be signed on behalf of a limited partner. 
(2)  Enterprise registration/change registration documents for all limited partnerships. 
(3)  Partner contribution confirmation. 
(4)  A document to be signed in order to perform a limited partnership dissolution or 
liquidation of a related business when the general partner acts as the liquidator of 
the limited partnership. 
Asset custody 
9.4 
9.4.1  The limited partnership shall entrust a reputable national commercial bank (hereinafter 
referred  to  as  the  “custodian  institution”)  to  custodian  all  assets  in  the  limited 
partnership account, and all cash flows of the limited partnership shall be conducted 
through  the  third  party  escrow  account  opened  by  the  limited  partnership  at  the 
custodian bank. To ensure that the limited partnership assets are independent and not 
conflated  with  the  assets  of  the  general  partner.  The  parties  agree  that  the  limited 
partnership custodian is selected or replaced by the general partner. 
9.4.2  The  investment  instructions  issued  by  the  limited  partnership  to  the  custodian  bank 
must be resolved by the investment decision-making committee. 
9.4.3  When any cash outlay occurs in a limited partnership, the procedures agreed with the 
escrow agreement between the custodian and the custodian shall be followed. 
9.5  Management agreement 
After the establishment of the limited partnership, the “trust management agreement” may be 
signed with the administrator to stipulate investment management and remuneration, but the 
agreement of the “trust management agreement” shall not conflict with the relevant provisions 
of this agreement. 
10.  Partner conference 
10.1  Partner conference 
10.1.1  The Partner Conference is the highest authority of the limited partnership. The meeting 
of the partners is convened and presided over by the general partner. All partners have 
the right to participate in the meeting. 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
10.1.2  The functions and powers of the Partner Conference include and only include: 
(i).  Review  and  approve  the  annual  report  of  the  general  partner  and  make 
strategic recommendations; 
(ii).  Early termination and dissolution of the limited partnership; 
(iii).  Selection of general partners (except for the first general partner), transfer of 
equity, withdrawal and subsequent participation of the latter; 
(iv).  Delisting the general partner in accordance with the procedure agreed in Article 
5.9.2 due to the circumstances agreed in Article 5.9.1; 
(v).  The  reduction  of  the  size  of  the  limited  partnership  and  the  cessation  of 
subsequent funding; 
(vi).  Amendments to this Agreement, except for matters that the General Partner 
may decide to amend; 
(vii).  Branches that establish limited partnerships within and outside China (except 
for special purpose entities established for investment projects); 
(viii).  Review and approve the Manager to propose a management fee payment plan 
based  on  the  reasonable  budget  based  on  the  reasonable  budget  of  Article 
2.11.3  of  this  Agreement,  and  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Section 
2.11.3 of this Agreement. Article (3), reviewing and approving the management 
fee payment plan for the first charging period proposed by the administrator; 
(ix).  Decide whether to terminate the investment period in advance and enter the 
exit period, or terminate the limited partnership in advance; 
(x).  Approving a default partner to withdraw from the partnership in accordance with 
item (3) of Article 4.4.3 of this Agreement; 
(xi).  Approving the partnership to withdraw from the partnership in accordance with 
Article 12 of this Agreement; 
(xii).  Make a resolution on the dissolution and liquidation of the partnership; 
(xiii).  Review and approve the partnership profit distribution plan and make up the 
loss plan; 
(xiv).  Incorporate new partners into the partnership; 
(xv).  This Agreement expressly stipulates all other matters that need to be agreed 
by the Partner's Assembly; 
(xvi).  The  Partnerships  Act  expressly  requires  all  other  matters  that  need  to  be 
agreed by all partners and cannot be excluded by agreement. 
The Partner Conference should not discuss limited partnership potential investment 
projects or other matters related to the implementation of limited partnership matters, 
and the limited partners should not exercise control over the management and other 
activities of the limited partnership through the Partner Conference. 
10.1.3  The matters considered by the partners listed in the above article shall be decided by 
all partners before the resolution is passed. Unless otherwise agreed in this Agreement, 
the agreement shall be followed. If there is a conflict of interest between the partner 
and the item being voted, it shall not participate in the voting and shall not be counted 
in the voting base. 
10.1.4  The general partner shall organize an annual partner meeting within five (5) months 
after the start of each year. The general partner shall notify all partners in writing (20) 
working days prior to the meeting and submit the partner at the same time. General 
Assembly motion. The main content of the annual partner conference is to review the 
annual  report  of  the  previous  year  made  by  the  general  partner,  and  all  partners 
propose the investment strategy to the limited partnership. 
10.1.5  The general partner may organize a temporary partner meeting after written notice ten 
(10) working days in advance, and a limited partner who holds more than 10% of the 
total paid contribution, individually or in total, may recommend the general partner to 
194 
convene a temporary partnership. At a general meeting, if a general partner fails to 
perform his duties within thirty (30) business days, the limited partner with the highest 
proportion of capital contribution or the limited partner who holds a total of more than 
one-third of the total paid contribution may jointly recommend one The limited partner 
shall notify all partners in writing (10) working days in advance to convene and organize 
a temporary partner meeting. A limited partner who holds more than 10% of the total 
paid contribution, either individually or in aggregate, may submit a proposal for voting 
at the temporary partner meeting. 
10.1.6  The  notice  of  the  meeting  issued  by  the  general  partner  or  limited  partner  in 
accordance with 10.1.4 and 10.1.5 shall include at least the following contents: 
(i). 
(ii). 
(iii). 
(iv). 
(v). 
Time and place of the meeting; 
Way of holding the meeting; 
Meeting agenda; 
Meeting materials necessary for the vote of the partners; 
Contact and contact details. 
11.  Transfer of equity 
11.1  Transfer of limited partner interests 
11.1.1  Except  for  the  transfer  stipulated  in  this  Agreement,  the  limited  partner  shall  not 
transfer any rights in the limited partnership in any other way, including but not limited 
to the right to contribute capital and receive income distribution. An assignment of an 
interest that is not in compliance with this Agreement may result in the general partner 
identifying  the  transferor  as  a  defaulting  partner  and  requiring  him  to  be  liable  for 
breach of contract. 
11.1.2  A limited partner (hereinafter referred to as the “transferor”) who intends to transfer the 
interest in a limited partnership applies for the transfer of all or part of the interest held. 
The application is valid when all of the following conditions are met: 
(i).  The transferor issues a transfer request to the general partner at least thirty (30) 
days in advance; 
(ii).  Such  transfer  of  interest  will  not  cause  the  limited  partnership  to  violate  the 
Partnerships  Law  or  other  relevant  laws  and  regulations,  or  have  additional 
restrictions on business activities; 
(iii).  The  proposed  transferee  has  submitted  to  the  general  partner  a  letter  of 
commitment  regarding  its  consent  to  be  bound  by  this  Agreement  and  to 
comply with this Agreement and to inherit all the obligations of the transferor, 
and other documents, documents requested reasonably by the general partner; 
(iv).  The proposed transferee has promised in writing to undertake all costs incurred 
by the limited partnership and general partner arising from the transfer. 
11.1.3  For  a  valid  application  for  the  transfer  of  a  limited  partnership  interest,  the  general 
partner  shall  make  a  decision  of  consent  or  disapproval  in  accordance  with  the 
principle of facilitating the smooth operation of the limited partnership. If the general 
partner agrees to the transfer, the other limited partners shall also agree and waive the 
priority transfer, but the general partner shall have the priority of transfer. 
11.1.4  If any limited partner breaches the agreement to transfer all or part of its partnership 
interests  in  this  limited  partnership,  the  general  partner  has  the  right  to  take  the 
following actions: 
(i).  Excluding  the  right  of  the  defaulting  partner  to  participate  in  any  future 
investment project; 
(ii).  The amount in the capital account of the defaulting partner is reduced by 20% 
and is distributed to the non-defaulting partner. 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
11.2  General partner equity transfer 
11.2.1  The  general  partner  may,  in  accordance  with  the  agreement,  transfer  the  limited 
partnership interest held to the other party, unless agreed by all the limited partners. 
11.2.2  If all limited partners pass the resolution to accept the new general partner and expel 
the  original  general  partner,  the  original  general  partner  shall  transfer  all  the  limited 
partnership interests held to the new general partner, and the transfer price shall be 
assessed  and  determined  by  the  independent  third  party  accepted  by  both  the 
transferor and the transferee. 
11.2.3  If a general partner appears to be insolvent and enforced to transfer the interest of the 
limited partnership interest, it is deemed that the general partner withdraws from the 
partnership.  If  a  new  general  partner  is  willing  to  bear  all  the  responsibilities  and 
obligations  of  the  original  general  partner  and  obtain  approval  from  all  the  limited 
partners, the original general partner shall transfer all the limited partnership interest 
to  the  new  general  partner,  otherwise  the  limited  partnership  enters  the  liquidation 
process. 
11.2.4  Except for the transfer provisions stipulated in this Agreement, the general partner shall 
not transfer any of its interests in the limited partnership in any other way. 
12.  Force majeure 
12.1  Force Majeure means all events that occur after the signing of this Agreement, which 
cannot  be  foreseen  at  the  time  of  signing  this  Agreement,  whose  occurrence  and 
consequences  cannot  be  avoided  or  overcome,  and  which  impede  the  full  or  partial 
performance of either party. Such incidents include earthquakes, typhoons, floods, fires, wars, 
disruptions to international or domestic transportation, acts of government or public institutions 
(including  major  legal  changes  or  policy  adjustments),  epidemics,  riots,  strikes,  and  other 
events of force majeure adopted in general international business practices. The lack of funds 
on one side is not a force majeure event. 
In the force majeure event, affecting a party's performance of its obligations under this 
12.2 
agreement,  the  performance  will  be  suspended  within  the  delay  period  caused  by  force 
majeure, and is not considered a breach of contract. The party claiming force majeure shall 
promptly notify the other party in writing and provide sufficient evidence proving the occurrence 
and duration of force majeure within fifteen (15) days thereafter. 
12.3 
In the force majeure event, each partner should immediately consult each other to find 
a fair solution and every reasonable effort should be made to minimize the consequences of 
force  majeure.  If  the  occurrence  or  consequences  of  force  majeure  cause  significant 
impediment to the operation of the limited partnership for more than six (6) months, and the 
partners do not find a fair solution, the partner may request a withdrawal in accordance with 
this agreement, in which case the partner conference shall approve the partner’s withdrawal 
request. 
13.  Dispute Resolution 
All disputes arising from and related to this Agreement shall first be settled through friendly 
negotiation between the relevant parties. If the parties’ concerns cannot resolve the dispute, 
they shall submit it to the Arbitration Commission. The arbitral award is final and binding on all 
parties involved. Unless the arbitral tribunal has a ruling, the arbitration fee shall be borne by 
the losing party. The losing party shall also compensate the winning party for legal fees and 
other expenses. 
14.  Dissolution and liquidation 
14.1  Disband 
The limited partnership shall be terminated and liquidated within fifteen (15) natural days from 
the date of occurrence of any of the following: 
196 
14.1.1  All investments in the limited partnership have been withdrawn; 
14.1.2  The  duration  of  the  partnership  expires,  and  the  partner  conference  decides  not  to 
extend it; 
14.1.3  The number of the partner is less than quorum over thirty (30) days; 
14.1.4  The purpose of the partnership as stipulated in this agreement has been achieved or 
cannot be achieved; 
14.1.5  The general partner fails to produce an alternate general partner within thirty (30) days 
after the termination of the business due to the suspension of the business license, 
closure order or cancellation; 
14.1.6  A serious partner breaches the contract by one or more of the limited partners, which 
gives the general partner reason to believe that the limited partnership cannot continue 
to operate; 
14.1.7  This  limited  partnership  has  been  cancelled  business  license,  ordered  to  close  or 
revoked; 
14.1.8  All partners decide and agree to dissolve for any other reason; 
14.1.9  Other reasons as stipulated by laws, administrative regulations or this agreement. 
14.2  Liquidation 
14.2.1  The liquidator is a general partner, unless partners who represents more than half of 
the total paid-in contribution decides to assign another person other than the general 
partner. 
14.2.2  After the liquidator is determined, all the assets of the limited partnership not realized 
are managed by the liquidator, but if the liquidator is not a general partner, the general 
partner is obliged to help the liquidator to realize the unrealized assets, and the limited 
partnership will not pay any management fee or other fees to the general partner during 
the liquidation period. 
14.2.3  The liquidation period is one (1) year. If it cannot be liquidated within one (1) year, it 
shall be extended by the liquidator. Non-cash assets that are not realized at the end of 
the liquidation period will be disposed in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.5 
of this Agreement. 
14.3  Liquidation payment 
14.3.1  When the limited partnership expires or terminates and enters liquidation, the interest 
and returns will be paid in the following order: 
(i).  Pay the liquidation fee; 
(ii).  Pay employee wages, social insurance fees and statutory compensation; 
(iii).  Pay the taxes owed; 
(iv).  Pay the debt of the limited partnership; 
(v).  Distribute  the  principles  among  all  partners  according  to  procedures  and 
provisions stipulated in this Agreement. 
Among them, items (i) to (iii) must be paid in cash. If the cash is insufficient, the 
liquidation of other assets should be increased. Item (iv) should be negotiated with 
the creditor. 
14.3.2  Where the limited partnership property is insufficient to repay the partnership debt, the 
general partner shall bear the joint liability for the creditor. 
15.1  Notice 
15.1.1  Any notice, request or communication under this Agreement shall be in writing, and 
15.  Other 
delivered or sent to the following address: 
(i). 
Send a notice of limited partnership to: 
Address: #### 
Fax: #### 
Phone: #### 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
Recipient: #### Company 
(ii). 
Send a notice to the general partner/manager to: 
Address: #### 
Fax: #### 
Phone: #### 
Recipient: #### Company 
(iii). 
A notice to each limited partner is sent to the address listed in Annex I to this 
Agreement. 
Anyone may change the address at any time by notice from the general partner to the 
limited partnership and the partners. 
15.1.2  Unless there is evidence that it has been received in advance, otherwise 
(i). 
(ii). 
In the case of the delivery, the notice shall be deemed to have been served 
when it is sent to the address stated in Article 15.1.1; 
In the case of a registered mail or prepaid postage, the notice shall be deemed 
to have been served ten (10) business days after the mailing; 
(iii).  In  the  case  of  mailing  by  airmail,  the  notice  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been 
served five (5) business days after the mailing: 
(iv).  In  the  case  of  a  fax transmission,  the  notification  is  deemed  to  be  delivered 
when the sender's fax machine records the transmission confirmation. 
15.2  Annex 
The  annex to  this  Agreement  is  an  integral  part of this  Agreement  and  has the  same  legal 
effect as this Agreement. 
15.3  All agreements 
This  Agreement  constitutes  the  entire  agreements  between  the  partners,  superseding  all 
previously agreed unsigned informal agreements, offers, promises or memoranda of limited 
partnerships, and other oral and written agreements regarding the raising and establishment 
of limited partnerships. 
15.4  Severability 
If  any  provision  of  this  Agreement  is  deemed  invalid  for  any  person  or  circumstance,  the 
validity of the remaining terms applied to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
15.5  Confidentiality 
Each party to this Agreement shall be responsible for the confidentiality of the business secrets 
of other parties that are known in negotiating, signing and executing this Agreement. Without 
the  prior  written  consent  of  the  general  partner,  each  partner  may  not  disclose  to  the  third 
party any of the following information provided by the partnership: this agreement (including 
its amendments from time to time), any other agreement referred to in this agreement, The 
financial statements and other information of the partnership and any information about the 
investee companies, except in the following cases: 
15.5.1  The  information  has  been  known  by  the  public  and  the  partner  or  any  of  its  agent 
doesn’t violate these terms; 
15.5.2  The information that the partner must provide in order to perform its legal obligations 
under applicable law or in any legal proceedings; 
15.5.3  Information  disclosed  to  its  employees  and  professional  advisers  and  potential 
investors  (including  the  partner's  auditors  and  legal  counsel),  and  such  individuals 
have written warranted compliance with the partner's confidentiality obligations under 
this Agreement; or 
15.5.4  Information provided at the request of a regulatory body with appropriate jurisdiction. 
A partner who discloses information in accordance with this Agreement shall notify the general 
partner in advance within the scope of applicable law so that the general partner has enough 
198 
time to take reasonable measures as he deems necessary. 
In order to carry out the fundraising of a limited partnership, or due to the normal operation 
and  management  needs  of  the  limited  partnership,  the  general  partner  may  disclose  the 
information of the limited partnership to the recipient of the information on the premise that the 
information recipient has promised to keep it confidential. 
Notwithstanding the other terms of this Agreement, the general partner could not disclose and 
keep  confidential  to  the  limited  partners  in  the  following  matters  for  the  period  in  which  it 
considers reasonable: (1) The general partner believes in good faith that the disclosure of the 
information is detrimental to the Partnership or the investment, or (2) The applicable law and 
third party requires to keep the information confidential.  
The  general  partner  may  disclose  any  necessary  information  of  the  partnership  or  limited 
partner as required by applicable law. At the same time, at the request of the general partner, 
each limited partner shall provide all necessary information to the general partner in a timely 
manner. 
The content of this article shall not constitute an unreasonable restriction on the right to know 
of a limited partner. 
15.6  Signing agreement 
The parties of this agreement sign [X] copies of the original form, each partner holds one copy, 
the  limited  partnership  retains  two  copies,  and  the  rest  is  used  for  registration  procedures. 
Each signed agreement has the same legal effect. 
15.7  Effective date of this agreement 
This Agreement shall be legally binding on the signatory parties from the date of the official 
seal of the parties and the signature of the legal representative/delegated representative. But 
the  signature  of  the  external  regulatory  authority  is  required  for  the  investment  provisions 
stipulated in this agreement. If its supervisory authority raises an objection to the terms of this 
agreement,  in  respect  of  such  objection  clauses,  (a)  after  the  objection  of  the  supervisory 
authority is removed, the signatories shall be legally bound, and (b) in order to eliminate the 
objection,  the  parties  shall  do  the  best  to  cooperate  until  the  dissent  is  eliminated.  If  the 
objection  fails  to  be  resolved  within  a  reasonable  period,  the  parties  shall  resolve  it  by 
reference  to  the  force  majeure  clause  of  Article  12  in  this  Agreement.  Regardless  of  the 
solution, the signatory should not be considered as breach of contract or be required to bear 
liability for breach of contract. The same applies to the amendment of this agreement. 
[No text in the following] 
Appendix H 
Example of Limited Partnership Agreement 
[This  page  is  the  signing  page  of  the  "####  Partnership  (Limited  Partnership)  Limited 
Partnership Agreement".] 
This Agreement was signed by the following parties on the day of XXX 20XX: 
General Partner/Manager: #### Company 
Legal representative / authorized representative: 
Limited Partner: #### Company 
Legal representative / authorized representative: 
200 
Annex I: Partners and their initial subscribed contributions 
Category 
Name 
Address 
Business license or 
identification number 
Funding 
Method 
Pay 
Contribution 
Subscription 
capital 
contribution 
ratio 
Unit: CNY 10,000 
Payment 
deadline 
Responsibility 
General 
Partner 
#### 
 Company 
Limited 
Partner 
#### 
Company 
Total 
#### 
*************** 
Cash 
#### 
#### 
********* 
#### 
************** 
cash 
#### 
#### 
********* 
#### 
100% 
Unlimited 
liability 
Limited 
Liability 
APPENDIX 5: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR THE 
GREEN INVESTMENT FUND 
201 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
FOR THE 
Huangshan Trust Investment 
Company 
Prepared by the Huangshan Municipal Government for the 
PRC: Anhui Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development 
Project 
October 2019 
202 
ADB 
BOD 
COD 
CNY 
CSC 
DEIA 
EA 
EHS 
EIA 
EMA 
EMP 
EPD 
EEB 
ESMS 
FSR 
GAP 
GDP 
GHG 
GRM 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(as of 6 August 2019) 
Currency unit 
CNY1.00 
€1.00 
– 
= 
= 
yuan (CNY) 
€0.1262 
CNY7.9228 
ABREVIATIONS 
-  Asian Development Bank 
-  Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
-  Chemical Oxygen Demand 
-  Chinese Yuan 
-  Construction supervision company 
-  Domestic EIA 
-  Executing Agency 
-  Environmental, health and safety 
-  Environment impact assessment 
-  Environmental monitoring agency 
-  Environmental management plan 
-  Environmental protection department 
-  Ecology and environment bureau 
-  Environmental and Social Management 
HMG 
HTIC 
GHG 
LIEC 
IA 
IEE 
MSW 
Mu 
PM 
PMO 
PRC 
SPS 
TOR 
-  Huangshan Municipal Government 
-  Huangshan Trust Investment Company 
-  Greenhouse Gas 
-  Loan implementation environment consultant 
-  Implementing Agency 
-  Initial Environmental Examination 
-  Municipal Solid Waste 
-  Chinese land unit (1 ha = 15 mu) 
-  Particulate matter 
-  Huangshan municipal project management office 
-  People’s Republic of China 
-  Safeguard Policy Statement 
-  Terms of Reference 
System 
-  Feasibility Study Report 
-  Gender action plan 
-  Gross Domestic Product 
-  Greenhouse Gas 
-  Grievance redress mechanism 
TRTA 
WSCP 
WSP 
WWTP 
  Transaction Technical Assistance 
-  Water and soil conservation plan 
-  Water supply plant 
-  Wastewater treatment plant 
This environmental and social management system is a document of the borrower. The views 
expressed  herein  do  not  necessarily  represent  those  of  ADB's  Board  of  Directors, 
Management, or staff, and may be preliminary in nature. 
In  preparing  any  country  program  or  strategy,  financing  any  Project,  or  by  making  any 
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the 
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other 
status of any territory or area. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
Table of Contents 
INTRODUCTION 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE ESMS 
Legislative and policy framework 
Definitions of terms used 
Roles and responsibilities for the ESMS 
What the project will and will not support 
Pre-readiness for establishment of the ESMS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ESMS – SIX STEPS 
INTEGRATION OF THE ESMS INTO FI BUSINESS PROCEDURES 
Existing safeguard capacity and procedures of HTIC 
Integrating the ESMS 
A. 
B. 
V.  GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
VI.  CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING 
VII.  PROJECT ASSURANCES 
ESMS-APPENDIX 1. LEGISLATION AND POLICIES 
ESMS-APPENDIX 2. ADB LIST OF PROHIBITED INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES 
ESMS-APPENDIX 3. WORKBOOK FOR SCREENING AND CATEGORIZING 
SUBPROJECTS 
WORKSHEET 1: Rapid Environmental Assessment Checklist 
WORKSHEET 2: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement Checklist 
WORKSHEET 3: Land Use Rights Transfer Impact Checklist 
WORKSHEET 4: Ethnic Minorities Impact Checklist 
WORKSHEET 5: Green Agriculture and Ecotourism Design and Best Practice 
ESMS-APPENDIX 4. OUTLINE OF AN INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION 
REPORT 
241 
ESMS-APPENDIX 5. ENVIRONMENTAL SITE INSPECTION CHECKLIST 
ESMS-APPENDIX 6. TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR ESMS POSITIONS 
ESMS-APPENDIX 7. LAND USE RIGHTS TRANSFER FRAMEWORK 
203 
204 
204 
204 
205 
207 
209 
210 
210 
219 
219 
220 
221 
226 
227 
227 
230 
232 
233 
236 
237 
238 
240 
242 
244 
245 
204 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
This  document  is  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  System  (ESMS)  for  the 
Huangshan  Trust  Investment  Company  (HTIC),  and  its  borrowers,  as  part  of  the  Anhui 
Huangshan Xin’an River Ecological Protection and Green Development Project (the project). 
An ESMS is an internal management system implemented by a financial institution to manage 
the potential environmental and social impacts of its equity investments. 
The Green Investment Fund component under the project is to provide financial support 
2. 
for  environmentally  friendly  business  and  services  sectors,  including  green  agriculture  and 
ecotourism,  for  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  in  three  districts  and  four  counties  of 
Huangshan  Municipality,  Anhui  Province,  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC).  Issues 
involving development and natural resources management in the project area include inefficient 
and/or  outdated  farming  technology,  excessive  use  of  agricultural  chemicals,  insufficient 
infrastructure for ecotourism, and lack of protection of natural resources.  
The  project  is  supported  by  a  €89.69  million  loan  from  the  Asian  Development  Bank 
3. 
(ADB) to the Huangshan Municipal Government (HMG). The HMG is the executing agency. A 
total  of  €13.00  million  of  the  loan  will  be  on-lent from the  government  to HTIC, the financial 
intermediary  (FI),  to  establish  a  Green  Investment  Fund  with  a  total  amount  of  €26  million 
(CNY200 million).54 The HTIC will on-lend the funds directly to qualified investees. The qualified 
investees  comprise  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  in  areas  of  green  farming  and 
ecotourism.  Investment proceeds  via  HTIC  will  be  used  for  environmentally  sustainable and 
socially responsible development, including improved practices for tea gardens, organic rice, 
bamboo forestry, orchards, and ecotourism.  
4. 
This  ESMS  is  to  help  the  HTIC,  HMG,  and  qualified  investees  to  manage  the 
environmental  and  social  risks  of  individual  subprojects,  and  to  support  the  overall  project 
objectives of promoting green development and natural resources management in the Xin’an 
River Basin. 
5. 
The  Green  Investment  Fund  will  encourage  and  favor  subprojects  which  promote 
agricultural innovation, efficiency, and the sustainable use of water, soil and energy. Projects 
may  unintentionally  result  in  impacts  to  surface  water,  groundwater,  soil,  air  quality,  noise 
levels, ecology, communities, physical cultural resources, and/or land use rights transfer. The 
identification, screening and management of such risks are key objectives of the ESMS. 
6. 
This is the first time any banking institution in Huangshan Municipality has implemented 
an ESMS. The ESMS is written in non-technical language and is simplified and tailored to the 
capacity  of  HTIC  to  implement  an  ESMS,  which  is  currently  low.  It  provides  step-by-step 
procedures to assess and manage potential environmental and social impacts associated with 
equity investment applications under the Green Investment Fund.  
II. 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE ESMS 
A.  Legislative and policy framework 
7. 
The project, including the Green Investment Fund and this ESMS, is being implemented 
within the context of relevant policies and laws of the PRC and policies of the ADB. Within the 
PRC, over 40 laws, regulations, standards and guidelines concerning agricultural production 
and natural resources management are relevant to this project (ESMS-Appendix 1). For the 
environment, these include environmental protection, planning, and impact assessment, water 
resources  management,  quality  standards  and  guidelines  for  air,  water,  soil,  and  noise, 
54 The additional start-up capital to the fund is provided by KfW and the government.  
205 
disposal of solid waste, and protection of flora, fauna and cultural resources. For social issues, 
these  include  the  management  of  land  use  rights  transfer,  involuntary  resettlement,  ethnic 
minorities and protecting the rights of vulnerable groups including women, the poor, the low-
income and the disabled. 
8. 
The ESMS complies with the requirements of the ADB Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS, 
2009). The SPS comprises three operational policies, for the environment, indigenous peoples, 
and involuntary resettlement. These seek to avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse environmental 
and social impacts. Under the SPS, projects categorized “financial intermediation loan” (FIL) 
require  the  preparation  of  an  ESMS,  which  includes:  environmental  and  social  policies; 
screening,  categorization,  and  assessment;  document  preparation  requirements  and  review 
procedures;  organizational  structure  and  staffing  including  skills  and  competencies  in 
environmental and social areas; training requirements; and monitoring and reporting. 
B.  Definitions of terms used 
9. 
This section provides the definitions of key terms used in the ESMS. 
Affected person. A person directly or indirectly affected by a subproject activity. 
Applicant. SME or individual that applies for an equity investment under the Green Investment 
Fund.  After the  application is  endorsed, the  applicant  is  termed  a  “qualified  investee” (see 
below). 
Small  and  medium-sized  enterprise  (SME).  Defined  by  the  PRC  Ministry  of  Industry  and 
Information  Technology  and  National  Development  and  Reform  Commission  as:  small 
enterprise – annual revenue CNY<5 million; medium enterprise – annual revenue CNY5–200 
million. 
Huangshan  municipal  project  management  office  (PMO).  Established  under  Huangshan 
Municipal Government. See Section II.C for role in project. 
PMO  environmental  officer  and  social  officer.  Qualified  officers  appointed  by  the  PMO  to 
assist the PMO, HTIC, and qualified investees to implement the ESMS. See Section II.C for 
role in project. 
Equity investment. A subproject which receives financial support from the Green Investment 
Fund after successfully completing the required screening and approval procedures including 
the ESMS. 
Equity investment agreement. Signed agreement between the HTIC and a qualified investee 
describing  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  financial  support  provided  under  the  Green 
Investment Fund. 
Executing  agency  (EA).  The municipal  agency  responsible  for  the  project,  the  Huangshan 
Municipal Government. 
Financial  intermediary  (FI).  An  entity  that  provides  finance  as  its  principal  or  subsidiary 
function.  The  FI  for  the  Green  Investment  Fund  is  HTIC.  It  will  channel  the  project  loan 
proceeds between the Huangshan Municipal Government and the qualified investees.  
FI environmental officer and social officer. Qualified officers appointed by the FI to assist the 
FI and qualified investees to implement the ESMS. See Section II.C for role in project. 
206 
Finance  officer.  Qualified  officer  appointed  by  HTIC  responsible  for  equity  investment 
management. See Section II.C for role in project.  
Gender  action  plan  (GAP).  Project  plan  with  measurable  indicators  to  strengthen  gender-
inclusive designs. The GAP is within the project administration manual.  
Grievance redress mechanism (GRM).  A  mechanism to  receive  and facilitate  resolution  of 
affected peoples’ concerns, complaints, and grievances about the project’s environmental or 
social performance. See Section V. 
Implementing agency (IA). An agency which implements the project activities. For the Green 
Investment Fund, HTIC is the implementing agency. 
Involuntary resettlement. Defined by the SPS (2009) as: physical displacement (relocation, 
loss of residential land, or loss of shelter) and/or economic displacement (loss of land, assets, 
access  to  assets,  income  sources,  or  means  of  livelihoods),  as  a  result  of:  (i)  involuntary 
acquisition  of  land,  or  (ii)  involuntary  restrictions  on  land  use  or  on  access  to  legally 
designated parks and protected areas. 
Indigenous Peoples (IP). Defined by ADB’s SPS (2009) as: a distinct, vulnerable, social, and 
cultural group. Safeguards are triggered if a project directly or indirectly affects the dignity, 
human rights, livelihood systems, culture or cultural resources of such groups.55 
Land use rights transfer (LURT). Leasing or renting farmland use rights without any change 
in the land ownership and/or the agricultural use. 
Loan implementation environmental consultant (LIEC) and social consultant (LISC). External 
environment and social specialists hired under the loan implementation consultancy services. 
See Section II.C for roles in project. 
Project  Administration  Manual  (PAM).  Summary  document  describing  all  administrative, 
financial, procurement, and safeguard procedures for the overall project. The PAM and other 
project documents are available on the ADB public website.  
Qualified investee. The final recipient of an equity investment, whose application has been 
completed (including the steps in the ESMS) and approved by HTIC.   
Safeguards Commitment Letter (SCL). An agreement ancillary to the loan agreement signed 
between a FI and qualified investee, whereby the qualified investee undertakes to use its loan 
to  carry  out  the  subproject  in  accordance  with:  (i)  the  approved  subproject  design;  (ii)  in 
compliance with all  requirements  in the  ESMS; and (iii)  which gives the  FI  the  right  under 
applicable  PRC  law  to  exercise  remedies  against  the  qualified  investee  under  the  loan 
agreement. 
Social  development  action  plan  (SDAP).  Project  plan  with  measurable  indicators  to 
strengthen socially-inclusive designs. The SDAP is within the project administration manual. 
Subproject.  Any  activity  financed  by  the  Green  Investment  Fund  under  the  project.  Also 
referred to as a “qualified subproject”. 
55  The  PRC  Government  uses  the  term  “ethnic  minorities”.  This  may  trigger  ADB’s  safeguard  requirements  in 
accordance with the above definition. 
207 
C.  Roles and responsibilities for the ESMS 
10.  This section identifies the roles and responsibilities of the agencies in implementing the 
ESMS. 
Table II.1. Institutional Responsibilities for Implementation of the 
Environmental and Social Management System 
Agency 
Huangshan Municipal Project 
Leading Group 
Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Ensure timely national, provincial, and inter-agency coordination 
and support for the project as needed 
Huangshan Municipal 
Government 
Huangshan Municipal Project 
Management Office 
Huangshan Trust Investment 
Company 
•  High-level support to executing agency 
•  Provide advice on project implementation 
•  Review project progress 
•  Project executing agency 
•  Overall accountability and responsibility for project planning, 
management, and implementation 
•  Ensure timely and effective execution of the loan agreements 
•  Coordinate with ADB 
•  Support HTIC to establish and implement the ESMS 
•  Submit updated draft ESMS to ADB for endorsement 
•  Establish project grievance redress mechanism 
•  Support  HTIC  to  review  and  strengthen  the  environmental  and 
social design of equity investment applications before approval 
•  For  the  first  2  applications  of  each  development  category,  submit 
the draft safeguard screening and categorization documents to ADB 
for endorsement 
•  Facilitate safeguard training for HTIC 
•  Prepare semiannual environment monitoring reports to ADB 
including on ESMS implementation progress 
•  Ensure project compliance with the loan and project agreements – 
including all safeguard provisions – and ESMS 
•  Terms  of  reference  for  the  PMO  environmental  officer  and  social 
officer are in EMP Appendix 1-1 and the PAM 
•  Implementing agency for the Green Investment Fund and ESMS 
•  Recruit  at  least  one  qualified  environment  officer  and  one  social 
officer to oversee establishment and implementation of ESMS 
•  Establish, manage, and implement the Green Investment Fund and 
ESMS 
•  Integrate the ESMS within HTIC business procedures 
•  Support PMO to implement the grievance redress mechanism 
•  Monitor  and  report  compliance  of  qualified  investees  with  the 
safeguard conditions of each equity investment 
•  Prepare  semiannual  environment  monitoring  reports  to  PMO,  for 
consolidation within progress reports by PMO to ADB 
The HTIC environment officer and social officer will: 
•  Work closely with HTIC finance officers and qualified investees to 
implement the ESMS, review equity investment applications against 
ESMS steps A-F (Section III), and manage the ESMS database 
•  Support PMO to implement the GRM 
•  Facilitate training related to safeguards and project design 
•  Monitor ESMS implementation of the qualified investees 
•  Compile ESMS progress reports 
•  Submit semi-annual safeguard progress reports to PMO 
•  Provide  information  as  requested  by  PMO  to  assist  with  queries 
and/or preparation of progress reports to ADB 
•  Terms of reference are in ESMS-Appendix 6 
The HTIC financial officers will: 
208 
Agency 
Investee (potential applicant of 
equity investment) 
“Start-up” Environment 
Safeguard Consultant (external 
technical support provided under 
the ADB loan)  
Loan Implementation 
Environmental Consultant and 
Social Consultant (external 
technical support provided under 
the ADB loan) 
Asian Development Bank 
Roles and Responsibilities 
•  Receive and review equity investment applications  against ESMS 
steps A-F (Section III), working with qualified investees, PMO and 
other agencies as necessary 
•  Document  the  results  of  Steps  A-F  for  each  equity  investment 
application in the HTIC ESMS database 
•  Liaise  with  qualified  investees,  PMO  and  other  agencies  as 
necessary  to  ensure  relevant  safeguard  approvals  and  design 
considerations are achieved 
•  Work with HTIC to complete the screening, categorization, and 
subproject design 
•  Provide HTIC and PMO access to the subproject designs and sites 
•  Implement and comply with any environmental or social conditions 
required as part of the equity investment 
•  Short-term national position to support PMO and implementing 
agencies with start-up support, including for ESMS establishment, 
while the loan implementation consultants are being recruited 
•  Assist PMO and HTIC to establish the GRM for the ESMS 
•  Provide initial training to HTIC for ESMS implementation 
•  Assist HTIC to establish and implement the ESMS 
•  Provide ongoing training to HTIC staff for ESMS implementation 
•  Review environment monitoring reports prepared by contractors 
•  Assist PMO to prepare semiannual environmental monitoring 
reports to ADB 
•  Terms of reference are in EMP Appendix 1-1 and the PAM 
•  Oversee project administration and timely execution of the loan 
agreements by the executing and implementing agencies 
•  Review project compliance and targets against the design and 
monitoring framework, EMP, ESMS, social plans, and project 
administration manual 
•  Review and endorse updated ESMS as needed 
•  Monitor project progress and conduct review missions 
•  Disclose monitoring reports on ADB public website 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  EMP  =  environment  management  plan,  ESMS  =  environmental  and  social 
management system, GRM = grievance redress mechanism, HTIC = Huangshan Trust Investment Company, LIEC 
= loan implementation environment consultant, PAM = project administration manual, PMO = Huangshan Municipality 
project management office. 
11.  The relationship among the project agencies for the ESMS is shown in Figure II.1. 
Asian Development Bank 
Huangshan Municipal Government 
209 
Consulting  
service 
PMO 
 LIEC and LISC 
PMO 
 Environmental and Social Officers 
Technical Assistance 
Huangshan Trust and Investment 
Corporation 
(implementing agency) 
 Environmental and Social Officers 
Finance Officers 
Qualified investees 
Figure II.1: Organization Chart of the project Agencies for the ESMS 
PMO = Huangshan Municipality project management office, LIEC = loan implementation environment 
consultant, LISC = loan implementation social consultant.    
D.  What the project will and will not support 
12.  The  Huangshan  Municipal  Government  and  HTIC  agree  to  the  following  terms  and 
restrictions for the Green Investment Fund. 
13.  THE GREEN INVESTMENT FUND WILL ONLY SUPPORT subprojects which: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
have  minimal  or  no  environmental  impacts.  Subprojects  must  meet  the  ADB 
definition  of  “Category  B”  or  “Category  C”  for  the  Environment.  “Category  A” 
activities are excluded (Worksheet 1–Appendix 3); 
have all relevant domestic environmental approvals and/or land permits, as well 
as for any associated facilities or operations; 
have a clearly defined geographic location; 
are  clearly  based  on  participatory  consultation  and  agreement  with  other 
stakeholders,  especially  affected  persons  [for  subprojects  involving  multiple 
parties and lands]; 
do  not  result  in  changes  to  land  ownership  (e.g.  from  village  land  to  other 
categories) or official land use category (e.g. from agricultural to other land use); 
and, 
demonstrate compliance with the project social and gender action plans (SDAP 
and GAP – see the project administration manual).  
14.  HTIC THROUGH THE GREEN INVESTMENT FUND WILL ENCOURAGE AND FAVOR 
subprojects which demonstrate the sustainable use of natural resources, including: 
•  water use efficiency; 
• 
sustainable water supply; 
210 
soil conservation practices; 
energy efficiency; 
reduced use of agricultural chemicals; 
improved pest control methods e.g. integrated pest management; 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  manure processed as organic fertilizer; 
• 
• 
• 
production, processing and marketing of local special products; 
adoption of traditional ethnic practices;  
involvement and/or support to women, the poor, and/or ethnic minorities. 
15.  THE GREEN INVESTMENT FUND WILL NOT FUND any activities which: 
• 
are listed in the ADB Prohibited Investment Activity List (ESMS-Appendix 2); 
•  may cause significant and irreversible impacts to the environment i.e. meet the 
definition of ADB “Category A” for Environment; 
are  located  in  or  next  to  a  designated  water  source  protection  zone,  protected 
area, cultural heritage site, or critical natural habitat; 
involve  large-scale  landscape  alteration  e.g.  quarrying,  or  terracing  on  slopes 
greater than 25º; 
involve involuntary land acquisition impacts;  
involve demolition of residential or private commercial buildings; 
involve involuntary resettlement, and which meet the definition of ADB “Category 
A” or “Category B” for resettlement, and any involuntary resettlement issues from 
past land acquisition or existing facilities as defined under ADB’s SPS; 
have impacts on vulnerable ethnic minorities (“Category A” or “B”) and any issues 
of  indigenous  peoples  or  ethnic  minority  communities  from  past  activities  or 
existing facilities as defined under ADB SPS;56 and/or, 
involve on-lending to other financial intermediaries or banking institutions. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
E.  Pre-readiness for establishment of the ESMS 
16.  At least three months prior to establishing the Green Investment Fund, HTIC shall issue 
a  formal  Presidential  Directive  to  integrate  the  ESMS  into  HTIC  business  procedures  and 
submit this directive to HMG and ADB. The directive shall: (a) officially recognize the ESMS as 
HTIC policy in the project districts and counties from the date of the Directive; (b) instruct the 
finance  officers  of  the  Green  Investment  Fund  that  the  ESMS  steps  are  now  part  of  eqity 
investment  assessment  and  approval  procedures;  (c)  identify  by  name  and  position  the 
managerial  and  review  arrangements  for  steps  and  decisions  taken  while  implementing  the 
ESMS; (d) confirm that breaches of environmental and social conditions by qualified investees 
will be treated by HTIC in the same way as breaches in other loan conditions – attracting similar 
penalties;  (e)  confirm  the  working  relationship  between  HTIC  and  PMO  and  its  loan 
implementation  consultants;  (f)  ensure  the  wide  dissemination  within  HTIC  of  the  Chinese-
language  ESMS  documents  (including  instructing  the  finance  officers  to  print  copies  of  the 
ESMS Workbook in ESMS-Appendix 3 to use in the field and fill out as part of their duties); 
and, (g)  commit to the  training  plan  in  the  ESMS  by  facilitating  HTIC officers’ attendance  at 
training courses as required. 
17.  Application of the ESMS procedures is described in Section III. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ESMS – SIX STEPS 
18.  This section describes six steps to implement the ESMS. The steps are conducted for all 
56 The due diligence during the preparation of the overall project has confirmed that the project area does not involve 
ethnic  minority  communities  that  would  trigger  ADB  SPS  requirements  on  indigenous  peoples.  The  Green 
Investment Fund activities are also not expected to involve such impacts.  
211 
equity  investment  applications.  The  six  steps  are:  A–screening;  B–improving  the  subproject 
design for environmental and social benefits; C–categorization; D–assessment; E–safeguard 
implementation; and F–monitoring and reporting. Steps A to D are conducted as part of the due 
diligence  before  an  equity  investment  is  approved.  Steps  E  to  F  are  conducted  during 
implementation  of  the  subproject.  All  steps  are  conducted  by  the  HTIC  finance  officer  and 
environmental and social officers, working with the qualified investees, PMO Environment and 
Social Officers, and Loan Implementation Environmental and Social Consultants. Information 
disclosure,  public  consultation,  and  participation  of  affected  persons  are  key  requirements 
under PRC laws and the ADB Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). Information disclosure and 
public consultation are included under Steps D to E. 
19.  The six steps are to be performed by HTIC, except where stated otherwise. The steps 
are summarized in Figure III.2. 
STEP A: SCREEN TO IDENTIFY POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
First filter – compliance with national and international laws and regulations 
A.1.  Does  the  equity  investment  application  include  any  activities  prohibited  under  PRC 
laws? 
A.2.  Does  the  equity  investment  application  include  any  activities  on  the  ADB  Prohibited 
Investment Activity List (Appendix 2)? 
A.3.  Does the applicant have existing or pending lawsuits for violation of PRC laws related 
to environment or land? 
If the answer is “yes” to any of the above: reject the application, or, invite the applicant 
A.4. 
to re-apply after the application has been re-designed to meet compliance. 
A.5. 
If the answer is “no” to all of the above, continue with the next steps. 
Second filter – environmental and social screening 
A.6.  Meet with the loan applicant and conduct a site visit. 
A.7.  Complete Worksheets 1-4 in Appendix 3 (environment, land acquisition, resettlement, 
land use rights transfer, ethnic minorities). 
A.8.  Proceed to Step B. Note: do not proceed until Step A is fully completed. 
A.9.  Document  all  applications,  whether  they  pass  Step  A  or  not.  Include  them  in  the 
progress reports to the PMO. 
A.10. HTIC pays for the cost of Step A (i.e. mainly the work time of the HTIC finance officers). 
STEP B: PROMOTE GREEN AGRICULTURE AND ECOTOURISM 
B.1.  Worksheet 5 in ESMS-Appendix 3 identifies the types of green development activities 
the Green Investment Fund aims to support. Identify those relevant to the loan application. 
Improve  the  proposed  subproject  design  to  achieve  sustainable  and  climate-smart  design 
which  meets  the  practices  in  Worksheet  5.  Note:  This  step  is  primarily  carried  out  by  the 
applicant, in consultation with the PMO Environmental and Social Officers, LIEC and LISC as 
necessary. 
212 
B.2.  Check with the applicant (and if necessary the PMO) that Step B.1 has been conducted. 
Include  the  design  measures  for  green  agriculture  and  ecotourism  in  the  equity 
B.3. 
investment conditions (see Step D). 
B.4. 
Include all information in Step B in the progress reports to PMO. 
B.5.  Do not proceed to Step C until Step B is fully completed. 
STEP C: CATEGORIZE THE LEVEL OF POTENTIAL IMPACTS  
C.1.  Use the information in Step A to identify the level of potential environmental and social 
impacts and the “impact category” of the subproject, according to ADB and PRC criteria. 
First categorization – environment (ADB criteria) 
C.2.  ADB  applies  three  impact  categories  to  Projects:  A,  B,  or  C.  See  definitions  in 
Worksheet 1 of ESMS-Appendix 3. In Worksheet 1, complete the final column in the table. 
Assign the ranking A, B, or C to each potential impact relevant to the loan application. 
C.3.  Using these results, circle the summary impact category underneath the table. Clearly 
state the reasons for this conclusion. 
C.4.  The project will only work with Category B or C subprojects. Preferably Category C. If 
the  final  category  is  A,  reject  the  application,  or,  invite  the  applicant  to  re-apply  after  the 
application has been re-designed to meet B or C level. 
Second categorization – environment (PRC criteria) 
C.5.  The PRC defines three classes of impact assessment and reporting (based on scale, 
investment  level,  and  environmental  sensitivity):  comprehensive  environmental  impact 
assessment report (EIAR; high potential impacts); environmental impact table (EIT; moderate 
potential impacts) and environmental impact registration form (EIRF; low potential impacts). 
See definitions in Table 2 in ESMS-Appendix 1. 
C.6.  Use Table 2 in ESMS-Appendix 1 to identify which category the application is within. 
C.7.  The  Green  Investment  Fund  can  work  with  a  subproject  in  any  of  these  classes. 
Subprojects  classed  as  EIT  or  EIRF  are  preferred  as  they  may  have  lower  environmental 
impacts. 
Third categorization – involuntary resettlement 
C.8.  ADB  applies  three  impact  categories  to  Projects:  A,  B,  or  C.  Screening  and 
categorization  standards  are  defined  in  Worksheets  2  and  3  in  Appendix  3.57 Use  these 
worksheets to assess the subproject category as A, B, or C. 
C.9.  Reject all equity investment applications for subprojects which are Category A or B; and 
if  they  involve  any  involuntary  resettlement  issues  from  past  land  acquisition  or  existing 
facilities.  These  include  subprojects  which  cause  physical  displacement  and/or  economic 
displacement  or  losses  which  result  from  involuntary  acquisition  of  land  or  involuntary 
restriction of land use. 
57 See also: http://www.adb.org/site/safeguards/safeguard-categories 
213 
Fourth categorization – indigenous peoples (ethnic minorities) 
C.10.  ADB  applies  three  impact  categories  to  Projects:  A,  B,  or  C.  Screening  and 
categorization standards are defined in Worksheet 4 in Appendix 3.58 Use these worksheets 
to assess the subproject category as A, B, or C. 
C.11.  Equity  investment  applications  for  subprojects  which  are  Category  A  or  B  are  not 
expected, neither any subprojects are expected to involve any issues of indigenous peoples 
or ethnic minority communities from past activities or existing facilities. Otherwise, invite the 
applicant to re-apply after the application has been re-designed to meet compliance. 
Fifth categorization –land use rights transfer59 issues 
C.12.  Any subproject that involves land with an existing or proposed land use rights transfer 
(LURT)  agreement  will  be  reviewed  by  the  PMO  and  HTIC  loan  and  social  officers.  Use 
Worksheet  3  in  ESMS-Appendix  3  to  determine  whether  there  are  any  issues  or  pending 
disputes. If the answer is “yes”, reject the application, or, invite the applicant to re-apply after 
all such issues have been legally settled and such evidence is provided in accordance with 
the LURT Framework in ESMS-Appendix 7. 
C.13.  HTIC pays for the cost of Step C. This should mainly be the work time of the HTIC loan 
and social officers to meet the applicant and conduct a site visit. 
Endorsement by Government and ADB of the Proposed Risk Categorizations 
C.14.  Include all information in Step C in the progress reports to PMO. 
C.15.  For the first 2 applications under each new type of subproject category, submit 
the  screening  documents  and  proposed  risk  categorizations  to  the  PMO  and  ADB  for 
endorsement.  The  PMO  will  provide  the  documents  to  ADB.  The  subproject  categories 
include but are not limited to: tea plantations; bamboo forestry; orchards; and, ecotourism. 
C.16.  Do  not  proceed  with  the  application  until  the  Government  and  ADB  has  provided 
feedback and endorsement on the application. 
C.17.  Do not proceed to Step D until Step C is fully completed. 
STEP D: IMPACT ASSESSMENT, MITIGATION, AND SUBPROJECT APPROVAL 
Environmental assessment 
D.1.  If  the  subproject  is  ADB  Category  B  for  environment,  an  Initial  Environmental 
Examination (IEE), including Environmental Management Plan (EMP), is required. 
D.2.  If  the  subproject  is  ADB  Category  C  for  environment,  the  following  is  required:  (i) 
preparation of the relevant PRC environmental assessment (EIAR, EIT, EIRF; see Step C); 
and (ii) a brief environmental checklist to help manage potential impacts. A sample checklist 
is given in ESMS-Appendix 5. 
D.3.  Advise the applicant: (i) it is the responsibility of the applicant to arrange and pay for the 
IEE, EIAR, EIT or EIRF; (ii) the assessment must be prepared by an accredited EIA institute; 
58 See also: http://www.adb.org/site/safeguards/safeguard-categories 
59 See Section II.B for definition of “land use rights transfer”. 
214 
(iii) the assessment will be submitted to HTIC and PMO for review; (iv) for an IEE, the content 
will include the details listed in ESMS-Appendix 4 and include an English-language version; 
(v) for an IEE, PMO will submit the draft to ADB for review and approval; (vi) for the EIAR, 
EIT or EIRF, the contents will be in Chinese-language only and will be submitted to the local 
Ecology and Environment Bureau (EEB) for approval.  
D.4.  All domestic environmental assessment documents require the review and approval of 
the relevant county bureaus, including the EEB. 
D.5.  Preparing an IEE takes time and is expensive. The project will favor subprojects which 
are “Category C” and which only require domestic EIA documents (EIAR, EIT or EIRF). 
D.6.  If  the  applicant  for  a  “Category  B”  subproject  wishes  to  proceed,  arrange  a  meeting 
between HTIC, PMO Environment and Social Officers, and applicant, and agree on: (i) the 
assessment process; and (ii) any changes in subproject design to achieve promotion of green 
agriculture and ecotourism development. HTIC will provide and (if necessary) pay for a venue 
for the meeting. For transport to/from the meeting, each party will pay for their own costs. 
D.7.  The  applicant  proceeds with  preparation  of the IEE  (with EMP)  and/or  EIAR,  EIT,  or 
EIRT. The applicant is responsible for all costs of preparing the documents, including field 
surveys, baseline monitoring, and public consultation (see below).  
Social assessments and preparation of mitigation actions 
D.8.  (i)  If  the  proposed  subproject  involves  land  use  rights  transfer,  the  applicant  must 
prepare a LURT agreement in accordance with the LURT Framework, and submit a copy to 
PMO and HTIC. (ii) If the proposed land has been the subject of any previous land transfer, 
the applicant must submit the LURT agreement and related evidence to confirm there are no 
pending disputes. Such due diligence will be done in accordance with the LURT Framework.   
D.9.  The  subprojects  should  be  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  project  Social 
Development Action Plan and Gender Action Plan (SDAP and GAP) that are included in the 
PAM. For the actions in the SDAP and GAP that are relevant to the subproject activities, HTIC 
will ensure the applicant implements them and reports on results, with assistance from PMO 
and LISC. 
D.10. Include all relevant requirements (action) of the SDAP and GAP in the social conditions 
of the contract for the equity investment. 
Information disclosure and public consultation and participation 
D.11. For all subprojects, regardless of impact category, check with the applicant if they have 
publicized the proposed project within the project area. 
D.12. If the answer is “no”, then inform the applicant that he or she must: 
•  publicize  the  basic  project  details  –  location,  activities,  potential  impacts,  contact 
details for the applicant, HTIC and PMO Environmental and Social Officers;  
•  publicize these details for at least 10 days to enable the general public sufficient time 
to submit any verbal or written comments; 
•  use disclosure materials and media which local communities near the project area can 
access e.g. signboard or poster in the village, website. 
•  at  the  end  of  the  disclosure  period,  summarize  any  public  comments  received  (by 
HTIC, PMO and/or applicant); and, 
•  address these comments in line with the EIT or EIRF or SDAP or GAP. 
215 
D.13. The applicant pays for the cost of the distribution materials. 
D.14. For  subprojects  which  are  Category  C  for  environment,  involuntary  resettlement  and 
indigenous peoples, the above is sufficient. 
D.15. For  subprojects  which  are  Category  B  for  environment,  ensure  that  the  applicant 
undertakes information disclosure to the local community and meaningful public consultation. 
Instruct  the  applicant  to  tailor  the  scope  and  extent  of  information  disclosure  and  public 
consultation to reflect the nature of the subproject and potential impacts, working also with 
the PMO Environment and Social Officers and EIA institute. The EIA institute preparing the 
IEE will coordinate the information disclosure and public consultation. The applicant will be 
responsible for the information disclosure and public consultation of relevant SDAP and GAP. 
The applicant pays for the costs and addresses any comments received. 
D.16. Ensure that the applicant has: (i) submitted the draft IEE to PMO for disclosure on the 
PMO website; and (ii) publicized the draft IEE (or at least a Chinese-language summary) in 
the local media and/or village boards.60 
Endorsement by Government and ADB of the Documents 
D.17.  Include all information in Step D in the progress reports to PMO. 
D.18.  For all applications rated as category B for environment, submit the draft final IEE to 
the PMO and ADB for endorsement. The PMO will provide the documents to ADB. Do not 
proceed  with  the  application  until  the  Government  and  ADB  has  provided  feedback  and 
endorsement on the draft IEE. 
D.19.  Obtain and verify copies of other relevant documents and approvals for the application: 
local EEB approval and requirements; 
• 
•  PMO concurrence of final subproject design; and, 
•  ADB approval of subprojects. 
D.20. Do not proceed to Step E until Step D is fully completed. 
STEP E: IMPLEMENT SAFEGUARD MEASURES 
E.1.  For  the  equity  investment  agreement  with  the  applicant,  prepare  a  Safeguard 
Commitment Letter (SCL), which lists all measures to be  implemented by the applicant for 
mitigation, monitoring and reporting from the environmental assessments, SDAP and GAP as 
relevant.61 At this stage, the applicant is now a “qualified investee” i.e. is eligible to receive 
funding support under the Green Investment Fund. 
E.2.  The qualified investee begins the subproject, including the measures in the SCL. The 
qualified investee is responsible for paying these costs. 
E.3.  For subprojects which are “Category B” for environment, inform the qualified investee 
60 The IEE will be submitted to ADB in English language. It will be based on the domestic environment assessment 
documents prepared in Chinese language. 
61 Environmental  impact  mitigation  measures  are  listed  in  the  IEE  Appendix  1:  Environmental  Management  Plan. 
Many of the mitigation measures in the EMP for other project activities will be applicable to subprojects under the 
Green Investment Fund and ESMS. Social safeguard measures are listed in Step D.  
216 
that if they hire a contractor: (i) the EMP, GRM, and Safeguards Commitment Letter must be 
included in the bidding documents; (ii) the contractor must agree to fulfill the EMP, GRM, and 
Safeguards Commitment Letter as a condition of accepting the contract, and should include 
the costs in their tender.62 
E.4.  Support  the  PMO  Environmental  and  Social  Officers  to  implement  the  Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) throughout the implementation stage (see Section V). 
E.5.  Any  changes  to  the  design  of  the  subproject  that  may  potentially  cause  negative 
environmental  impacts  will  be  screened  and  assessed  and  additional  environmental 
monitoring and/or mitigation measures will be developed as needed.  
STEP F: MONITORING AND REPORTING 
F.1.  Monitor whether the qualified investee is implementing the measures in the Safeguards 
Commitment Letter. 
F.2.  Develop and maintain an internal FI recording system for the results of Steps A-F for 
each  equity  investment  application  and  approved  subproject.  This  should  be  a  simple 
database (e.g. in excel). 
F.3.  For subprojects which require an IEE, an environmental monitoring plan is described in 
the  EMP.  This  should  be  implemented  by  the  qualified  investee.  The  results  should  be 
reported to HTIC at the frequency described in the EMP.  
F.4.  The  PMO  is  responsible  for  overall  project  monitoring  of  the  SDAP  and  GAP 
implementation.  The  Loan  Implementation  Consultants  will  help  the  PMO  to  develop  the 
monitoring and reporting mechanism. 
F.5.  During at least the first two years of the project, the following agencies meet every six 
months, and then at least annually from year 4 onwards: 
•  HTIC and qualified investee meet, to review progress against the equity investment 
contract conditions in the Safeguards Implementation Commitment; and, 
•  HTIC, PMO and relevant county bureaus, meet, to review safeguard compliance of all 
the subprojects being supported and lessons learned. 
F.6.  HTIC  submits  a  semi-annual  safeguard  progress  report  to  the  PMO,  which  includes 
progress with HTIC's ESMS, GRM and safeguard training. Submission dates: for the report 
for January-June – submit by 31 July latest; for the report for July-December – submit by 31 
January latest.  
F.7.  The  PMO  submits  a  semi-annual  safeguard  progress  report  to  ADB,  which  includes 
progress  with  HTIC’s  ESMS.  Submission  dates:  for  the  report  on  January-June  –  by  15 
August latest; for the report on July-December – by 15 February latest (i.e. two weeks after 
HTIC submits its reports to the PMO). 
F.8.  The reporting procedure is shown in Figure III.1. 
F.9.  HTIC pays for the costs of internal ESMS monitoring and reporting. The PMO pays for 
the costs of preparing semi-annual progress reports to ADB.  
62  The  bidding  documents  will  show  if  the  contractor  has  included  costs  for  these  conditions.  A  construction 
supervision company will monitor contractor performance. 
217 
F.10. Penalties. The failure of a qualified investee to implement the environmental and social 
requirements  set  out  in  the  equity  investment  conditions  will  result  in  penalties  e.g.  equity 
investment foreclosure, accelerated repayments, and/or other measure deemed appropriate 
by HTIC and under PRC law. 
Table III.1: Reporting Plan for ESMS 
Report 
Timing 
Responsibility 
For environment category B 
subproject, report on results of EMP 
implementation and monitoring 
As required in the project EMP for 
reporting 
Qualified investee 
submits to HTIC 
HTIC semi-annual safeguard report 
to PMO, including ESMS progress, 
SDAP and GAP 
Semi-annual.  
For January-June: by 31 July.  
For July-December: by 31 January 
HTIC submits to PMO 
PMO semi-annual safeguard report 
to ADB 
Semi-annual. 
For January-June: by 15 August.  
For July-December: by 15 
February 
PMO submits to ADB. 
ADB reviews; discloses 
on ADB website 
ADB  =  Asian  Development  Bank,  HTIC  =  Huangshan  Trust  Investment  Company,  EMP  =  environmental 
management plan, ESMS = environmental and social management system, PMO= Huangshan  Municipal project 
management office, SDAP = social development action plan, GAP = gender action plan. 
Asian Development Bank 
Semi-annual safeguards report 
Huangshan municipal project 
management office 
Semi-annual safeguards report 
Huangshan Trust and Investment 
Corporation (HTIC) 
HTIC finance officer 
Semi-annual ESMS report 
Qualified investee 
Implementing  Steps 
A–F  while  processing 
the  equity  investment 
applications 
Figure III.1. Reporting Procedures for the Environmental and Social Management System 
218 
Figure III.2. Steps A–F of the Environmental and Social Management System 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EEB = ecology and environment bureau, EIAR = environmental impact assessment report, 
EIR  =  environmental  impact  report,  EIT  =  environmental  impact  table,  EMP  =  environment  management  plan,  ESMS  = 
environment and social management system, GAP = gender action plan, HTIC = Huangshan Trust Investment Company, 
IEE = initial environmental examination, IP = indigenous peoples, IR = involuntary resettlement, PMO = Huangshan Municipal 
project management office, PRC = People’s Republic of China, SDAP = social and development action plan. 
219 
IV. 
INTEGRATION OF THE ESMS INTO FI BUSINESS PROCEDURES 
A.  Existing safeguard capacity and procedures of HTIC  
20.  The Huangshan Trust Investment Company (HTIC) is a state-owned enterprise (SOE), 
fully owned by Huangshan Municipality Government. It was incorporated in January 2016 in 
Huangshan Municipality, with a registered capital of CNY20 million. The business of HTIC 
covers  investment  management,  investment  consulting,  and  cooperate  equity  investment. 
HTIC is operating under PRC’s commercial law and is financially autonomous. HTIC has a 
track record of operating funds and equity financing and is expected to provide a sound base 
for the Green Investment Fund. 
21.  The  HTIC  comprises  a  Board  of  Directors,  a  Management  Committee,  and  seven 
departments:  General,  Legal,  Human  Resources,  Business Operation,  Risk,  Finance,  and 
Information  Technology.  As  of  August  2019,  HTIC  had  48  employees,  comprising  5 
managers, 11 administrative personnel and 32 business personnel. There are currently no 
staff with qualifications or experience in environmental or social safeguards.  
22.  When a loan application is received by HTIC, it is categorized as for “operating capital” 
or  a  “project”.  If  the  investment  is  for  a  project  (i.e.  new  construction  or  expansion  or 
intensification  of  existing  development),  a  feasibility  study  report  (FSR)  approved  by  the 
Development  and  Reform  Commission  (DRC;  provincial  or  county  level  depending  upon 
scale) is required. Before DRC will approve a FSR, an environmental assessment, approved 
by  the  Huangshan  Ecology  and  Environment  Bureau  (EEB),  must  be  obtained.  The 
environmental approval is appended to the DRC approval. 
23.  The finance officer at HTIC receiving the application conducts the following safeguard 
due diligence: (i) whether the proposed application has DRC and environmental approvals; 
(ii) whether any land use rights are involved; (iii) whether any resettlement is involved; and 
(iv) preliminary assessment of potential impacts on livelihoods and welfare of people in the 
project  area.  Processing  of  the  application  does  not  proceed  without  the  DRC  and 
environmental  approvals  and/or  if  unresolved  issues  of  land  use  rights  transfer  or 
resettlement  are  identified.  Copies  of  the  DRC  and  environmental  approvals  are  held  by 
HTIC. The current business procedure of HTIC in approving loan applications is summarized 
as follows: 
The potential borrowers 
prepare project proposal 
Project screening 
Project design review 
and due diligence 
Management during 
investment period 
Funding 
Passed 
Investment review 
committee 
Figure IV-1 Current Business Procedures of HTIC for Investment Applications 
24.  As required under the PRC Tentative Procedure of Project Completion Environmental 
Inspection and Acceptance for Construction Project (2017),  within three months of project 
completion,  the  qualified  investee  or  its  commissioned  technical  agency  assesses  if  the 
subproject has been constructed in compliance with the environmental approval conditions; 
submits related documents to the Huangshan EEB; and uploads required information onto 
the national project completion environmental acceptance platform. EEB is responsible for 
supervision. HTIC is not involved in this step. If the subproject is not compliant, the qualified 
Appendix 5 
investee  is  required  to  take  corrective  actions.  Without  this  it  will  not  obtain  final 
environmental approval and cannot become operational. 
25.  Monitoring by HTIC during the duration of an equity investment includes site visits and 
meetings with the management and chief accountant of the qualified investee, one to two 
times in the first month and subsequent inspections dependent on the risk judgment of the 
HTIC finance officer. There is no monitoring of safeguards. 
B.  Integrating the ESMS 
26.  HTIC has clarified that there are no existing policies or practices within its operations 
which would constrain the adoption and implementation of the ESMS. To establish the ESMS 
and ensure its operation, HTIC will recruit one qualified environment officer and one qualified 
social officer. These personnel will facilitate the establishment of the ESMS and integration 
into  the  existing  HTIC  business  procedures,  and,  support  the  HTIC  finance  officers  to 
complete the ESMS requirements for individual loan applications. 
27.  To integrate the ESMS into the HTIC business procedures, HTIC will issue a formal 
Presidential  Directive  at  least  three  months  prior  to  establishing  of  the  Green  Investment 
Fund and receiving loan proceeds from the project. This period also includes prior review 
and approval of HTIC’s ESMS by the PMO and ADB.  
28.  This Directive will: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
officially recognize the ESMS as HTIC policy in the project districts and counties from 
the date of the Directive; 
instruct the finance officers of the Green Investment Fund that the ESMS steps are 
now part of equity investment assessment and approval procedures; 
identify by name and position the managerial and review arrangements for steps and 
decisions taken while implementing the ESMS; 
confirm that breaches of environmental and social conditions by qualified investees 
will  be  treated  by  HTIC  in  the  same  way  as  breaches  in  other  loan  conditions  – 
attracting similar penalties; 
v. 
confirm the working relationship between HTIC and PMO and its loan implementation 
consultants; 
vi. 
ensure the wide dissemination within HTIC of Chinese-language ESMS documents; 
vii. 
instruct finance officers to print copies of the ESMS Workbook (ESMS-Appendix 3) 
to use in the field and fill out as part of their duties; and, 
viii.  commit to the training plan in the ESMS by facilitating HTIC officers’ attendance at 
training courses as required. 
29.  At least three months before the first equity investment disbursement, HTIC will recruit 
the  HTIC  environment  officer  and  social  officer.  These  officers  will  oversee  the  ESMS 
implementation. They will work directly with the HTIC finance officers to guide their activities, 
undertake regular checks of ESMS implementation internally, and provide and participate in 
the  training.  They  will  prepare  the  ESMS  progress  reports  for  submission  by  HTIC  to the 
PMO. The HTIC environment officer and social officer will also work with the LIEC and LISC 
to establish the ESMS. 
221 
30.  Upon  receipt  of  an  application  for  an  equity  investment,  a  HTIC  finance  officer  will 
commence  the  safeguard  screening  procedure.  The  screening  and  categorizing  will  be 
integrated  into  the  initial  site  visit  and  due  diligence  examination  of  the  equity  investment 
application.  After  the  qualified  investee  has  completed  the  required  assessments,  impact 
mitigation measures and other relevant actions will be formulated as contractual conditions 
and signed by the qualified investee in a Safeguards Commitment Letter. As far as possible, 
the same HTIC finance officer (to maintain consistency) will check if the measures have been 
fully  and  properly  undertaken  as  part  of  HTIC’s  internal  monitoring  of  individual  equity 
investments that are being implemented. 
31.  Where a subproject needs to be redesigned, the HTIC finance officer will discuss with 
the qualified investee and consult with the HTIC environment and social officers, and other 
technical  personnel  as  needed  (e.g.  agricultural  extension  staff  of  the  local  Agriculture 
Bureau) and PMO to guide the re-design. After re-design, the application will progress step 
by step through the ESMS procedures as before. 
32.  During  the  project  implementation  period  (six  years),  HTIC  will  receive  technical 
support from the  LIEC  and  LISC  to  implement  the  ESMS  and overall  monitoring from the 
PMO and ADB. The maximum potential life of the Green Investment Fund is estimated to be 
about 15 years (assuming no future replenishments; and pending capital expenditures and 
success  during  implementation  of  the  ADB-funded  project).  Therefore,  it  is  possible  the 
Green  Investment  Fund  might  continue  to  be  implemented  for  another  10-11  years  after 
completion of the ADB-funded project. This future phase of the Green Investment Fund might 
not be subject to ADB guidance or technical or financial support. At this early stage, there is 
no  viable  mechanism  to  ensure  the  HTIC  will  continue  to  implement  the  ESMS  after  the 
project.  The  success  of  the  ESMS  will  be  assessed  by  the  government,  HTIC,  and  ADB 
during project implementation and the ADB project completion report (one year after project 
completion) and recommendations for future management will be identified as relevant.    
V. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM 
33.  The project includes a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to identify, address and 
resolve any public concerns for environmental and/or social issues of the project activities. 
The GRM comprises a series of steps to receive, document, and address the concerns of 
any affected persons. The GRM is accessible to all members of the community. Multiple entry 
points are available, as well as multiple ways to convey issues/ grievances including face-to-
face meetings, written complaints, telephone conversations, e-mail, and social media. The 
GRM will be implemented for the 6-year life of the project. 
34.  The  PMO  Environmental  and  Social  Officers  and  HTIC  Environmental  and  Social 
Officers will be the lead coordinators for GRM implementation. All project related staff will be 
trained  in  the  GRM  and  will  take  an  active  role  in  supporting  these  officers  as  and  when 
necessary.  
35.  At the PMO level, the PMO Environmental Officer and Social Officer will establish a 
GRM tracking and documentation system, conduct daily coordination with the FI’s officers, 
arrange  meetings  and conduct  site  visits  as  necessary,  maintain the  overall  project  GRM 
database,  and  prepare  the  reporting  inputs  for  progress reports to  ADB. Within HTIC, the 
environment and social officers will instruct qualified investees, contractors and construction 
supervision companies (CSCs) on the GRM procedures, and coordinate with the local EEBs 
and  other  government  divisions  as  necessary.  PMO  and  HTIC  staff  will  be  trained  and 
supported by the LIEC and LISC. 
36.  The  contact  persons  for  different  GRM  entry  points,  such  as  the  PMO  and  HTIC 
Appendix 5 
Environmental and Social Officers, contractors, operators of project facilities, and local EEBs, 
will  be  identified  prior  to  construction.  The  contact  details  for  the  entry  points  (phone 
numbers, addresses, e-mail addresses) will be publicly disclosed on information boards at 
construction sites and on the websites of the local EEBs.  
37.  Once  a  complaint  is  received  and  filed,  the  PMO  and  HTIC  officers  will  identify  if 
complaints are eligible for management under the GRM. Eligible complaints include those 
where (i) the complaint pertains to the subproject; and (ii) the issues arising in the complaint 
fall  within  the  scope  of  ESMS  issues  that  the  GRM  is  authorized  to  address.  Ineligible 
complaints include those where: (i) the complaint is clearly not project-related; (ii) the nature 
of the issue is outside the mandate of the ESMS GRM (such as issues related to allegations 
of fraud or corruption); and (iii) other procedures are more appropriate to address the issue. 
Ineligible  complaints  will  be  recorded  and  passed  to  the  relevant  authorities,  and  the 
complainant will be informed of the decision and reasons for rejection.  
38.  HTIC will support the PMO to implement the GRM, including immediate  reporting to 
the PMO of any grievance issues identified. Other key agencies that will support the PMO to 
implement the GRM are the county EEBs, township governments, and village committees. 
39.  The  PMO  will  provide  progress  of  the  GRM  in  the  semi-annual  environmental  and 
social progress reports to ADB. 
40.  The  PMO  Environmental  and  Social  Officers  coordinate  the  GRM  and  work  directly 
with  the  HTIC  Environmental  and  Social  Officers  responsible  for  the  ESMS,  to  handle 
complaints and implement corrective actions. 
41.  The following scheme outlines the main elements of the GRM. It will be reviewed during 
project implementation by the LIEC and LISC and revised if necessary. 
42.  The  procedure  for  the  GRM  involves  two  pathways:  environmental  issues  (three 
stages) and social (ethnic minority and LURT) issues (four stages) (Figure V.1 and Figure 
V.2).  Upon receiving  a complaint,  a  project  agency  will  report  it  immediately  to  HTIC  and 
PMO. The PMO Environment and Social Officers will assess which GRM (environment or 
social) is to be applied. 
43.  Environmental Issues (three stages). Note that the design of the environmental GRM 
is similar to the overall project GRM (described in the IEE Appendix 1: EMP), but places more 
responsibility in stages 2 and 3 on HTIC rather than PMO. This is to help build accountability 
and  self-sufficiency  within  HTIC  and  to  further  embed  the  ESMS  procedures  into  HTIC 
operations. 
•  Stage  1  (5  calendar  days):  If  a  concern  arises  during  construction  or  operation,  the 
affected  person  may  submit  a  written  or  oral  complaint  to  the  contractor  or  equity 
investment owner, family (if onsite) or representative. The person receiving the complaint 
will: (i) respectfully acknowledge the issue and immediately stop the causal activity (e.g. 
on-site construction causing high noise levels to a nearby household); (ii) not resume the 
activity  until  the  complaint  has  been  resolved;  (iii)  inform  the  PMO  and  HTIC  finance 
officer of the incident on the same day of the incident occurring and how the contractor 
has responded or will respond; (iv) give a clear reply to the affected person within two 
calendar days; and (v) as far as possible, resolve the problem within five calendar days 
from receiving the complaint. In stage 1, the contractor (or other persons receiving the 
complaint) will as far as possible resolve the issue directly with the affected person. The 
contractor will keep the HTIC finance officer fully informed at all stages. The HTIC will: 
inform the PMO, local village committee, and local EEB of the incident within one working 
223 
day of being informed by the contractor; and, subsequently keep the PMO informed at all 
stages. 
•  Stage 2 (5 calendar days): If the issue cannot be resolved in Stage 1, after five calendar 
days,  the  HTIC finance officer  and  environmental  and social  officers,  with  support  and 
facilitation  by  the  PMO,  will  take  over  responsibility.  Eligibility  of  the  complaint  will  be 
assessed and a recommended solution given to the complainant and contractors within 
two calendar days. If the solution is agreed by the  complainant, the contractors and/or 
facility operators (in operation) will implement the solution within five calendar days from 
HTIC taking over responsibility of the complaint. Written records will be made of all stages 
and outcomes. At the expiration of Stage 2, PMO will inform ADB of the outcome. 
•  Stage  3  (15  calendar  days):  If  no  solution  can  be  identified  by  HTIC,  and/or  the 
complainant is not satisfied with the proposed solution, HTIC will organize, within seven 
(7)  calendar  days,  a stakeholder meeting.  This will  include the  complainant,  contractor 
and/or  operator  of  the  facility,  EEB,  and  PMO.  A  solution  acceptable  to  all  shall  be 
identified including clear steps. The contractors (during construction) and facility operators 
(during  operation)  will  immediately  implement  the  agreed  solution.  All  attempts  will  be 
made to fully resolve the issue within 15 calendar days. Written records will be made of 
all  stages  and  outcomes.  At  the  expiration  of  Stage  3,  PMO  will  inform  ADB  of  the 
outcome. 
Appendix 5 
Affected Person(s) 
Stage 1 
5 days 
Complaint 
Solution  
Implemented 
Complaint 
Contractor, CSC 
HTIC, local EEB, 
Village committee 
Reporting 
Stage 2 
5 days 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
HTIC Environment and/or Social 
Officers 
(recording and coordination) 
Unresolved Complaint  
Forwarded 
Stakeholder  Meeting 
PMO 
HTIC 
Action Plan 
Stage 3 
15 days 
Solution Implemented 
Reporting by 
 PMO to ADB 
ADB 
Figure V.1: The Grievance Redress Mechanism for Environment Safeguards 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CSC = construction supervision company, EEB = ecology and environmental 
bureau, GRM = grievance redress mechanism, HTIC = Huangshan Trust Investment Company, PMO = Huangshan 
Municipal project management office. 
44.  The GRM does not affect the right of an affected person to submit their complaints to 
any agency they wish to, for example the local village committee, community leaders, courts, 
PMO,  HMG,  district/county  government,  and/or  ADB.  At  any  time  in  the  GRM,  affected 
persons may also contact the local courts and/or ADB East Asia Department. The GRM does 
not affect public rights under the PRC Regulations on Letters and Visits (ESMS-Appendix 1), 
which requires a complaint acceptance mechanism at all levels of government and protects 
complainants from retaliation. If the complaint is still unresolved after all stages, the affected 
person and/or PMO may refer to the ADB Accountability Mechanism.63 
45.  All stages of the GRM are time-bound with maximum periods set for advising, finding 
and  implementing  corrective  actions.  All  complaints  and  processes  are  documented  and 
reported to the ADB in the semi-annual PMO safeguard progress reports. 
46.  HTIC shall bear any and all costs of implementing the ESMS GRM, including meeting, 
63 See: www.adb.org/ accountability-mechanism 
225 
travel, and/or accommodation costs of the project staff or affected person. The HTIC finance 
officer and environmental and social officers shall pay close attention to subproject design 
and implementation to ensure that complaints are minimized.  
47.  Land use rights transfer issues (four stages).  
Stage 1: Complaints are submitted to the village committee. In case of an oral appeal, the 
village committee shall make a written record. The village committee shall make a decision 
to resolve the problem within 15 days. 
Stage 2: If the affected person is dissatisfied with Stage 1, they may file an appeal to the 
township  government.  The  township  government  shall  make  a  decision  to  resolve  the 
problem within 15 days. 
Stage 3: If the affected person is dissatisfied with Stage 2, they may file an appeal to the 
county/district government and HTIC, who shall resolve the issue within 20 days. 
Stage 4: If the affected person is dissatisfied with Stage 3, they may file for arbitration in 
the Rural Land Use Rights Transfer Disputes Tribunal for final resolution.  
At each stage, the receiving agency will report the complaint, and progress resolving it, to 
the PMO. HTIC will send consolidated reports on GRM activity to the PMO for semi-annual 
reporting. 
Based  on  the  PRC  Law  on  Mediation  and  Arbitration  of  Rural  Land  Contract  Disputes, 
charges  for  disputes  arbitration  of  rural  land  contracts  are  not  allowed.  Reasonable 
expenses will be paid by the local government. 
48.  Ethnic minority safeguard issues (four stages).64 
Stage 1: If the affected people are dissatisfied with the project, they can make either oral 
or  written  complaint  to  the  village  committee  or  cultural  leaders;  if  they  use  verbal 
complaints,  the  community  committee  or  cultural  leader  should  handle  and  record  it. 
Complaints will be addressed within15 days. 
Stage  2: If the  complainant  is  not satisfied with the  result  of  the  first  phase,  he/she  can 
appeal  to  the  township  government  after  receiving  the  result;  the  township  government 
should make decision within 15 days. 
Stage 3: If the complaint is not satisfied with the result of the second phase, he/she can 
appeal to HTIC after receiving the result; HTIC should make decision within 30 days. 
Stage 4: If the complainant is not satisfied with the results of any above phases, he/she 
can appeal to the government departments applying for administrative reconsideration after 
receiving the result.  
64 http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp.  
Appendix 5 
Social related complaints by APs 
Village Committee 
Township Government 
County/district government and 
HTIC 
(PMO recording & coordination) 
County Rural Land Dispute 
Arbitration Tribunal 
Solution resolved 
Figure V.2: The Grievance Redress Mechanism for Social Safeguards 
AP  =  affected  person,  HTIC  =  Huangshan  Trust  Investment  Company,  PMO  =  Huangshan  Municipal  project 
management office. 
VI. 
CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING 
49.  The capacity of HTIC to implement the ESMS is currently low. Prior to the project, HTIC 
had no staff qualified in environmental or social management or safeguards. The PMO will 
work  with  HTIC  to  implement  the  ESMS  over  the  6  years  of  the  project  life.  The  project 
includes a training program (Table VI.1) to build capacity of HTIC, with the aim that HTIC can 
independently conduct the following without PMO or ADB support after the first five years of 
the  project:  (i)  implement  the  ESMS;  (ii)  understand  the  principles  and  practice  of 
environmental and social impact assessment in the agriculture and ecotourism sectors; and 
(iii)  incorporate  green  agriculture  and  ecotourism  best  practices  into  project  design  to 
minimize potential environmental and social adverse impacts. Most training will occur within 
the  first  two  years  of  the  project.  Training  will  be  conducted  by  the  loan  implementation 
environment consultant (LIEC) and loan implementation social consultant (LISC) (see terms 
of  reference  in  EMP  Appendix  1-1  and  the  PAM),  supported  by  other  technical  loan 
implementation consultants. 
Table VI.1: Five-year training program for the ESMS.  
Includes a mid-term review of the ESMS and grievance redress mechanism in Year 3. 
Trainees 
Training 
Trainer  Year 
HTIC staff 
PMO,  
HTIC staff 
LIEC, 
Maintain and implement 
ESMS 
LISC 
Maintain and implement GRM  LIEC, 
LISC 
1 
Full-
time 
Full-
time 
Year 
2 
Year 
3 
Year 
4 
Year 
5 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
Cost 
(CNY 
x10,000) 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
PMO,  
HTIC staff 
PMO,  
HTIC staff 
PMO and HTIC 
environmental 
and social 
officers 
HTIC staff, 
qualified 
investees 
PMO,  
HTIC staff 
Implement ESMS Steps A–F 
(screening, design, 
categorization, impact 
assessment); and inclusion of 
safeguards into equity 
investment contracts 
(mitigation, monitoring, 
reporting, SDAP, GAP, land 
transfer) 
ESMS monitoring and 
reporting– spreadsheet data, 
HTIC reporting to PMO; 
reporting by PMO to ADB 
Introduction to environmental 
and social impact assessment 
in the agriculture and tourism 
sectors 
Introduction to best practices 
for green agriculture and 
ecotourism design 
Mid-term review of ESMS – 
progress, challenges, lessons 
learned 
227 
LIEC, 
LISC 
Full-
time 
Full-
time 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
LIEC, 
LISC 
Full-
time 
Semi-
annua
lly 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
LIEC, 
LISC 
Full-
time 
Quart
erly 
Semi-
annua
l 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
LIC 
Full-
time 
Full-
time 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
LIEC, 
LISC 
0 
0 
tbc 
0 
0 
In-kind 
support 
ESMS = environmental and social management system, GRM = grievance redress mechanism, HTIC = Huangshan 
Trust  Investment  Company,  LIC  =  loan  implementation  consultant,  LIEC  =  loan  implementation  environmental 
consultant, LISC = loan implementation social consultant, PMO = Huangshan Municipal project management office, 
SDAP = social development action plan, GAP = gender action plan; tbc = to be confirmed. 
VII. 
PROJECT ASSURANCES 
50.  HTIC  and  implementation  of  the  ESMS  will  be  subject  to  loan-  and  project-specific 
assurances to support  efficient  and timely  project  management.  The loan  assurances are 
described  in  Section  X  of  the  IEE.  Refer  to  the  loan  and  project  agreements  for  the  final 
wording of the assurances. 
VII. 
ESMS-APPENDIX 1. LEGISLATION AND POLICIES 
Table 1: PRC Laws and Regulations on Agriculture, Environment and Social Issues Relevant to 
the ESMS 
Laws, Regulations and Standards 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AND PLANNING and LAND USE MANAGEMENT 
Relevance to Project 
Environmental Protection Law (2015, 
amended) 
Land Administration Law (2004, amended) 
Noise Pollution Prevention and Control Law 
(2018, amended) 
Water Pollution Prevention and Control 
Law (2018, amended) 
Air Pollution Prevention and Control Law 
(2018, amended) 
Solid Waste Pollution Prevention and 
Control Law (2016, amended) 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
Environmental Impact Assessment Law 
(2018, amended) 
Management Regulation on EIA Categories 
of Construction Projects (2018) 
Subprojects avoid any significant environmental impact. 
Subprojects comply with provincial, county and local land 
use plans, which are made to protect and develop land 
resources. 
Noise during construction and operation of the proposed 
subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Water pollution during construction and operation of the 
proposed subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Air pollution during construction and operation of the 
proposed subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Solid waste pollution during construction and operation of 
the proposed subprojects to be mitigated or avoided. 
Overarching law for EIA, setting out procedures for EIA 
and approvals needed before construction. 
Defines assessment and reporting requirements for three 
EIA classes, based on scale, investment level, and 
Appendix 5 
Laws, Regulations and Standards 
Relevance to Project 
Regulation on Public Participation of 
Environmental Impact Assessment (2017) 
Provisional Methods of Management of 
Projects Financed by International 
Financial Institutions and Foreign 
Governments (2005) 
Technical Guideline for EIA: General 
principle (HJ 2.1-2016) 
Technical Guideline for EIA: Surface Water 
(HJ/T 2.3-2018) 
Technical Guideline for EIA: Atmospheric 
Environment (HJ2.2-2018) 
Technical Guideline for EIA: Acoustic 
Environment (HJ2.4-2009) 
Technical Guideline for EIA: Ecological 
Impact Assessment (HJ19-2011) 
Technical Guideline for EIA: Groundwater 
Environment (HJ 610-2016) 
WATER 
Water Law (2016) 
Environmental Quality Standard for Surface 
Water (GB 3838-2002) 
Environmental Quality Standard for 
Groundwater (GB/T14848-2017) 
Water Pollution Prevention and Control 
Law (2018, amended) 
Regulation on Pollution Prevention of 
Drinking Water Source (2010) 
Measures on Monitoring of Pollutant 
Discharge Outlets Entering Rivers (2015, 
amended) 
Integrated Wastewater Discharge Standard 
(GB 8978-2002) 
Water Quality Standard for Sewage 
Discharged into Municipal Sewers (CJ343-
2010) 
Regulations for Water Extraction Permitting 
and Collection of Water Resource Fees 
(2017, amended) 
environmental sensitivity: comprehensive environmental 
impact assessment report (EIAR); environmental impact 
table (EIT); and, environmental impact registration form 
(EIRF). See Table 2. All subprojects are expected to 
require EIT or lower. 
Guideline and requirement for conducting public 
participation and consultation during the environmental 
impact assessment of a project 
Project funds are sourced from an international 
organization (ADB), the provisions of this method apply 
for aspects of the environmental impact assessment.  
Guideline for conducting EIA preparation. Provides 
information on the scope and content of environmental 
impact assessment.  
Guideline for surface water pollution prediction and 
analysis for projects where wastewater discharge is a 
potential impact. 
Guideline for air pollution prediction and analysis for 
projects where gaseous emissions are a potential impact. 
Guideline for noise level prediction and analysis for 
impact assessments. 
Guideline for ecological impact prediction and analysis 
for impact assessments. 
Guideline for groundwater pollution prediction and 
analysis for impact assessments. 
Regulation and management of water resources.  
Assigns a water quality class to waterbodies according to 
their use. There are 5 classes, ranging from I (drinking 
water) to V (industrial use only). Waterbodies in 
subprojects will be classed to assess the permitted use 
of the water and discharge of wastewater.  
Standards for groundwater quality which must be 
maintained. 
Enabling legislation for rules and regulations preventing 
water pollution. 
Sets aside areas adjoining drinking water sources to 
protect water quality. Subprojects should not be within or 
bordering these zones. 
Environmental monitoring in the wastewater discharge 
outlet may be required for the subproject if necessary. 
Requirements for wastewater discharge. 
Wastewater should not be discharged to municipal 
wastewater treatment plant if indicators exceed the limits 
in this standard. 
Subprojects need to obtain water resource extraction 
permission from local BWR before accessing water 
resource. 
SOIL 
Water  and  Soil  Conservation  Law 
amended 2011) 
AIR 
(2010, 
Provisions  to  combat  soil  erosion  and  land  degradation  in 
construction and agriculture.  
Air Pollution Prevention and Control Law 
(2018, amended) 
Emission Standards for Odor Pollutants 
(GB 14554-1993) 
Integrated Emission Standard for Air 
Pollutants (GB 16297-1996) 
Technical Guidelines for Fugitive Emission 
Monitoring of Air Pollutants (HJ/T 55-2000) 
Ambient Air Quality Standard (GB3095-
Enabling legislation for rules and regulations preventing 
air pollution. 
Limits for odors from enterprises and activities. 
Limits for air pollutants emission from enterprises and 
activities. 
Guidance on how to predict and measure air pollutants 
for environmental impact assessments. 
Standards for ambient air quality of an area (urban, rural, 
229 
Laws, Regulations and Standards 
2012) 
SOLID WASTE 
Relevance to Project 
industrial etc.) 
Solid Waste Pollution Prevention and 
Control Law (2016, amended) 
Classification and Assessment Standards 
for Municipal Solid Waste (CJJ/T 102-
2004) 
FLORA, FAUNA, AND CULTURAL RESOURCES 
Wild Animal Protection Law (2018, 
amended) 
Cultural Relics Protection Law, 2011 
Requirements for solid waste handling and disposal. To 
be used for management measures in subprojects. 
Solid waste quality and contamination limits for a range 
of permissible disposal options. 
Protection of listed fauna and flora. Subprojects must 
ensure they do not threaten any animals on the lists. 
Procedures to record, protect any relics found during 
construction. 
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT / SAFEGUARDS 
Law on Protection of the Rights and 
Interests of Women (2018, amended) 
Decree  431–  Regulation  on  Letters  and  Visits 
(2005); Decree 34 – Measures on Environmental 
Letters and Visits (2006) 
LAND 
Land Contract Law for Rural Areas (2019, 
amended) 
Law on Arbitration and Dispute over 
Management of Contracted Rural Land 
(2009) 
Administration Methods on Rural Land Use 
Rights Transfer, Ministry of Agriculture, 
2005 
Arbitration Rules of Disputes over Management of 
Contracted Rural Land, Ministry of Agriculture and 
State Forestry Administration, 2010 
Provincial, county and local land use plans 
Protection of employment, welfare, occupational health 
and workplace equality of women; equal rights for 
allocation of farmland and approval of housing sites in 
rural areas. These rights endure after marriage or 
divorce. 
Codifies  a  complaint  acceptance  mechanism  at  all  levels  of 
government and protects the complainants from retaliation. 
Legislative requirements covering all land contract 
signing. 
Enabling law setting up an arbitration system for disputes 
in land transfers. 
Land use right transfers to follow this guideline. 
Provides rules and procedures for resolving disputes in cases of 
land use right transfer. 
Plans to be consulted to ensure that proposed subprojects are 
not prohibited or constrained in the site locality and do not cause 
land use conflicts with adjoining uses. 
Appendix 5 
Table 2. PRC EIA documentation requirements for agricultural and ecotourism activities.  
Type of subproject 
EIAR 
EIT 
EIRF 
Agricultural reclamation  N/A 
Agricultural base 
project (including 
medicinal herb base) 
N/A 
Economic forest base 
project 
N/A 
Affecting an environmentally 
sensitive area 
Others 
Affecting an environmentally 
sensitive area 
Others 
Involving raw material forest  Others 
Park development 
Super large-scale and large-
scale theme park 
Others 
City park and botanic 
garden 
Tourism development 
Construction of cable car or 
cableway in environmentally 
sensitive area; maritime 
entertainment, sports and 
landscape exploitation.  
Others 
N/A 
Source:  Directory  for  the  Management  of  Different  Categories  of  Construction  Project  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment (2018). EIAR = environmental impact assessment report; EIT = environmental impact table; EIRF = 
environmental impact registration form. N/A = not applicable. 
VIII.  ESMS-APPENDIX 2. ADB LIST OF PROHIBITED INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES 
The use of ADB funds is strictly prohibited for the following activities (ADB Safeguard Policy 
Statement, 2009). 
11.  Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor65 or child 
labor.66 
12.  Production of or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws 
or  regulations or  international  conventions  and  agreements  or  subject to international 
phase-outs  or  bans,  such  as  (a)  pharmaceuticals, 67  pesticides,  and  herbicides, 68  (b) 
ozone-depleting  substances, 69  (c)  polychlorinated  biphenyls 70  and  other  hazardous 
chemicals, 71  (d)  wildlife  or  wildlife  products  regulated  under  the  Convention  on 
International  Trade  in  Endangered  Species  of  Wild  Fauna  and  Flora, 72  and  (e) 
transboundary trade in waste or waste products.73 
13.  Production of or trade in weapons and munitions, including paramilitary materials. 
65 All work or services not voluntarily performed i.e. extracted from individuals under threat of force or penalty. 
66 Employment  of  children  whose  age  is  below  the  host  country’s  statutory  minimum  age  of employment, or,  in 
contravention of International Labor Organization Convention No. 138 “Minimum Age Convention” (www.ilo.org). 
67 A list of pharmaceutical products subject to phaseouts or bans is available at http://www.who.int. 
68 A list of pesticides and herbicides subject to phaseouts or bans is available at http://www.pic.int. 
69A list of the chemical compounds that react with and deplete stratospheric ozone resulting in the widely publicized 
ozone  holes  is  listed  in  the  Montreal  Protocol,  together  with  target  reduction  and  phaseout  dates.  Information 
is available at http://www.unep.org/ozone/montreal.shtml. 
70 A group of highly toxic chemicals. Likely to be found in oil-filled electrical transformers, capacitors, and switchgear 
dating from 1950 to 1985. 
71 A list of hazardous chemicals is available at http://www.pic.int. 
72 A list is available at http://www.cites.org. 
73 As defined by the Basel Convention; see http://www.basel.int. 
231 
14.  Production of or trade in alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine.74 
15.  Production of or trade in tobacco. 
16.  Gambling, casinos, and equivalent enterprises. 
17.  Production  of  or  trade  in  radioactive  materials, 75  including  nuclear  reactors  and 
components thereof. 
18.  Production of, trade in, or use of unbonded asbestos fibers.76 NOTE: see project-specific 
assurance (ESMS Section VII) for use of asbestos.  
19.  Commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment for use in primary 
tropical moist forests or old-growth forests. 
20.  Marine and coastal fishing practices, such as large-scale pelagic drift net fishing and fine 
mesh  net  fishing,  harmful  to  vulnerable  and  protected  species  in  large  numbers  and 
damaging to marine biodiversity and habitats. 
74 Does  not  apply  to  project  sponsors  who  are  not  “ substantially  involved”  in  these  activities  i.e.  the  activity 
concerned is ancillary to a project sponsor's primary operations. 
75 Does  not  apply  to  the  purchase  of  medical  equipment,  quality  control  (measurement)  equipment,  and  any 
equipment for which ADB considers the radioactive source to be trivial and adequately shielded. 
76 Does not apply to purchase and use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is <20%. 
Appendix 5 
IX. 
ESMS-APPENDIX 3. WORKBOOK FOR SCREENING AND CATEGORIZING 
SUBPROJECTS 
This workbook comprises five worksheets. The worksheets are to be filled out by 
HTIC staff in consultation with the qualified investee. 
The workbook can be printed out and carried into the field by HTIC staff, for site 
assessments and discussions with applicants. The workbook is retained by HTIC in their 
records for each equity investment application. 
Each subproject is recorded in a separate workbook. Complete the details below. 
Name of FI 
Subproject title (name of entity) 
Name of equity investment applicant 
Name of applicant  
(if same as applicant write “as above”) 
Huangshan Trust Investment Company 
Information on the proposed subproject 
Proposed subproject activity 
County 
Town/Township 
Village 
Date of site visit 
Name of assessor 
Geographic coordinates (if available) 
If the subproject is a production base 
(otherwise write “not applicable”): 
Area of production base  
# farmer households involved  
#farmers involved  
# poverty households involved  
# poverty people involved  
# EM households involved  
# EM people involved  
Name of ethnic minority group  
# women involved  
Notes: 
EM = Ethnic minority, HTIC = Huangshan Trust Investment Company. 
233 
WORKSHEET 1: Rapid Environmental Assessment Checklist 
1.  Answer the first question (“Will it happen?”) assuming that no mitigation measures will be 
conducted. The purpose is to identify potential impacts. 
2.  If the answer is “Yes” then fill out the next two columns, “is it irreversible?” and “can it be 
minimized?” 
3.  If the answer is “No” then place a “C” in the final column.  
4.  The first three columns (“will it happen?”, “is it irreversible?”, “can it be minimized?”) 
should be filled out by discussions with the applicant and a site inspection. 
5.  The final column refers to the ADB categories “A”, “B” and “C” for environmental impacts. 
They are defined below. Use these definitions to decide on the category. 
Category A. Subproject likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are irreversible, 
diverse,  or  unprecedented.  Impacts  may  extend  beyond  the  subproject  sites.  Environmental  impact 
assessment (EIA) including environmental management plan (EMP) is required. Examples: conversion 
of wetlands; subprojects in or next to protected areas; large scale pollution of water resources. 
Category B. Potential adverse environmental impacts are site-specific, few if any are irreversible. In 
most cases mitigation measures can be designed more readily than for Category A subprojects. Initial 
environmental examination (IEE) including EMP is required. Examples: crop farming on land already 
used for the same crop type; farming which does not result in increased pressure on water resources. 
Category C. Subproject likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. EIA or IEE not 
required.  Environmental  implications  need  to  be  reviewed.  Examples:  construction  of  small  offices, 
financing, training, or planning activities. 
Will it 
happen? 
Y/N 
If YES 
Is it 
irreversible? 
Y/N 
Can it be 
minimized? 
ADB 
Category 
Screening and Impact Questions 
project Siting 
Is project in or next to (i) a cultural heritage site, (ii) 
a protected area, (iii) wetland or (iv) special area 
for protecting biodiversity? 
Is siting of the project likely to be affected by climate 
including  extreme  weather-related 
conditions 
events  such  as 
floods,  droughts,  storms, 
landslides?  
Potential Environmental Impacts 
Will the project cause… 
•  damage to historical/cultural areas or physical 
cultural resources? 
•  disturbance to precious ecology (e.g. sensitive 
or protected areas)? 
•  alteration of surface water hydrology of 
waterways resulting in increased sediment in 
streams affected by increased soil erosion at 
construction site? 
•  deterioration of surface water quality due to silt 
runoff and sanitary wastes from worker-based 
camps and chemicals used in construction? 
•  increased air pollution due to project 
construction and operation? 
•  noise and vibration due to project construction 
or operation? 
Will it 
happen? 
Y/N 
If YES 
Is it 
irreversible? 
Y/N 
Can it be 
minimized? 
ADB 
Category 
Appendix 5 
Screening and Impact Questions 
•  generation of solid waste and/or hazardous 
waste? 
•  use of chemicals? 
•  generation of wastewater during construction or 
operation? 
In land leveling and other earthworks as necessary 
will there be: 
•  construction dust and erosion  
•  loss of micro-habitat for local biodiversity 
•  changes to local drainage 
In  the  upgrade  or  establish  irrigation  system, 
including wells, canals, pipes. Installation of quota 
irrigation systems will there be: 
•  Unsustainable use of local water resources 
•  Water use conflicts  
•  Cumulative impacts on limited water resource 
For  construction  of  livestock  pens  and  other 
livestock structures will there be problems with: 
•  location (too close to residences / waterways) 
•  construction impacts - dust, noise 
•  operational impacts – noise, odor 
In  electricity  use  for  machinery,  greenhouses, 
pumps, ventilation will there be: 
•  GHG emissions from electricity use 
•  GHG emissions and flue gas emissions from 
on-site electricity generator 
In  the  establishment  of  on-site  wells  for  process 
water and drinking water will there be: 
•  unsustainable use of local water resources 
•  water use conflicts 
•  cumulative impacts on limited water resource 
For  handling,  transport,  and  storage  of  materials 
and  inputs  of  seeds,  seedlings,  fertilizers  and 
chemicals will there be: 
•  application of chemicals and fertilizer not 
carefully managed - increased volumes enter 
soil and water 
•  noise, dust, pollution from haulage, handling 
and storage of materials 
•  extensive residue of plastic mulch material in 
soil and water 
•  loss of crop diversity and self-sustaining 
household plots 
In  the  collection,  treatment,  disposal  /  reuse 
processes built as part of the facilities will there be: 
•  pollution of land and rivers from wastewater 
disposal or via land application as liquid fertilizer 
Overall conclusion on Environment Category (circle one): 
A 
B 
C 
Reason for conclusion: 
235 
Notes 
Appendix 5 
WORKSHEETS 2 – 4: Land Acquisition, Involuntary Resettlement, Land Use Rights, 
Ethnic Minorities 
Does the subproject involve physical changes to the land or changes to land user rights (land 
adjustment within the group or formal land use rights transfer to a third party?) If no, skip to 
Worksheets 4 and 5. If yes, proceed to Worksheets 2, 3, and 4. 
What is the current status of land ownership and land use rights of the land to be used? 
Yes   
No   
1)  Ownership: 
2)  User rights: enterprise  ; cooperative  ; village/group  ; or household   
state-owned farm  ; 
collective land   
WORKSHEET 2: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement Checklist 
INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT ISSUES FROM PAST ACQUISITION OR 
EXISTING FACILITIES 
Involuntary Issues 
Are there any involuntary resettlement issues from 
past land acquisition? 
Are there any involuntary resettlement issues from 
existing facilities? 
Yes* 
If Yes, give information 
No 
*If “yes”, the subproject should be excluded e.g. in case there are outstanding land acquisition 
and/or resettlement issues that would present legacy issues or risks to the project.  
NEW LAND ACQUISITION UNDER EQUITY INVESTMENT 
Probable Involuntary Resettlement Effects 
Y
e
s 
If Yes, give number of affected 
persons and households 
N
o 
for 
this 
there  be 
land  acquisition 
Will 
subproject?* 
Will  there  be  loss  of  land  use  rights  due  to 
change  in  land  use  resulting  from  the 
subproject (e.g., expanded village road)? 
Will  there  be  residential  house  demolition 
causing loss of shelter to people due to land 
acquisition or construction activities? 
Will  there  be  any  temporary  occupation  of 
land that affects the land, housing, assets or 
livelihoods/business of people? 
Will there  be  losses of crops, trees, graves 
and fixed assets? 
Will people lose access to natural resources, 
communal facilities and services? 
If land use is changed, will it have an adverse 
impact on social and economic activities? 
Will  access  to  land  and  resources  owned 
communally or by the state be restricted? 
* Check if there will be land acquisition per local development planning (especially urban development planning). 
Overall conclusion on Involuntary Resettlement Category (circle one): 
A 
B 
C 
Note: for a subproject to be approved for HTIC equity investment, it should be category C and any due 
diligence for prior land acquisition should confirm there are no remaining issues. 
237 
Reason for conclusion: 
Notes: 
WORKSHEET 3: Land Use Rights Transfer Impact Checklist 
Will subproject require land use rights transfer or is there a pre-existing land use rights transfer 
agreement?  (Y/N) If yes, complete form.  If no, leave form blank. 
Types of 
activity* 
Cooperatives 
involved 
Enterprises 
involved 
Production bases 
involved 
HHs 
involved 
Farmland 
area (mu) 
Y
e
s 
N
o 
If no, explain 
Y
e
s 
N
o 
If no, explain 
Total 
*Cropping, animal processing etc. HH=household. 
Land use rights transfer (LURT) agreement 
New LURT agreement 
Has the agreement been prepared in 
accordance with the LURT Framework in 
ESMS-Appendix 5? 
Has third party due diligence been 
conducted? If yes, give results in the 
“Notes” section. 
Has the agreement been endorsed by the 
Township Agriculture Station or higher 
authority? 
Has the agreement been signed by all 
affected households? 
Has the agreement been signed by at least 
70% of spouses? 
Pre-existing LURT agreement 
Was the agreement prepared  in 
accordance with the LURT Framework in 
ESMS-Appendix 5? 
Has third party due diligence been 
conducted?  If yes, give results in the 
“Notes” section. 
Was the agreement endorsed by the 
Township Agriculture Station or higher 
authority? 
Has the agreement been signed by all 
affected households? 
Has the agreement been signed by at least 
70% of spouses? 
Appendix 5 
Are there any outstanding issues?  If yes, 
give details in the “Notes” section. 
Overall conclusion on LURT Agreement 
Agreement is in place and acceptable (in accordance with LURT Framework)    
Agreement requires further due diligence   
Agreement requires resolution of outstanding issues   
Agreement is not acceptable (not in accordance with LURT Framework)   
Reason for conclusion: 
Notes: 
WORKSHEET 4: Ethnic Minorities Impact Checklist 
Will subproject involve any ethnic minority communities? (Y/N)   If yes, complete form. If no, leave 
blank. 
Name of ethnic minority:  
Include consideration of: (i) magnitude of impact (including customary rights for use and access to land 
and/or resources, socioeconomic status, cultural and communal integrity, health, education, livelihoods, 
social security, indigenous knowledge); (ii) the vulnerability of the affected community. 
ETHNIC MINORTIY ISSUES FROM PAST ACTIVITY OR EXISTING FACILITIES  
Involuntary Issues 
Are  there  any  ethnic  minority  issues  from 
past activity? 
Are  there  any  ethnic  minority  issues  from 
existing facilities? 
Y
e
s
* 
If Yes, give information 
N
o 
*If “yes”, the subproject should be excluded e.g. in case there are outstanding ethnic minority community-related 
issues that would present legacy issues or risks to the project.  
NEW IMPACTS TO ETHNIC MINORITY COMMUNITY UNDER EQUITY INVESTMENT 
Y
e
s
/
N
o 
If Yes, give information about 
affected EM community 
Potential Impacts to Ethnic Minorities (EM) 
Will the subproject directly or indirectly benefit or 
target EM community? 
Will the subproject affect the livelihood systems of 
EM community? (e.g., food production, natural 
resource management, crafts, trade, employment) 
Is there commercial development of the cultural 
resources and knowledge of the EM? 
Is there commercial development of natural 
resources (e.g. forests, river, lake) in customary 
239 
lands under use, that would impact the livelihoods 
or cultural, ceremonial, and/or spiritual uses by 
the EMs? 
Will the subproject involve a pre-existing or new 
land use rights transfer agreement that are owned 
by EM communities? 
Proposed activities 
No. of 
villages 
No. of EM 
communities 
EM 
population 
Beneficial and/or Adverse Impacts 
1.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Overall conclusion on Indigenous Peoples Category (circle one): 
A 
B 
C  
Note: The overall project has been categorized C based on due diligence during the project preparation. Category 
A and B subprojects are not expected. Only Category C subprojects are expected.  
Reason for conclusion: 
Notes: 
Appendix 5 
WORKSHEET 5: Green Agriculture and Ecotourism Design and Best Practice 
This worksheet is to improve the technical design and operation of the subprojects. HTIC will 
encourage and favor loans which contribute to non-point source pollution control and reduction, organic 
farming shifting,  green economy development  and climate change adaption uplift, including reduced 
use and proper disposal of agricultural chemicals, improved efficiency of water and/or energy use, soil 
conservation practices and principles, accurate pest control and fertilizing methods, recycling natural 
resources, creation of economic opportunities through low-impact tourism, conservation of biological 
diversity and cultural diversity, promotion of sustainable use and preservation of ecosystem.  
Use  the  worksheet  to  identify  which  features  below  are  most  suitable  for  the  subprojects. 
Instruct the applicant to work with the HTIC Environmental Officer to include these as relevant 
in the project design. 
Type and content 
Sustainable key features 
Irrigation facilities: 
wells,  canals, 
irrigation  pipes, 
water  use  quota  system  and 
monitoring 
Ecological agriculture: organic farming, e.g. tea, rice. 
Land preparation and leveling  Soil conservation principles including: (1) shallow ploughing and 
ripping; (2) fallow or green manure inter-cropping; (3) terrace-forming 
on  slopes;  (4)  check  dams  on  drainage  swales;  (5)  gully  head 
protection 
Water  saving  technologies  including:  (1)  pipe  irrigation  system 
rather  than  open  canal;  (2)  drip  or  sprinkler  irrigation  systems;  (3) 
irrigation  system  maintenance  Irrigation  schedule  based  on  crop 
need;  (4)  irrigation  sustainability  demonstrated  by  seasonal  water 
balances 
Including:  (1)  certified  seed  and  seedlings  sourced;  (2)  certified 
inorganic  fertilizer;  (3)  organic  fertilizer;  (4)  certified  pesticides;  (5) 
low-toxicity herbicides 
Including: (1) organic manures; (2) organic mulches; (3) minimum 
tillage; (4) chemical waste disposal plan 
Production materials 
Production practices: 
soil  preparation,  sowing,  crop 
nutrition, 
pest  management, 
harvesting 
Technical support 
The  following  technical  support  must  be  accessible:  (1)  crop-
specific land preparation; (2) cultivation standard; (3) fertilization; (4) 
irrigation; (5) pest and disease control; (6) management techniques. 
Ecological  tourism:  tourism  infrastructure;  natural  resource  conservation;  biological  and  cultural 
diversity conservation 
Construction: 
building, pavements, etc.  
embarkments, 
Energy supply 
Materials 
Guideline and education 
Nature conservation  
Technical support 
Including:  (1)  ecological  embarkment,  e.g.  stone  gabion;  (2)  low 
impact  development  practices,  e.g.  porous  pavement,  green  roof, 
rain garden, bio-swale, vegetated filter strip  
Including: (1) clean energy preferred, e.g. solar and hydro energy; 
(2) low energy consumption practices; (3) energy recycling plan  
Including:  (1)  environment  friendly  construction  materials;  (2) 
environment friendly decoration materials; (3) degradable disposable 
materials 
Including:  (1)  mitigation  of  negative  environmental  impacts;  (2) 
improving  awareness  of  tourists  to  protect  the  environment;  (3) 
promotion of small scale, slow growth and local control in tourism 
Including:  (1)  water  and  other  natural  resource  management;  (2) 
biodiversity  conservation;  (3)  environmental  impact  mitigation;  (4) 
ecosystem restoration after construction 
The  following  technical  support  must  be  accessible:  (1) 
engineering best practice; (2) energy recycling; (3) natural resource 
management; 
low-impact 
development strategy; (6) environmental risk mitigation plan. 
(4)  ecosystem  preservation; 
(5) 
241 
X. 
ESMS-APPENDIX 4. OUTLINE OF AN INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION 
REPORT 
Under the ADB Safeguard Policy (SPS, 2009), an initial environmental examination report is required 
for all Projects classified as “Environment Category B”. This appendix provides the outline for an initial 
environmental examination report. No “Category A” Projects will be supported by the loan.  
A.  Executive Summary 
This section describes concisely the critical facts, significant findings, and recommended actions. 
B.  Policy, Legal, and Administrative Arrangement 
This  section  discusses  the  national  and  local  legal  and  institutional  arrangement  within  which  the 
environmental assessment is carried out. It also identifies Project-relevant international environmental 
agreements to which the country is a party. 
C.  Description of the project 
This  section  describes  the  proposed  Project;  its  major  components;  and  its  geographic,  ecological, 
social,  and  temporal  context,  including  any  associated  facility  required  by  and  for  the  project  (for 
example, access roads, power plants, water supply, quarries and borrow pits, and spoil disposal). It 
normally includes drawings and maps showing the project’s layout and components, the project site, 
and the project's area of influence. 
D.  Description of the Environment (Baseline Data) 
This  section  describes  relevant  physical,  biological,  and  socioeconomic  conditions  within  the  study 
area. It also looks at current and proposed development activities within the project's area of influence, 
including those not directly connected to the project. It indicates the accuracy, reliability, and sources 
of the data. 
E.  Anticipated Environmental Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
This section predicts and assesses the project's likely positive and negative direct and indirect impacts 
to physical, biological, socioeconomic (including occupational health and safety, community health and 
safety, vulnerable groups and gender issues, and impacts on livelihoods through environmental media, 
and  physical cultural resources in the  project's area of influence, in quantitative terms to the extent 
possible; identifies mitigation measures and any residual negative impacts that cannot be mitigated; 
explores opportunities for enhancement; identifies and  estimates  the  extent  and  quality  of  available  
data,  key  data  gaps,  and  uncertainties associated with predictions and  specifies  topics  that  do 
not    require    further  attention;  and  examines  global,  transboundary,  and  cumulative  impacts  as 
appropriate. 
F.  Analysis of Alternatives 
This section examines alternatives to the proposed Project site, technology, design, and operation—
including the no Project alternative—in terms of their potential environmental impacts; the feasibility of 
mitigating these impacts; their capital and recurrent costs; their suitability under local conditions; and 
their  institutional,  training,  and  monitoring  requirements.  It  also  states  the  basis  for  selecting  the 
particular  Project  design  proposed  and,  justifies  recommended  emission  levels  and  approaches  to 
pollution prevention and abatement. 
G.  Environmental Management Plan 
This section deals with the set of  mitigation  and management measures to  be  taken during Project 
implementation to avoid, reduce, mitigate, or compensate for adverse environmental impacts (in that 
order of priority). 
H.  Conclusion and Recommendation 
This section provides the conclusions drawn from the assessment and provides recommendations. 
Appendix 5 
XI. 
ESMS-APPENDIX 5. ENVIRONMENTAL SITE INSPECTION CHECKLIST 
Note:  This  form  is  designed  for  use  by  the  Huangshan  Trust  Investment  Company 
environmental officer and financial officers during site inspections, and may not be exhaustive. 
Modifications and  additions may  be  necessary to  suit  individual  subproject  activities  and to 
address any specific environmental issues. 
Location: 
Inspection Date: 
Inspection Time: 
Inspection by: 
_____________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________ 
Inspection Item 
Yes  No  N/A  Remarks (i.e. problem observed, 
possible cause of problem, and/or 
proposed corrective/ preventative 
actions) 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
2. 
1.  Has contractor appointed a construction 
supervisor and is the supervisor on-site? 
Is information pertaining to construction 
disclosed at construction site (construction 
period, contractor information, etc.)? 
3.  Are chemicals/hazardous products and 
waste stored on impermeable surfaces in 
secure, covered areas? 
Is there evidence of oil spillage?  
4. 
5.  Are chemicals stored and labeled 
6. 
7. 
properly? 
Is construction equipment well 
maintained? (any black smoke observed) 
Is there evidence of excessive dust 
generation?   
8.  Are there enclosures around the main 
dust-generating activities?  
9.  Does contractor regularly consult with 
residents to identify concerns? 
10.  Is there evidence of excessive noise? If 
yes, describe location and equipment.  
11.  Any noise mitigation measures adopted 
(e.g. use noise barrier / enclosure)? 
12.  Is construction wastewater and domestic 
wastewater discharged to sewer systems 
(if possible), or are on-site treatment 
facilities (e.g. septic tank, portable latrine) 
provided? 
13.  Is there any wastewater discharged to soil 
or surface water?  
14.  Is the site kept clean and tidy? (e.g. litter 
free, good housekeeping) 
15.  Are separated labeled containers/ areas 
provided for facilitating recycling and 
waste segregation? 
16.  Are construction wastes / recyclable 
wastes and general refuse removed off 
site regularly? 
17.  Have hazardous wastes been identified 
(such as asbestos, PCBs)?  
Inspection Item 
Yes  No  N/A  Remarks (i.e. problem observed, 
possible cause of problem, and/or 
proposed corrective/ preventative 
actions) 
243 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
18.  Is safe supply of clean water and an 
adequate number of latrines provided for 
workers? 
19.  Is personal protection equipment (PPE) 
provided for workers? 
20.  Are clear information and warning signs 
placed at construction sites? 
21.  Are construction sites secure, to 
discourage access? 
22.  Are fire extinguishers / fighting facilities 
properly maintained and not expired? 
Escape not blocked / obstructed? 
23.  Is there any evidence of damage to 
vegetation, habitats, Khuvsgul Lake, or 
streams? 
24.  Are disturbed areas properly re-vegetated 
after completion of works? 
25.  Any other problems identified or 
observations made? 
N/A = not applicable. 
_______________________________________ 
Date, Name, and Signature 
Appendix 5 
XII. 
ESMS-APPENDIX 6. TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR ESMS POSITIONS 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
The Huangshan Municipal Government will apply a $100 million loan from the Asian Development 
Bank  (ADB)  to  implement  the  Anhui  Huangshan  Xin’an  River  Ecological  Protection  and  Green 
Development Project (the project). Project implementation will be coordinated by the Huangshan 
Municipal  project  management  office  (PMO).  Of  the  loan,  $8  million  will  be  on-lent  to  the 
Huangshan Trust Investment Company (HTIC) to help establish a Green Investment Fund. HTIC 
will on-lend the funds directly to qualified investees (small and medium-sized enterprises in green 
farming and ecotourism). All subprojects supported under the Green Investment Fund will be used 
for  “green”  development,  including  tea  gardens,  organic  rice,  bamboo  forestry,  orchards,  and 
ecotourism. An Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) has been developed to 
regulate  safeguards  for  the  Green  Investment  Fund  and  will  be  established  by  HTIC  within  its 
business procedures. The ESMS is the key guiding document to assess and manage the potential 
environmental and social impacts of subprojects. This is the first ESMS to be conducted by the 
HTIC. HTIC will recruit one environmental officer and one social officer to guide and oversee ESMS 
establishment and implementation. These terms of reference describe the requirements for these 
two positions. 
II. 
SCOPE AND DURATION OF WORK 
The HTIC Environment Officer and Social Officer will work with the HTIC finance officers, PMO 
Environment Office and Social Officer, and other relevant personal, to establish and implement the 
ESMS. Duration: entire project (6 years). 
III.  QUALIFICATIONS 
The HTIC Environment Office and Social Officer will have: (i) an undergraduate degree or higher 
in a relevant field (i.e. environmental and social sciences or related topics, respectively); (ii) ability 
to compile and prepare progress reports, including critical review and checking of reports and data 
from county branches; (iii) at least some familiarity with environmental, social, agricultural, and/or 
natural resource management; (iv) preferably, proficiency in spoken and written English. The HTIC 
finance officers implementing the ESMS will have demonstrated ability to: (i) communicate and 
work effectively with local communities, contractors, and government agencies; (ii) analyze data 
and  prepare  technical  reports;  at  least  some  familiarity  with  environmental,  social,  agricultural, 
and/or natural resource management (iii) willingness and health to regularly visit the subproject 
sites. 
IV.  DETAILED TASKS 
HTIC Environmental and Social Officers and HTIC finance officers: 
1. 
2. 
Develop a high level of familiarity with the ESMS and range of supporting documents to 
be  produced  (environmental  and  social  checklists,  categorization  forms,  the  different 
types  of  PRC  environmental  assessment  reports,  land  use  rights  transfer  framework, 
social and gender action plan, etc). 
Implement the ESMS, from daily implementation with qualified investees to reporting to 
HTIC. 
HTIC Environment Office and Social Officer: 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Ensure quality assurance and control for establishment and implementation of the ESMS, 
for the environmental and social components of the ESMS respectively. 
Lead the integration of the ESMS in the HTIC business procedures. 
Report on ESMS progress to HTIC senior management. 
245 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Represent the HTIC regarding the ESMS, in discussions with the PMO and other relevant 
agencies. 
Support the PMO to implement the safeguard-related training for HTIC staff. 
Incorporate the ESMS progress into the semi-annual reports to be submitted to PMO.  
HTIC finance officers: 
9. 
Implement  Steps  A–F  of  the  ESMS  for  each  equity  investment  application  under  the 
Green  Investment  Fund,  working  with  applicants,  the  PMO  and  other  agencies  as 
relevant. 
10.  For subprojects categorized as environment Category B, ensure that applicant prepares 
11. 
an initial environmental examination (see Appendix 4). 
Instruct and guide qualified investees on their requirements under the ESMS. Including: 
(i) coordination with qualified investees and/or other relevant agencies to re-design (or 
relocate)  subprojects  to  comply  with  the  ESMS;  (ii)    assist  in  the  training  of  qualified 
investees to facilitate implementation of the ESMS. 
12.  During the implementation phase of subprojects, liaise with qualified investees to ensure 
all  safeguard  related  conditions  of  the  equity  investments  (as  stated  in  the  Safeguard 
Commitment Letter attached to the equity investment) are being met. 
13.  Support the PMO to implement the project grievance redress mechanism (GRM) at the 
local level, and help ensure that potentially affected communities know about the GRM 
before the subproject commences. 
14.  Support the PMO to implement the safeguard-related training for HTIC staff. 
V. 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
From  HTIC  to  the  PMO:  semi-annual  ESMS  reports,  using  a  template  provided  by  ADB  or  a 
domestic format reviewed and approved by ADB. 
XIII.  ESMS-APPENDIX 7. LAND USE RIGHTS TRANSFER FRAMEWORK 
1. Main Principles 
This  Land  Use  Rights  Transfer  Framework  (LURTF)  is  to  help  the  Huangshan  Trust  Investment 
Company  (HTIC;  the  project  financial  intermediary  responsible  for  implementation  of  the  Green 
Investment  Fund)  and  qualified  investees  mitigate,  monitor  and  report,  potential  negative  impacts 
caused  by  land  use  rights  transfer,  and  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  ADB’s  SPS  (2009).  The  LTF 
guiding principles are: 
(i)  Equality, voluntary, legal procedure, and, fair compensation. Equality means both of parties have 
equal legal status.  Voluntary  means the transfer of land contracting management right  must be 
completely  voluntary  for  both  parties,  and  one  party  shall  not  force  another  party  to  transfer  or 
accept transfer of land. Legal procedure  means that land use rights transfer must be concluded 
per legal procedure with legal agreement. Fair compensation means the transferred land shall be 
compensated at negotiated market price.   
(ii)  Unchanged  ownership  and  agricultural  use  of  transferred  land.  Land  use  rights  transfer  means 
transferring  use  right,  not  ownership,  therefore  ownership  of  transferred  land  shall  remain 
unchanged. Yet future users of transferred land shall not change the agricultural land use nature, 
i.e., shall not convert transferred land for non-agricultural uses. 
(iii)  Priority  to  fellow-community  members.  Under  the  same  conditions,  priority  shall  be  given  to 
members of the collective economic organization (community) to obtain land use rights through 
transfer. 
(iv)  Government’s direction and administration. Department of agriculture of county government shall 
direct and administrate legal transfer of rural land 
(v)  Conflict resolution through GRM. The grievance redress system of Project counties shall be used 
to resolute complaints and conflicts, if any. 
Appendix 5 
2. Legal Framework 
All subprojects must comply with the PRC Rural Land Contract Law and Rural Land Management Right 
Transfer Management Method, other relevant policies of Anhui Province and local governments, and 
ADB’s SPS. These are listed in Appendix 1. Key laws and policies are as follows: 
(i) 
Law  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  on  Land  Contract  in  Rural  Areas  –  no  change  of 
collective  ownership;  no  change  of  agricultural  land  use  (not  allowed  to  convert  farmland  into 
construction land for establishment of permanent structures). 
(ii) 
relevant regulations of Anhui Province and Project district/county governments: 
Administration  Methods  on  Rural  Land  Use  Rights  Transfer,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  of  PRC, 
•  Land use rights transfer duration without the land contract period; 
•  Negotiated settlements between transferor and transferee; 
•  Land use rights transfer per legal procedures; 
•  Standard  contract  (with  endorsement  by  a  third  party  if  transferor  and  transferee  feel 
necessary). 
•  Official registration and documentation for land use rights transfer. 
• 
If necessary, the township agricultural station endorses the contract. 
(iii) 
PRC  Law  on  the  Mediation  and  Arbitration  of  Rural  Land  Contract  Disputes,  and  relevant 
implementation methods of Anhui provincial and Project district/county governments – mediation and 
arbitration of disputes per a bottom-up Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). 
(iv) 
ADB’s SPS  – requirements on IR does not  apply to  LURT. The  good practice   on voluntary 
agreements include meaningful consultations; negotiated agreements; establishment and functioning 
of a GRM; record-keeping; and; independent monitoring. 
In addition, the best practices in the project area also have good applications for the land use rights 
transfer under the project, such practices include: 
•  Land use rights transfer period of 5-10 years, within the land contraction period (1998-2028); 
•  Land use rights transfer rate (or land rental rate) calculated in equivalent output value of grain 
(wheat, rice); this protects transferees from price fluctuations; 
•  Endorsement of land use rights transfer contract by the township agriculture station. 
3. Legal Procedures of Land use rights transfer 
Legal procedures are as follows (also the following chart): 
(i) 
(ii) 
Information collection. Farmers with intention to transfer land present the details of the land, like 
location,  area,  usage,  and  reference  price  to  village  committee,  which  will  then  report  to  the 
township agricultural station. They can also entrust the contracted or intermediary organizations to 
transfer  their  land,  and  the  letter  of  attorney  will  be  issued  by  land  transferee,  illustrating  the 
entrusted matters, authority and deadlines, etc., with the signature of the principal. 
Information disclosure. Township agricultural station, after collecting data, will sort out information 
about land use rights transfer of different villages and establish a database. The sorted information 
will be disclosed timely by means of network, radio, newspapers, board, electronic display, and 
etc. The township station  will also report to the county (district) agricultural bureau for updating 
land use rights transfer databases. 
(iii)  Negotiation  between  transferor  and  transferee.  With  the  arrangement  of  township  agricultural 
station, both sides negotiate about the land use rights transfer conditions and price based on the 
principle of equality, voluntariness and mutual benefiting. 
(iv)  Signing  land  use  rights  transfer  contract.  When  both  parties  agree  on  conditions  and  price, 
township  agricultural  station  provides  4-5  copies  of  a  standard  contract  (the  fifth  copy  for 
endorsement, if needed), for both parties to sign. Township agricultural station also endorses the 
contract. 
247 
(v)  Endorsing  land  use  rights  transfer  contract.  The  township  agricultural  station  endorses  the 
contract. 
(vi)  Registration for land use rights transfer. Township agricultural station registers the land use rights 
transfer information timely and exactly, and submits the relevant materials to the county agriculture 
bureau for documentation. 
(vii)  Documentation.  County  agricultural  bureau  documents  all  relevant  materials  for  land  use  rights 
transferred. 
Supervising contract implementation. Both parties should perform the contract positively, and township 
agricultural  station  supervises  the  contract  execution.  In  case  of  conflicts  or  disputes,  the  township 
station will timely report to the county station, and the latter will inform HTIC synchronously. 
Land Use Rights Transfer Procedure Chart 
4. Institutional Arrangement and Responsibility 
According to relevant laws and regulations, county agricultural bureau and township agricultural stations 
should manage and guide rural land use rights transfer (LURT) in their administrative areas.  
Responsibilities of municipal agricultural bureau:  
(i)  publicity rural land use rights transfer policies;  
(ii)  direct the land use rights transfer legally and orderly;  
(iii)  guide disputes arbitration and resolution;  
(iv)  strengthen and standardize rural LURT; and  
(v)  propose solutions to problems in LURT, and develop a new mechanism for LURT. 
Responsibilities of county agricultural bureau:  
(i)  direct rural LURT and contracting;  
(ii)  set  up  a  service  center  for  LURT,  and  establish  information  network  platform,  online  trading 
and/or open trading of land to be transferred;  
Appendix 5 
(iii)  accept, manage and guide the application from rural LURT agencies;  
(iv)  settle the disputes; and  
(v)  provide consultation services for LURT policies. 
Responsibilities of township agricultural station:  
information collection, analysis and disclosure, LURT can be conducted by county or township; 
(i) 
(ii)  providing a standard contract for parties who have reached agreements on contract conditions 
and terms, and assisting them to sign contract signing;  
(iii)  functioning  as  a  third  party  to  endorse  the  signed  contract,  if  requested  by  land  use  rights 
transferor and transferee; 
(iv)  formulating a system for registering the rural LURT, and record the relevant information timely 
and exactly;  
(v)  documenting land use rights transfer materials; 
(vi)  investigating and rectify illegal LURT;  
(vii)  settling disputes about rural LURT;  
(viii) guide and administrate LURT legally; and  
(ix)  provide consultancy services. 
Responsibilities of village committee:  
information collection and classification on LURT, to be reported to township agricultural station; 
(i) 
(ii)  assisting township in settling disputes. 
Responsibilities of district/county PMO: 
(i)  supervising contract execution; and  
(ii)  participating in conflict/dispute resolution at county level if not resolved at township level. 
5. Land Use Rights Transfer Contract 
Land use rights transfer contract shall include the following clauses:  
location, borders, area and quality of the land for transferring;  
(i)  names and domiciles of two parties;  
(ii) 
(iii)  term of transfer and dates of beginning and completion;  
(iv)  ways of transfer;  
(v)  usage of land; 
(vi)  rights and obligations of two parties;  
(vii)  land use rights transfer expense and method of payment;  
(viii) handling of appurtenance and relevant facilities after expiry of contract;  
(ix)  liabilities for breach of the contract; 
(x)  method of conflict resolution; 
(xi)  other clause that both parties thought necessary;  
(xii)  stamping of endorsing agency; and  
(xiii) date of contract conclusion.  
Contract used in the Project, as well as in Anhui Province, is normative, which is prepared by the Anhui 
Department of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry. 
6. Measures to Safeguard Interests of Contract Parties 
The following measures will be taken to safeguard the interests of contract parties: 
(i) 
In case of severe damage of transferred land due to natural disasters or force majeure during the 
contract  term,  both  parties  can  terminate  or  change  the  contract  through  negotiation,  and  the 
land  shall  be  returned  to  the  original  users  for  cultivation.  When  there  are  specific  contract 
provisions on severe damage of land, the provisions prevail. 
(ii)  Contract  agreement regarding policy subsidies to  farmers for grain  production  and production 
masteries.  
(iii)  At least 70% of the land leasing contracts will be signed by both husband and wife in case of 
involving individual households. 
(iv)  Contract endorsement by township per request of contract parties, free of charge. 
(v)  According to the PRC’s Rural Land Contract Law and Rural Land Management Right Transfer 
Management  Method  and  other  relevant  LURT  laws  and  regulations  of  Anhui  Province  and 
districts/counties, the LURT duration shall be negotiated equally by both parties, but within the 
249 
limit of the rural land contract (duration form 19980-2028 or so). 
(vi)  The  LURT  rate  will  be  ensured  according  to  land  type,  feasibility,  grade,  and  condition  of 
referential  corps,  or  even  the  price  of  LURT  in  nearby  villages.  Taking  farmer’s  interest  into 
consideration, both transferor and transferee should set a time to renegotiate land price in case 
of LURT for over 5 years. It is recommended to adjust the rate after five years. 
7. Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for Social Safeguards 
Where  LURT  contract  is  based  on  negotiations  and  mutual  agreement,  complicated  disputes  are 
unlikely  to  occur.  However,  there  might  be  some  unexpected  issues  during  and  after  land  being 
transferred.  According  to  Law of the People's Republic of China on the Mediation and  Arbitration  of 
Rural  Land  Contract  Disputes,  the  project  has  set  up  a  transparent  and  efficient  grievance  redress 
procedure  to  settle  such  disputes  and  defaults  after  land  use  rights  transfer.  The  GRM  for  social 
safeguards is described in Section V of the ESMS. 
