Appendix 3 
Project Readiness Financing 
Project Administration Manual 
Project Number: 53189-001 
Loan Number: {PRFXXXX} 
November 2020 
India: Himachal Pradesh Subtropical Horticulture, 
Irrigation, and Value Addition Readiness Project  
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
CONTENTS 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
A. 
Overall Project Readiness Financing Project Implementation Plan 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
B. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Key Assumptions 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category and Financier 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Financial Management Assessment 
Disbursement 
Accounting 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
Procurement of Consulting Services 
Procurement of Goods and Civil Works 
Procurement Plan 
Consultant’s Terms of Reference. 
SAFEGUARDS 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Environmental Safeguards 
Social Safeguards 
Gender 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
VII. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION 
A. 
B. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Reporting 
VIII.  ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
IX. 
X. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
LIST OF ATTACHMENTS  
Attachment A. Terms of Reference for Consulting Services 
Attachment B. Procurement Plan  
Attachment C. Quarterly Progress Report Template  
Attachment D. Standard Terms of Reference for the Audit of ADB-assisted Projects  
Attachment E. Detailed Grievance Redress Mechanism  
Attachment F. Environment Protection Guidelines 
Attachment G. Sample Memorandum of Understanding for Donation of Farmers’ Land under the PRF  
Attachment H. Involuntary Resettlement Impact Categorization Checklist  
5 
5 
8 
8 
11 
12 
13 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
17 
19 
21 
23 
25 
25 
27 
27 
27 
28 
28 
28 
29 
32 
33 
33 
33 
34 
34 
35 
35 
Project Administration Manual for Project Readiness Financing: Purpose and Process 
The project administration manual (PAM) for project readiness financing (PRF) is an abridged version of 
the regular PAM of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and describes the essential administrative and 
management requirements to implement PRF  following the policies and procedures of the government 
and ADB. The PAM should include references to all available templates and instructions either by linking 
to relevant URLs or directly incorporating them in the PAM. 
The  Department  of  Horticulture  (DOH,  executing  and  implementing  agency),  and  the  Department  of 
Irrigation and Public Health (DIPH, implementing agency), are wholly responsible for the implementation 
of ADB-financed PRF projects, as agreed between the borrower and ADB, and following the policies and 
procedures  of  the  government  and  ADB.  ADB  staff  are  responsible  for  supporting  implementation, 
including  compliance  by  DOH  and  DIPH  of  their  obligations  and  responsibilities  for  PRF  project 
implementation following ADB’s policies and procedures. 
In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the loan agreement, the provisions 
of the PRF loan agreement will prevail. 
After  ADB’s  approval  of  the  PRF  proposal,  changes  in  implementation  arrangements  are  subject  to 
agreement and approval pursuant to relevant government and ADB administrative procedures (including 
the Project Administration Instructions) and upon such approval, they will be subsequently incorporated 
in this PAM. 
ADB 
CAG 
CDR 
CHPMA 
DOF 
DIPH 
DoH 
DOP 
EA 
EARF 
EC 
ECOP 
EMP 
FMA 
GC  
GoHP 
GRM 
HP 
HPSHIVA 
IA 
IP 
M&E 
MIS 
O&M 
PAM 
PCR 
PMU 
PY 
PRF 
QCBS 
RFQ 
SOE 
SPS 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Asian Development Bank 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
climate and disaster risk  
Community Horticulture Production and Marketing 
Associations  
Department of Finance 
Department of Irrigation and Public Health  
Department of Horticulture 
Department of Planning 
Executing Agency 
environmental assessment and review framework 
Executive  Committee  
Environmental Codes of Practice 
Environmental Management Plan 
financial management assessment 
Governing Council  
Government of Himachal Pradesh  
Grievance redress mechanism 
Himachal Pradesh  
Himachal Pradesh Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation 
and Value Addition 
implementing agency 
Indigenous People 
monitoring and evaluation 
Management Information System 
operations and maintenance 
project administration manual 
project completion review 
project management unit 
project year 
Project Readiness Financing Report 
Quality and Cost Based Selection 
request for quotation 
statement of expenditures 
Safeguard Policy Statement 
5 
I. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
A. 
Overall Project Readiness Financing Project Implementation Plan  
Table 1: PRF Implementation Plan 
Project year 
  Activities 
2020  
2021 
(retroactive financing)  
Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
2022 
Implementation 
Output 1: Irrigation infrastructure and water management systems established (by DIPH) 
Activity 1.1: Rehabilitate or establish 16 irrigations schemes (DIPH’s pilot activities)a 
1.1.1. Irrigation infrastructure construction designs 
prepared/due diligence 
1.1.2. Irrigation infrastructure construction contract(s) 
tendered 
1.1.3. Irrigation infrastructure construction supervision 
contract awarded 
1.1.4. Irrigation infrastructure construction  
Activity 1.2: Develop Farmer Water User Association (WUA) and operationalize WUA-based water management  
1.2.1. WUA service provider selected  
1.2.2. WUA manual prepared 
1.2.3: WUA development facilitated at the site level 
1.2.4. Draft WUA Act finalized  
1.2.5. WUAs trained in irrigation system management 
and raised awareness on WUA Act and manual 
1.2.6. Study tour on the WUA (delayed to 2021/22 due 
to the COVID-19) for DIPH and WUA members 
1.2.7. Water use monitoring system established 
1.2.8. Irrigation water distribution managed by WUAs 
Output 2. Subtropical horticulture production technology and marketing systems demonstrated (by DOH)  
Activity 2.1. Establish 17 irrigated subtropical horticulture production areas (DOH’s pilot activities) 
2.1.1. Prepare land for 17 subtropical plots   
2.1.2. Guava, Litchi, Citrus and Pomegranate plants 
established in the plots 
2.1.3. Subtropical crop inputs supplied 
2.1.4. Fencing of 17 plots established   
Activity 2.2. Establish community horticulture production and marketing associations (CHPMAs)   
2.2.1. CHPMAs established by 600 participating male 
and female farmers 
2.2.2. Training of CHPMA on marketing and value 
chain infrastructure 
2.2.3. Facilitation of CHPMA meetings with private 
sector market representatives 
2.2.4. CHPMA subtropical horticulture investment 
plans prepared (to be implemented under the ensuing 
loan)  
Output 3. Enabling environment, tools and capacity for promoting intensive irrigated subtropical horticulture 
provided (by DOH and DIPH)  
Activity 3.1: HP Horticulture Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan (HSDIP) 2023-2030 (by DOH)  
 3.1.1. Consulting firm contracted  
 3.1.2. Consultation workshops/meetings  
 3.1.3. Strategy and Investment Plan drafted 
Activity 3.2. DOH capacity building for horticulture sector management (by DOH)  
3.2.1. Subtropical horticulture production specialist 
recruited 
3.2.2. DOH training plans developed by DOH and 
updated with the support of a consultant (of 3.2.1)  
3.2.3. International horticulture value chain and high-
density production study tours  
(delayed due to the COVID-19) 
3.2.4. National horticulture production study tour 
(delayed due to the COVID-19) 
6 
2020  
(retroactive financing)  
2021 
Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
2022 
Project year 
  Activities 
3.2.5. Nursery technical development firm contracted 
(pending activity depending on the project savings) 
3.2.6. Nursery technical development supported 
(pending activity depending on the project savings)  
Activity 3.3: Farmer capacity building for climate resilient horticulture practice (by DOH)  
3.3.1. Consultant recruitment and university 
engagement finalized to prepare PoPs   
3.3.1. PoPs for key subtropical horticulture crops 
(linked to 3.2.1 and 3.2.2)  
3.3.2. CHDMA + DOH staff training of PoPs  
3.3.3. PoPs revised based on the PRF implementation 
experience 
Activity 3.4: DIPH capacity building for WUA-based water use management (by DIPH) 
3.4.1 Consulting firm contracted (on climate resilient 
irrigation, hydrology and natural resource 
management) 
3.4.2. DIPH staff training plan/materials developed by 
consultants and DIPH specialists 
3.4.3. DIPH national irrigation innovation study tour 
(delayed due to the COVID-19)  
3.4.4. DIPH trainings   
Activity 3.5: Scientific horticulture monitoring (by DOH and DIPH) 
3.5.1. Contracting scientific studies of horticulture 
cropsb 
3.5.2. Contracting scientific studies of irrigation 
systems  
3.5.3. PRF monitoringc  
Output 4. Ensuing investment project and its implementation readiness prepared (by DOH and DIPH)  
Activity 4.1. Prepare ensuing loan RRP and associated documents (by DOH and DIPH)  
4.1.1. At least 40% of the project target areas jointly 
identified by DOH and DIPH considering criteria 
provided by the project 
4.1.2. Consulting firm contracted (for DOH and DIPH)  
4.1.3. Feasibility studies of at least 40% of the areas 
conducted  
4.1.4. Detailed design of 40% of the HPSHIVA 
irrigation infrastructure (DIPH)  
4.1.5. Detailed design of 40% of the HPSHIVA VC 
infrastructure design (DOH)  
4.1.6. Draft HPSHIVA RRP prepared and draft 
procurement plan approved 
4.1.7. Farmer group facilitator contracted (linked to 
2.2.4) (DOH)  
4.1.8. Farmer groups (for the ensuing loan) 
established and surveyed (DOH)  
4.1.9. Water User Associations (for the ensuing loan) 
established (DIPH)  
4.1.10. Additional 20% area identification and its 
feasibility studies conducted (under the retroactive 
financing of the ensuing project) 
Activity 4.2. Project readiness requirements for the ensuing loan (by DOH and DIPH)  
4.2.1. At least 50% of land acquisition (if required) 
completed  
4.2.2. Ensuing project horticulture production and 
predator-proof fencing tendered (DOH) 
4.2.3. Ensuing project irrigation infrastructure 
construction tendered (DIPH) 
4.2.4. Bids evaluated (DOH and DIPH) 
4.2.5. Ensuing loan PMU established  
4.2.6. Ensuing loan PMU consultants recruited  
4.2.7. Consultants for the ensuing project 
implementation recruited  
7 
2020  
(retroactive financing)  
2021 
Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4  Q1  Q2  Q3  Q4 
2022 
Project year 
  Activities 
4.2.8. Bids for contract worth at least 30% of the 
project cost received by fact-finding mission  
4.2.9. Consulting awards completed and at least 30% 
contracts for civil works awarded before loan signing  
Management Activities (by PMU)  
       Submission of quarterly progress report 
       Submission of annual report 
       Submission of APFS 
Ensuing Loan Processing (by GoHP and ADB)  
Ensuing loan fact finding mission in April 2022  
Ensuing loan quality assurance meeting in May 2022  
Ensuing loan negotiation in July 2022  
Ensuing loan approval in September 2022  
Ensuing loan signing in October 2022 
Ensuing loan effectiveness in December 2022  
ADB = Asian Development Bank, APFS = audited project financial statement, CHPMA = community horticulture production and 
marketing association, GoHP = Government of Himachal Pradesh; HPSHIVA = Himachal Pradesh Sub-tropical Horticulture, Irrigation 
and Value Addition Project, PoPs = Package of Practices, PRF = project readiness financing, RRP = ADB Report and 
Recommendation of the President; WUA = water user association.  
a The guidelines of selecting irrigation schemes included selecting the following 5 types of subprojects: (i) an existing high head pump 
scheme that can demonstrate the above components; (ii) an existing weir or river bed infiltration water source and gravity supply and 
distribution system; (iii) a small dam and gravity supply piped scheme; (iv) a system with catchment management interventions, tank 
storage and gravity supply; and (v) free intake on larger river and low head, solar powered pumping. The selection criteria applied are: 
(i) schemes where the main system has recently been completed or will shortly be completed; (ii) existing irrigation schemes requiring 
rehabilitation in preference to greenfield sites; (iii) gravity fed or low lift solar powered pump schemes in preference to high lift schemes; 
(iv) opportunities for innovation in system design and additional water storage; (v) stable terraces with suitable soils; and (vi) willing 
male and female smallholder landowners. 
b These studies will be contracted by the PMU during implementation. The subjects to be studied will be identified as the project 
implementation evolves e.g. pest and weed management, plant nutrition, plant husbandry, irrigation frequency, market analysis, etc. 
c The subjects to be monitored will include farmer attitude surveys, monitoring of seedling viability, and assessments of group 
activity/cohesiveness. 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
II. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
A. 
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
Table 2: Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities 
8 
PRF Project Implementation 
Organizations 
A.  Oversight body 
B.  Executing agency (EA) 
C. 
Implementing agencies (IA)  
C.   Beneficiaries 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Governing Council   
(i)  Overall coordination of the sector investment projects in the state  
(ii) 
Interdepartmental coordination of the project  
Executing Committeeb  
(i)  Overall coordination of the project  
(ii)  Provide necessary policy guidance related to project implementation 
DOH through the PMU  
(i)  Oversee and monitor project implementation as well as the adequacy 
of overall project funding 
(ii)  Project progress reports  
(iii)  Project account management by establishing and maintaining project 
account, submitting withdrawal applications and administer statement-
of-expenditure and maintain supporting documents  
(iv)  Complete loan financial records  
(v)  Day-to-day project execution, supervision and management  
(vi)  Monitor and provide updated procurement plan to ADB  
DOH and DIPH through the PIUs (one PIU in each department) 
(i)  Oversee day-to-day project execution, supervision and management 
(ii)  Consultant recruitment and procurement of goods, works and non-
consulting services    
(iii)  Collect necessary inputs to prepare quarterly and annual project 
progress reports environmental and social monitoring reports, and the 
project completion report. 
(iv)  Carry out quality assurance review to ensure that subprojects meet 
established project standards. 
(v)  Open, operate and maintain the advance account and supervise 
subaccounts, prepare project accounts and financial statements for 
DOH and DIPH each and thereafter EA/DOH’s compilation of financial 
report and the audited project financial statements into one file, and 
process payments to contractors/consultants/suppliers 
(vi)  Conduct financial, environmental, and social due diligence for 
proposed subprojects as necessary in consultation with relevant 
government agencies and ADB 
(vii)  Carry out project grievance redress mechanism 
(viii) Supervise consultants’ work and provide timely guidance  
WUAs (composed of villagers and elected by villagers) 
(i)  Ensure community engagement in irrigation system design 
(ii)  Prepare seasonal water use plans for WUA irrigation area. 
(iii)  Monitor water use by group members 
(iv)  Form higher level organizations that progressively take up the 
management of irrigation schemes. 
(v)  Establish subcommittees (water management, O&M, etc.). 
(vi)  Record water fee collection and report to block/district DIPH. 
Community Horticulture Production and Marketing Association 
(CHPMA) (composed of villagers and elected by villagers) 
(i)  Coordinate the horticulture development planning practice by the 
beneficiary male and female farmers  
PRF Project Implementation 
Organizations 
D. Consultants   
9 
(ii)  Submit applications to PMU for horticulture crop establishment grant 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
financing 
(iii)  Manage the allocation of grant financing to group members 
(iv)  Coordinate group member capacity building programs 
(v)  Liaise with public and private sector market operators 
(vi)  Form higher level organizations to establish public-private partnerships 
for value addition and improved market access. 
Construction supervision 
(i)  Construction supervision and contract monitoring of 16 irrigation 
schemes   
Horticulture sector strategy and investment plan preparation  
(i)  undertake a desk review of relevant activities conducted by 
government or other development partners on the selected horticulture 
commodity value chains 
(ii)  establish public-private engagement platforms for market-based 
horticulture value chain strategic planning 
(iii)  conduct value chain analyses for each of the selected horticulture 
commodities 
(iv)  conduct assessments of demand and market conditions for products 
(v) 
within selected value chains  
identify constraints and barriers (financial, technology, infrastructure, 
human resources/skills, marketing, regulatory, policy, institutional)  
(vi)  recommend public investments required to support the selected value 
chains  
(vii)  identify appropriate models for public-private partnerships in 
agribusiness 
(viii) evaluate the public organization and capacity of relevant government 
institutions and their staff and propose institutional, policy and capacity 
building reforms 
(ix)  consolidate the outcome of the above tasks and prepare a 
development strategy for the HP horticulture sector and action and 
investment plans for increased commercialization of the selected 
commodities 
POP development and training  
(i)  Baseline assessment of the selected horticulture fruits, varieties and 
the clusters under the PRF 
(ii)  Organize a workshop for consultation and develop the draft POPs  
(iii)  Create necessary audio-visual materials for easy communication of 
POPs for dissemination with the farmers   
(iv)  Assess the training needs of targeted farmers  
(v)  Select POPs trainers in consultation with the DOH abd organize 
training of trainers in POPs-based technology and its application 
(vi)  Assist DOH in organizing training of farmers through selected trained  
trainers  
(vii)  Create a network of crop/fruit experts for supporting the farmers in the 
use of POPs under the program. 
(viii) Support DOH in developing a website or modules for knowledge 
website to host the POPs and related knowledge material for public 
access  
Capacity building  
(i)  Gap analysis of the current extension schemes of DOH and DIPH  
(ii)  Assessment of current planning and design practices and procedures 
of DOH and DIPH 
(iii)  Development and implementation framework of a capacity building, 
technical assistance and training of trainers   
(iv)  Design capacity building  programs at state, district and lower levels 
PRF Project Implementation 
Organizations 
E.  Asian Development Bank 
10 
(v)  Develop relevant training materials for the agreed capacity building 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
program  
(vi)  Provide a training of trainers for DOH horticulture specialists and DIPH 
irrigation specialists; 
(vii)  Supervising a district level training program implemented by the 
Trained Trainers 
WUA facilitation  
(i)  Support DIPH to establish a unit for WUA and prepare terms of 
reference at Sub-district, Block and Facilitator levels   
(ii)  Prepare a unified WUA manual in collboaration with the World Bank 
and JICA under the leadership of DIPH   
(iii)  Prepare a WUA Development Plan that schedules the institutional 
development and training of the WUAs  
(iv)  Establish systems and procedures to monitor the progress of WUA 
establishment and training  
(v)  Advise and prepare recommendations on participation of the WUAs in 
aspects of planning and design of irrigation construction activities   
(vi)  Develop a methodology whereby legal WUA construction contracts 
could be formulated and implemented by the WUAs    
(vii)  Develop methodoligies with the DIPH Design Unit tailored to the needs 
of each scheme including field testing of equitabe means of water 
management, irrigation scheduling, volumetrically measured cost 
recovery and other aspects of system management and infrastructure 
handover  
(viii) Ensure that information on the WUA development and management 
program, including digitally recorded system water use, are 
incorporated into the Project MIS and GIS systems 
CHPMA facilitation  
(i)  Support the DoH to establish a CHPMA unit within the DOH  
(ii)  Working with the DoH prepare a CHPMA manual   
(iii)  Prepare a CHPMA Development Plan that schedules the institutional 
development and training of the CHPMAs 
(iv)  Establish systems and procedures to monitor the progress of CHPMA 
establishment and training    
(v)  Create a series of fora at district and state level for key stakeholder 
engagement 
(vi)  Advise and prepare recommendations on a value chain development 
fund    
(vii)  Ensure that information on the CHPMA development and management 
program are incorporated into the Project MIS and GIS systems. 
Ensuing project preparation  
(i)  Prepare feasibility studies as the basis of the ensuing project design  
(ii)  Prepare the ensuing project design report and its supporting 
documentsc  
(iii)  Assist the IAs to collect other documents and information as required    
to obtain project approval from government authorities and ADB  
Auditing 
(i)  Assessment of the adequacy of the project financial management 
systems, including internal controls 
(ii)  Support DOH and DIPH to enhance the system to record and manage 
supporting documents, contracts, records, and accounts 
(iii)  Support DOH and DIPH to prepare an annual audit plan  
(iv)  Follow-up on the status of past audit observations and 
recommendations to ensure timely implementation 
PRF Project Implementation 
Organizations 
11 
Management Roles and Responsibilities 
Monitor and review overall implementation of the project in consultation 
with the EA and IAs including the following:  
(i)  Project implementation schedule  
(ii)  Progress with procurement and disbursement  
(iii)  Monitor effectiveness of safeguard procedures and ensure full social 
and environmental safeguards compliance 
(iv)  Timeliness of budgetary allocation and counterpart funding 
(v)  Project expenditure  
(vi)  Review compliance with particular loan covenants 
(vii)  Monitor conformity with ADB anti-corruption policies 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CHPMAs = community horticulture production and marketing associations, DIPH = 
Department of Irrigation and Public Health, DOH = Department of Horticulture, PIU = project implementing unit, PMU 
= project management unit, POP = packages of practice, PRF = project readiness financing, WUA = water user 
association  
a The Governing Council is chaired by Minister and includes the following members: Chief Secretary, GOHP as Deputy 
Chair;  Additional  Chief  Secretary  for  Finance;  Principal  Secretary  for  Agriculture;  Secretary  for  Horticulture;  Vice 
Chancellor  for  Dr.  YS  Parmer  University  Solan  of  Horticulture  and  Forestry;  Director  of  Horticulture;  Director  of 
Agriculture; Engineering-in-Chief (projects); and Project Director. 
b The Executing Committee is chaired by Secretary for Horticulture, and Irrigation and Public Health. Members: Director 
of Horticulture; Engineer-in-Chief (Projects) for DIPH; Managing Director for HPMC; Managing Director for HPSAMB; 
Director of Research for YSP UHF Solan; and Advisor for Planning Department; Director of Agriculture;  Project Director 
of the PMU acting as the Secretary to the EC; DOH and DIPH Deputy Project Directors; nodal officer for PMU; and 
Finance Officer.   
C The list of supporting documents are provided in the Terms of Reference of consulting services 
Source: ADB 
B. 
Key Persons Involved in Implementation 
Executing Agency 
Department of Horticulture, 
Government of Himachal Pradesh 
Asian Development Bank 
Environment, Natural Resources 
and Agriculture Division of  
South Asia Department (SAER) 
Mission Leader 
Mr. Devinder Thakur 
Project Director, HPSHIVA 
Telephone  0177 262 8479  
E-mail address pmuhpshiva@gmail.com  
Mio Oka 
Director 
Telephone No. +63 977 815 3539 
E-mail address moka@adb.org  
Sunae Kim 
Natural Resource and Agriculture Specialist 
Telephone No. +63 999 999 1561 
E-mail address sunaekim@adb.org  
Project  organization  structure  and  key  staff:  the  reporting  lines  essential  internal 
1. 
structures of key organizations involved in implementation is shown in Figure 1. 
Figure 2: Project Organization Structure 
12 
III. 
COSTS AND FINANCING 
The project is estimated to cost $12.5 million.1 The government has requested a regular 
2. 
loan of $ 10.0 million from ADB’s ordinary capital resources to help finance project preparation 
and design activities. The State of Himachal Pradesh will finance the equivalent of $2.5 million for 
taxes and duties, PMU operating costs and interest during implementation. PMU operating costs 
include PMU staff salaries and per diem, vehicle and equipment operating costs. Taxes and duties 
are  estimated  to  be  $1.55  million.  ADB  will  finance  taxes  and  duties  of  $0.66  million  and  the 
government will finance taxes and duties of $0.87 million in the form of reimbursement. ADB will 
finance the expenditures in relation to civil works and equipment, consulting services, capacity 
building, and consultant operating costs. Project costs may be revised during midterm review or 
special administration review missions.  
3. 
PRF piloting activities comprise Activity 1.1 rehabilitation or establishment of 16 irrigation 
schemes and Activity 2.1. establishment of 17 irrigated subtropical horticulture production areas. 
The cost of piloting activities will not exceed $5 million of ADB’s loan for the PRF project. Once 
the  PRF  is  completed,  the  management  of  PRF  assets  will  be  continuously  done  under  the 
ensuing project.2 As part of the clear transfer of PRF asset management responsibilities, the EA 
will  ensure  that  DOH  and  DIPH  record  the  asset  in  its  books  at  its  fair  value  before  the  PRF 
completion. 
1 The cost  estimates  were prepared  by  ADB  and  the  government  using data  from  primary  and  secondary  sources. 
Figures are based on unit cost and rates prevailing in Himachal Pradesh in November 2019. 
2 If no ensuing project is to be followed by the PRF, the PRF assets will be handed over to DOH, DIPH or beneficiaries. 
As part of the handover, the EA will develop and adopt procedures for proper maintenance of the assets and secure 
funds for operating and maintaining the assets.   
13 
Climate financing of the project is estimated at $1.25 million for climate adaptation. This 
4. 
includes the costs of the preparation of packages of practices for climate-resilient practices, drip 
irrigation and farm-level water storage, recruitment of climate specialists, study tours and scientific 
studies supported by the PRF.3  
5. 
The loan will have a 15-year term, including a grace period of 3 years; an annual interest 
rate  of  determined  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  London  interbank  offered  rate  (LIBOR)-based 
lending facility and other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan agreement. The method 
of repayment will be a straight-line amortization.  
6. 
The project readiness loan will be refinanced under the ensuing loan. The refinancing date 
is the expected date of effectiveness of the ensuing loan agreement and will generally be adjusted 
to coincide with the actual effectiveness date of the ensuing loan agreement. The refinancing date 
will be before the first principal repayment date of the project readiness loan. 
A. 
7. 
Key Assumptions 
The following key assumptions underpin the cost estimates and financing plan: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Exchange rate: RS74.3541 = $1.00 (as of 27 August 2020). 
Physical  contingencies  computed  at  10%  for  civil  works,  equipment,  training, 
vehicles  and  administrative  costs  and  5%  on  consultancy.  Price  contingencies 
based  on  expected  cumulative  inflation  over  the  implementation  period  are  as 
follows: 
Table 3: Escalation Rates for Price Contingency Calculation 
Item 
Foreign rate of price inflation 
Domestic rate of price inflation 
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.  
2020 
-0.5% 
3.0% 
2021 
1.6% 
4.0% 
2022 
1.7% 
4.0% 
Average 
0.9% 
3.7% 
B. 
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
Table 4: Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds  
Number 
Item 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Equipment, 
materials and 
capacity 
building 
Civil works 
Consultants 
Vehicles 
Unallocated 
Total 
Total Amount Allocated for 
ADB Financing ($)  
1,500,000 
% of Total 
Financing 
84.7% 
Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account 
Percent of total expenditure claimed 
3,500,000 
4,170,000 
160,000 
670,000 
10,000,000 
89.3% 
Percent of total expenditure claimed  
100% 
Percent of total expenditure claimed  
82% 
Percent of total expenditure claimed 
ADB=Asian Development Bank 
Source: ADB estimates.  
3 Climate Change Assessment of the ensuing loan will also cover the PRF given that all the PRF target areas are part 
of the ensuing project and PRF pilot activities will be expanded under the ensuing project. 
14 
C. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category and Financier 
Table 5: Project base cost estimates by expenditure category and financier 
Asian Development 
Bank 
The Government 
Total 
Amount 
($'000) 
% of Cost 
Category 
Amount 
($'000) 
% of Cost 
Category 
Amount 
($'000) 
Taxes and 
Duties 
A. Ensuing loan preparation 
1. Consultants 
2. Capacity building 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Pilot-testing 
1. Civil works 
2. Vehicles 
3. Equipment and Materials 
Subtotal (B) 
C. Recurrent cost 
1. PMU staff salaries and expenses 
2. Operation and maintenance 
Subtotal (C) 
4,179.1 
599.6 
4,778.7 
3,459.4 
166.2 
906.6 
4,532.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0% 
84.7% 
97.8% 
89.3% 
82.0% 
84.7% 
88.1% 
0.0 
107.9 
107.9 
415.1 
36.6 
163.2 
614.9 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
1,195.6 
370.3 
1,565.9 
Total Base Cost (A+B+C) 
9,310.9 
80.3% 
2,288.7 
D. Contingencies 
1. Physical 
2. Price 
Subtotal (D) 
602.9 
88.8 
689.1 
85.3% 
85.3% 
85.3% 
103.7 
15.4 
119.1 
0.0% 
15.3% 
2.2% 
10.7% 
18.0% 
15.3% 
11.9% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
100.0% 
19.7% 
14.7% 
14.7% 
14.7% 
4,179.1 
707.5 
4,886.7 
3,874.5 
202.7 
1,069.8 
5,147.1 
1,195.6 
370.3 
1,565.9 
637.5 
107.9 
745.4 
415.1 
36.6 
163.2 
722.8 
6.8 
56.5 
63.3 
11,599.7 
1,423.6 
703.9 
104.2 
808.1 
93.3 
13.8 
107.1 
E. Financial Charges During Implementation (E) 
0.0 
0.0% 
100.0 
100.0% 
100.0 
0.0 
Total Project Cost (A+B+C+D+E) 
10,000.0 
80.0% 
2,507.8 
20.0% 
12,507.8 
1,530.7 
PMU = Project Management Unit  
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
D. 
Detailed Cost Estimates by Year 
Table 6: Total project expenditure by year (Base cost) 
($ million) 
15 
Item 
A. Consulting Services 
1. Consultants 
2. Capacity building 
Subtotal (A) 
B. Pilot-testing 
1. Civil works 
2. Vehicles 
3. Equipment and Materials 
Subtotal (B) 
C. Recurrent cost 
1. PMU staff salaries and expenses 
2. Operation and maintenance 
Subtotal (C)  
Total Base Cost (A+B+C) 
D. Contingencies 
1. Physical 
2. Price 
Subtotal (D) 
E. Interest Charges During Implementation 
Total Project Cost (A+B+C+D+E) 
PMU = Project Management Unit. 
Note: Numbers may not sum precisely because of rounding 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
Total Cost 
2021 
2022 
4,179.1 
707.5 
4,886.7 
3,874.5 
202.7 
1,069.8 
5,147.1 
1,195.6 
370.3 
1,565.9 
11,599.7 
703.9 
104.2 
808.1 
100.0 
12,507.8 
1,972.8 
503.0 
2,475.9 
3,358.5 
202.7 
1,035.5 
4,596.8 
579.1 
204.5 
783.6 
7,856.3 
578.4 
48.4 
626.8 
0.0 
8,483.1 
2,206.3 
245.5 
2,410.8 
516.0 
0.0 
34.3 
550.3 
616.4 
165.8 
782.3 
3,743.4 
125.6 
55.8 
181.3 
100.0 
4,024.7 
16 
E. 
Contract and Disbursement S-Curve  
Cumulative contract award and disbursement (ADB Loan)
0
0
0
'
$
S
U
12,000.0
10,000.0
8,000.0
6,000.0
4,000.0
2,000.0
0.0
2021-Q1 2021-Q2 2021-Q3 2021-Q4 2022-Q1 2022-Q2 2022-Q3 2022-Q4
Year by Quarter
Contract award
Disbursement
Table 7: Contract Award and Disbursement Projections 
Contract Awards 
(in USD'000) 
Year 
Q2 
2021  7,127.0  2,425.8  193.5  126.8 
0.0 
126.8 
2022 
Total Contract Awards    
0.0 
0.0 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Disbursements 
(in USD ‘000) 
Q2 
Q1 
Total 
9,873.2  4,030.6  2,471.2  1,009.0 
374.4 
126.8 
455.0 
374.4 
Q3 
10,000.0  Total Disbursements   
Q4 
877.6 
407.8 
Total 
8,388.4 
1,611.6 
10,000.0 
Fund flow diagram: The Government of Himachal Pradesh will provide DOH and DIPH 
8. 
with sufficient budget to finance the project expenditures. Subsequently, DOH and DIPH will claim 
the  share  of  expenditures  to  be  covered  by  ADB  on  a  reimbursement  basis  by  submitting 
withdrawal applications through the Borrower to ADB. ADB will pay the Borrower out of the loan, 
and the Borrower will channel the funds to the Government of Himachal Pradesh.  
Figure 3 Fund Flow Diagram 
ADB
WAs/claims for 
reimbursement
GOI/MOF
CAAA account (RBI)
Flow of Funds  =
Flow of documents  =
Reimbursements in 
$
Release in INR
GOI -MOF - DEA  
(CAAA)
State Treasury 
(GoHP)
WAs/claims for 
reimbursement
GoHP Budget release (prefinancing & 
counterpart funds) in INR
DOH 
(PMU -  preparation 
of WAs)
Forms & Supporting 
Documentation for WA 
purposes
Payments
DIPH
Invoices, 
etc.
Invoices, 
etc.
Contractors, Suppliers, Service Providers, Consultants, Project Staff, etc.. 
17 
IV. 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
A. 
Financial Management Assessment 
9. 
The  financial  management  assessment  (FMA)  was  conducted  in  November  2019  in 
accordance with ADB’s Guidelines for the Financial Management and Analysis of Projects and 
the Financial Due Diligence: A Methodology Note.  The FMA considered the capacity of the two 
implementing agencies, DOH and DIPH, including funds-flow arrangements, staffing, accounting 
and financial reporting systems, financial information systems, and internal and external auditing 
arrangements. 
The FMA found that DOH and DIPH have adequate financial management capability to (i) 
10. 
record  the  required  financial  transactions,  (ii)  provide  reliable  annual  financial  statements  and 
audit  reports  in  a  timely  manner,  administer  the  SOE  procedure  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
disbursement handbook and (iv) safeguard the financial assets.  However, the FMA also identified 
the following financial management (FM) risks: (i) implementation arrangement that engages two 
IAs;  (ii)  lack  of  experience  with  ADB’s  FM  requirements  and  disbursement  procedures;  (iii) 
inefficient internal audit functions of IAs; and (iv) outstanding audit observations observed at the 
IA level. Overall, the FM risk is assessed as substantial. The identified risks will be mitigated by 
the following: (i) assigning  designated account staff to the project in both IAs, (ii) engaging an FM 
Expert  to  support  the  PMU;  (iii)  providing  continuous  training  in  ADB’s  FM  requirements;  iv) 
including  comprehensive  financial  information  in  the  quarterly  project  progress  reports;  v) 
establishing an project audit review committee; and vi) engaging an external firm to undertake 
internal audits for the PRF. Moreover, the project financial statements will be audited annually by 
an auditor acceptable to ADB, following auditing standards acceptable to ADB. 
11. 
DOH,  DIPH  and  ADB  have  agreed  to  implement  an  action  plan  with  key  measures  to 
address the identified risks. The FM action plan presented in Table 8 below summarizes the key 
risks, activities for mitigation, staff and/or personnel responsible, and agreed completion dates. 
Table 8: Financial Management Action Plan 
Risk Area 
Staffing 
Staffing 
Staffing 
Planning 
Agreed action 
Assign a dedicated accountant to the project to 
ensure each IA maintains separate books of 
accounts, financial reports generated in a timely 
manner and in agreed format and ADBs audit 
requirements are complied with. 
Hire an external FM expert to support the PMU/DOH 
and DIPH.  
to  project 
Develop  and  implement  an  FM  training  plan  with 
reporting,  ADB 
regards 
disbursement procedures and systems (CPD & LFIS) 
and FM and audit requirements 
Prepare a consolidated the annual work program and 
budget for the entire project 
financial 
Responsib
ility 
DOH and 
DIPH 
Timeframe 
Within one month 
after loan 
effectiveness.  
PMU/DOH  Within one month 
PMU/DOH, 
DIPH and 
ADB 
PMU/DOH, 
and DIPH 
after loan 
effectiveness 
Quarterly 
throughout the 
project 
implementation;  
Annually 
throughout the 
project 
implementation 
18 
Risk Area 
Agreed action 
Accounting  Develop an FM manual for the value chain financing 
activities to be implemented under the ensuing loan. 
The manual should summarize the applicable FM 
arrangements and cover the flow of funds, 
accounting, financial reporting and audit 
arrangements under the related activities. 
Responsib
ility 
PMU/DOH  
Timeframe 
By end of first 
year of 
implementation of 
the PRF 
Accounting  Monitor the financial performance including 
PMU/DOH  Continuous 
disbursement commitments, budget against actual 
expenditures, and physical financial performance  
Accounting   Maintain a fixed asset register for all asset created or 
Financial 
reporting 
Internal 
audit 
External 
audit 
purchased under the project. 
Include  comprehensive  financial  information  in  the 
consolidated  quarterly  progress 
to  be 
submitted to ADB.  
reports 
Engage  an  external  Chartered  Accountant  firm  to 
undertake  quarterly  internal  audits  of  the  project 
(project  internal  auditor)  in  accordance  with  agreed 
ToRs. 
Ensure the project is included in the audit plan of the 
CAG; 
PMU/DOH 
and DIPH 
PMU/DOH 
and DIPH 
DOH and 
DIPH 
Continuous 
Within 45 days 
after the end of 
the reporting 
period. 
Within six months 
after loan 
effectiveness. 
PMU/DOH 
and DIPH 
Within 2 months 
after loan 
effectiveness; 
Cause the DOH and DIPH project financial statements 
to be audited separately by CAG in accordance with 
the audit ToRs agreed between ADB, DEA and CAG; 
Submit the APFS for DOH and DIPH to ADB 
PMU/DOH 
and DIPH 
 PMU/DOH  
CAG 
Conduct annual review of past audit observations to 
ensure corrective actions are being implemented in a 
timely manner; 
DOH and 
DIPH 
Develop a plan with including time bound milestones 
and feasible  actions to resolve past audit 
observations.    
External 
and internal 
audit 
Information 
systems 
Form a project audit review committee to review 
project related external and internal audit 
observations and monitor timely implementation of 
corrective actions. 
Deploy an accounting software to be used to record 
project transactions and to generate financial reports. 
PMU/DOH 
and DIPH 
 PMU/DOH 
and DIPH  
Information 
systems 
Use of ADB’s LFIS and CPD to reconcile project 
accounts and ADB disbursement records.  
PMU/DOH 
and DIPH 
Annually 
throughout the 
project 
implementation; 
Within six months 
after the end of 
the fiscal year 
Annually; 
By the end of the 
second year of 
implementation of 
the PRF 
Within six months 
after loan 
effectiveness 
Within one month 
after loan 
effectiveness 
Monthly from loan 
first disbursement 
throughout project 
implementation. 
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CPD = Client Portal for disbursement, DOH = Department of Horticulture, DIPH = 
Department of Irrigation and Public Health, GoHP=Government of Himachal Pradesh, HPSHIVA = Himachal Pradesh 
Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project, IA = Implementing Agency, LFIS = Loan Financial 
Information Service, PIU = project implementation unit, PMU = project management unit.  
19 
12. 
To ensure an effective and timely implementation of the FM action plan, DOH and DIPH 
are  required  to  review  the  progress  made  against  each  agreed  action  on  a  quarterly  basis.  In 
addition, ADB review missions will review and verify the status of the FM risks and FM action plan 
on an annual basis and suggest remedial measures, as appropriate. 
B. 
Disbursement 
The PRF loan proceeds will be disbursed in accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
13. 
Handbook  (2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time),  and  detailed  arrangements  agreed  upon 
between the government and ADB.4 It is expected that only the reimbursement procedure will be 
used  to  disburse the  ADB  funds.  Online training for  project  staff  on  disbursement policies  and 
procedures  is  available.5 Project  staff  are  encouraged  to  avail  of  this  training  to  help  ensure 
efficient disbursement and fiduciary control. 
14. 
The  DOH  and  DIPH  will  be  responsible  for  (i)  preparing  disbursement  projections,  (ii) 
requesting  budgetary  allocations  for  counterpart  funds,  and  (iii)  collecting  and  retaining  all 
supporting documents for their respective outputs. DOH, through its PMU, will be responsible for 
preparing and submitting all withdrawal applications to ADB, through CAAA, and collecting the 
necessary  documents  from    DIPH  as  specified  in  ADB’s  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook.  To 
facilitate reconciliation of ADB disbursement records and DOH’s and DIPH’s books of accounts, 
DOH will ensure, through its PMU, that expenditures incurred by DOH and DIPH are claimed in 
separate withdrawal applications (WAs). 
Statement  of  expenditure  (SOE)  procedure.6   The  SOE  procedure  may  be  used  for 
15. 
reimbursement  of  eligible  expenditures.  The  ceiling  of  the  SOE  procedure  is  the  equivalent  of 
$100,000  per  individual  payment.  Supporting  documents  and  records  for  the  expenditures 
claimed under the SOE should be maintained and made readily available for review by ADB's 
disbursement and review missions, upon ADB's request for submission of supporting documents 
on a sampling basis, and for independent audit.  
Reimbursement of individual payments in excess of the SOE ceiling should be supported 
16. 
by full documentation when submitting the withdrawal application to ADB.  
17. 
Before  the  submission  of  the  first  WA,  the  Borrower  should  submit  to  ADB  sufficient 
evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal applications on behalf of 
the government, together with the authenticated specimen signatures of each authorized person. 
The minimum value per WA is stipulated in the Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended 
from time to time). Individual payments below such amount should be paid by DOH, DIPH or the 
Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  (GoHP)  and  subsequently  claimed  to  ADB  through 
reimbursement,  unless  otherwise  accepted  by  ADB.  The  borrower  should  ensure  sufficient 
category and contract balances before requesting disbursements. Use of ADB’s Client Portal for 
Disbursements (CPD) system is mandatory for submission of withdrawal applications to ADB. 7 
4 The handbook is available electronically from the ADB website (http://www.adb.org/documents/ loan-disbursement-
handbook).  
5  Disbursement eLearning. http://wpqr4.adb.org/disbursement_elearning.  
6  The SOE procedure is a simplified procedure requiring no submission of supporting documentation of 
expenditures. SOE forms are available in Appendix 7B and 7D of ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as 
amended from  time to time). 
7 The CPD facilitates online submission of WA to ADB, resulting in faster disbursement. The forms to be completed by 
the Borrower are available online at https://www.adb.org/documents/client-portal-disbursements-guide.     
20 
18. 
This PRF project will be re-financed under an ensuing loan. Upon refinancing, no further 
disbursements will be made from the PRF account. The PRF loan amount and accrued financing 
charges are paid out under the PRF cost category of the ensuing loan that will refinance the PRF 
loan. Provided the following costs are eligible expenditures, the ensuing loan will finance (i) costs 
incurred under PRF that have not yet been paid from the PRF account by the refinancing date, 
(ii) costs for activities initiated under PRF and continuing beyond the refinancing date, and (iii) 
costs incurred during PRF implementation but ineligible under PRF. 
19. 
Disbursement  Arrangements  for  Counterpart  Fund.  The  project  budget  will  be 
prepared following  a  bottom-up  approach  in  a  consultative  process  that  will  involve  all  related 
units/divisions from DOH and DIPH. Budgets will be prepared for all activities financed by ADB 
funds as well as GoHP. Final approved budget estimates for government funds for the project will 
be reflected in the annual budget estimates under DOH and DIPH.   
20. 
The  government  counterpart  funds  will  be  sufficiently  allocated  in  the  budget  annually. 
DOH  and  DIPH  will  be  responsible  for  preparing  disbursement  projections  and  requesting 
budgetary allocations for their respective outputs under the project, including counterpart funds 
to the Government of Himachal Pradesh. All disbursements under government financing will be 
carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  regulations  of  GoI  and  GoHP  and  accounting  principles 
acceptable to ADB. 
21. 
Financial management responsibilities. The DOH through its PMU will have the overall 
responsibility  for  ensuring  that  financial  management  arrangement  of  the  project  comply  with 
ADB’s requirements as outlined in the legal agreements and the PAM. In particular, the PMU/DOH 
will have the following responsibilities: 
•  Ensure that adequate and qualified financial staff are assigned to the PMU and PIUs;  
•  Based on input from DIPH, prepare a consolidated annual work program and budget for 
• 
the entire project; 
Incur expenditures as part of the project and maintain separate book of accounts under 
the project;  
•  Ensure that the adequate internal controls are in place for the project as whole and that 
the  Financial  Management  action  plan  outlined  in  the  PAM  is  implemented  in  a  timely 
manner;  
•  Prepare  and  submit  withdrawal  applications  to  ADB  through  CAAA,  in  accordance  with 
ADBs’ disbursement procedures; 
•  Support DIPH in undertaking quarterly reconciliations of their books of accounts and ADB 
disbursement records;  
•  Monitor  the  financial  performance  of  the  project  as  a  whole,  including  disbursement, 
commitments, budget vs actual expenditures and physical vs financial performance;  
•  Based  on  input  from  DIPH,  prepare  consolidated  quarterly  progress  reports  to  be 
submitted to ADB 45 days  after the end of each quarter;  
•  Prepare project financial statements in the agreed format and cause them to be audited 
by an independent auditor  (CAG or an audit firm empaneled by CAG); 
•  Ensure the audited project financial statements of DOH and DIPH are submitted to ADB 
within six months after the end of the fiscal year; 
•  Through  the  project  audit  review  committee,  ensure  audit  observations  are  addressed 
within a reasonable time;  
•  File all relevant project records in a secure place; and 
21 
•  Coordinate with DIPH to ensure timely closure of the ADB loan account. 
22. 
DIPH will undertake at least the following: 
•  Ensure that adequate and qualified financial staff are assigned to the project;  
•  Prepare input for the annual work program and budget and submit the to the PMU/DOH 
• 
for consolidation. 
Incur expenditures as part of the project and maintain separate book of accounts under 
the project;  
•  Provide quarterly financial reports to the PMU/DOH in the agreed format within 30 days 
after the end of each quarter;  
•  Collect and provide all financial documentation to the PMU/DOH as outlined in the ADB 
disbursement handbook; 
•  Prepare project financial statements in the agreed format and cause them to be audited 
by an independent auditor (CAG or an audit firm empaneled by CAG) engaged and submit 
the audited project financial statements and the management to the PMU/DOH for further 
submission to ADB.  
•  Address audit recommendations in a timely manner; and 
•  File all relevant project records in a secure place; 
23. 
Financial Management Capacity. In order to ensure sufficient knowledge in ADB’s FM 
requirements, including procedures and related systems, the DOH and DIPH will ensure that each 
financial staff assigned to the project undertake the following actions within the first three months 
working with the project: 
•  Become  aware  of  the  ADB  and  national  anticorruption  policy  and  whistle  blowing 
mechanisms. 
•  Master  loan/grant  agreement  including the  loan covenants  and the  relevant  sections  of 
the Project Administration Manual, as well as the ADB loan disbursement handbook 
•  Obtain user/reader rights (as required) to ADBs systems including: the Client Portal for 
Disbursement and the Loan Financial Information Service (LFIS); and   
•  Familiarize themselves with ADB’s reporting requirements including the agreed format for 
project financial statements and Audit ToRs Terms of Reference for audit of ADB assisted 
projects, agreed with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the DEA and ADB  
C. 
Accounting  
24. 
DOH and DIPH will maintain separate books of accounts and records by funding source 
for  all  expenditures  incurred  as  part  of  the  project  on  cash  basis  of  accounting  following 
accounting principles and practices prescribed by the Government of India’s accounting laws and 
regulations.  DOH and DIPH will prepare separate project financial statements and in accordance 
with  the  government's  accounting  laws  and  regulations  which  are  consistent  with  international 
accounting principles and practices. Template financial statements provided in the standard terms 
of  reference  for  the  audit  of  ADB-assisted  projects,  agreed  with  the  Comptroller  and  Auditor 
General  of  India,  Department  of  Economic  Affairs,  and  ADB,  are  to  be  referred  to  as  a  guide. 
Accordingly, the project financial statements shall include the following: 
•  Statement of cash receipts (by financing source) and payments (by expenditure category) 
for the current reporting period, past reporting period, and cumulative to date;  
•  Statement of expenditure by category and financier for the year/period end; 
•  Statement of advance/imprest  sub account; 
22 
•  Statement  of  disbursement,  disclosing  all  funds  claimed  from  ADB  by  disbursement 
method, total expenditure claimed for the current reporting period, past reporting period, 
and cumulative to date. The notes of the financial statements should include a detailed list 
of all withdrawal applications submitted to, and the amounts paid by ADB as follows: (a) 
WA number, (b) the amount claimed and currency,  (c) time period in which expenditures 
were incurred, (d) date submitted, (e) disbursement method and f) the amount disbursed 
by ADB; 
•  Disbursement claimed under SOE procedure for the reporting period; 
•  Statement of appropriation vs. actual expenditures. Any significant variances must be duly 
explained;  
•  Expenditure by output/components for the current reporting period, past reporting period, 
and cumulative to date; and 
•  Notes to the Financial Statements disclosing the used accounting standards and policies 
and  other  relevant  information  and  explanations.  The  notes  should  also  disclose  any 
government contribution received as part of the project.  
The  expenditure  categories  and  outputs  used  in  the  project  financial  statement  will  be 
25. 
aligned with the expenditure categories of the PAM. 
26. 
In order to provide timely information on the project’s financial progress and the status of 
financial management to DOH, through its PMU, will prepare consolidated financial information 
to be included in the Quarterly Progress Reports (QPR) to be submitted to ADB within 45 days 
after the end of the quarter.  
The  consolidated  financial  information  in  the  QPRs  will  include  at  least  the  following 
27. 
financial information8:   
•  Cumulative  contract  awards  financed  by  the  ADB  loan,  and  counterpart  funds 
(commitment of funds to date), and comparison with time-bound projections (targets – for 
ADB financing compare the  actual contract awards with the contract award curve included 
in the PAM). Any significant variances between planned and actual contract awards are 
to be explained; 
•  Cumulative  disbursements  from  the  ADB  loan,  and  counterpart  funds  (expenditure  to 
date),  and  comparison  with  time-bound  projections  (targets  –  for  the  ADB  financing 
compare the  actual disbursement with the disbursement projections as per the S curve 
included 
the  PAM).  Any  significant  variances  between  planned  and  actual 
disbursements are to be explained;  
in 
•  Re-estimated costs to completion, need for reallocation within ADB loan categories, and 
whether an overall project cost overrun is likely; 
•  Reconciliation of project records and ADB disbursement records (LFIS) for the financial 
year  to  date  and  cumulative  from  project  inception  to  end  of  the  reporting  period.  Any 
discrepancies and outline follow-up actions required are to be explained; 
•  Variance  analysis  including  budget  vs  actual  expenditures  and  physical  vs  financial 
progress, with significant deviations explained; 
•  Summary of the status of financial covenants (if any) as outlined in the loan and project 
agreement;  
•  Summary of the status of Financial management in the project including: a) any problems 
in  the  existing  FM  arrangements  and  /or  flow  of  funds  and  b)  any  significant  changes 
8 QPR report template is attached to the PAM. 
23 
occurred  during  the  reporting  period  (e.g.  FM  staff  turnover,  implementation  of  new 
financial systems, emerging FM related risks etc.); 
•  Summary of the status of: a) the FM action plan outlined in the PAM, b) recommendations 
and  actions  raised  by  ADB  as  part  of  the  APFS  review  (if  any)  and  c)  FM  related 
recommendations agreed during ADB review missions (if any); and 
•  Summary of the status of Status of past audit observations (resolved/ pending) 
Detailed financial reports may be included as an annex to the progress report as agreed 
28. 
with ADB. Sample quarterly financial reports are included as an appendix to the PAM. 
29. 
Reconciliations and Variance analysis. To ensure the correctness and completeness 
of the project’s disbursement records, the DOH and DIPH shall conduct quarterly reconciliation 
of the project accounts, and ADB’s disbursement data available in the LFMIS.   
30. 
Any discrepancies and/or reconciliation items will be promptly followed up on to ensure 
these are resolved in a prompt manner. Furthermore, any differences between amounts claimed 
and the amounts disbursed will be disclosed and explained in the WA register, in the quarterly 
progress reports and in the notes of the project financial statements. 
31.  Moreover, The DOH and the DIPH will conduct variance analysis of at least on a quarterly 
basis, examining the differences between budgeted vs. actual expenditures as well as financial 
vs. physical progress. The variance analysis will pay particular attention to: 
•  significant deviations from the budgeted engineer’s estimate; 
•  Significant deviations between financial and physical progress;  
•  Significant delays on (planned vs. reported) physical and/or financial progress; and 
• 
Inconsistent and/or delayed progress reporting. 
D. 
Auditing and Public Disclosure 
32. 
Project Audit Review Committee: In order to strengthen the internal control framework 
under the project, a Project Audit Review Committee will be established. The Committee will be 
headed by the Project Director and will include staff from both DOH and DIPH. The Project Audit 
Review  Committee  will  meet  on  a  quarterly  basis  to  monitor  past  internal  and  external  audit 
observations  and  recommendations  to  ensure  these  are  being  adequately  addressed  within  a 
reasonable time. The status of past audit observations will be included in the quarterly progress 
reports. 
33. 
External  Auditing  and  Public  Disclosure.  DOH  and  DIPH  will  cause  their  respective 
project financial statements to be audited separately on an annual basis and in accordance with 
the  government’s  audit  regulations  by  the  Controller  and  Auditor  General  (CAG)  or  a  firm 
empaneled  by the  CAG,  which  is  acceptable  to ADB.  The  standard  terms  of reference for the 
audit  of  ADB-assisted  projects,  agreed  with  the  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  of  India, 
Department of Economic Affairs, and ADB, are to be referred to as a guide. The standard terms 
of reference are provided in Attachment C. 
34. 
The  respective  audit  reports  will  include  a  separate  audit  opinions,  which  will  cover  (i) 
whether the project financial statements present a true and fair view or are presented fairly, in all 
material  respects,  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  financial  reporting  framework;  and  (ii) 
whether the loan proceeds were used only for the purposes of the project. The respective audit 
reports must also be accompanied by a management letter outlining any identified internal control 
24 
issues.  The  management  letter  should  also  include  management’s  response  to  the  audit 
observations. From the second year onward, the management letter must also include a follow-
up on previous years audit observations. In case the auditor does not issue a management letter, 
the auditor must issue a written confirmation that no internal control issues were identified as part 
of the audit. 
35. 
The  audited  project  financial  statements,  together  with  the  auditor’s  opinion,  and  the 
management letter will be presented in the English language to ADB within 6 months from the 
end of the fiscal year. In this regard, DIPH will submit its respective APFS to the PMU/DOH in a 
timely manner to allow the PMU/DOH to compile the Audited project Financial Statements, audit 
opinions and management letters for both entities and submit the complete package to ADB in a 
timely  manner.9 As  part  of  the  compilation,  the  PMU  will  make  sure  the  financial  information 
presented  in  each  of  audited  project  financial  statements  (APFS)  reconcile  with  ADB’s 
disbursement records. In this regard, a separate unaudited reconciliation statement, in a format 
acceptable to ABD, will be attached to the complied APFS submitted to ADB.  
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by review 
36. 
missions and during normal program supervision, and followed up regularly with all concerned, 
including the external auditor. Accordingly, the submission of the following audit reports, listed in 
the table below will be monitored by ADB.  
Entity 
DoH 
DIPH 
Audit report 
Audited project financial Statements 
(APFS) including  management letter  
Audited project financial Statements 
(APFS) including  management letter 
Date 
Within six months after the end of the 
fiscal year: 30th September each year. 
Within six months after the end of the 
fiscal year: 30th September each year. 
37. 
The government, DOH, and DIPH have been made aware of ADB’s approach to delayed 
submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of the audited project 
financial  statements.10 ADB  reserves  the  right  to  require  a  change  in  the  auditor  (in  a  manner 
consistent with the constitution of the borrower), or for additional support to be provided to the 
auditor, if the audits required are not conducted in a manner satisfactory to ADB, or if the audits 
are substantially delayed.  
38. 
ADB reserves the right to verify the project’s financial accounts to confirm that the share 
of ADB’s financing is used in accordance with ADB’s policies and procedures. Public disclosure 
of the audited project financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion on the project financial 
statements, will be guided by ADB’s Access to information Policy 2018.11 After the review, ADB 
9 No later than 6 months after the end of the fiscal year. 
10  Following is ADB’s policy on delayed submission of audited project financial statements: 
(i)  When audited project financial statements are  not received by the due date, ADB will write  to the executing 
agency  advising  that  (i)  the  audit  documents  are  overdue;  and  (ii)  if  they  are  not  received  within  the  next  6 
months, requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of imprest accounts, 
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed. 
(ii)  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will 
withhold  processing  of  requests  for  new  contract  awards  and  disbursement  such  as  new  replenishment  of 
imprest  accounts,  processing  of  new  reimbursement,  and  issuance  of  new  commitment  letters.  ADB  will  (i) 
inform  the  executing  agency  of  ADB’s  actions;  and  (ii)  advise  that  the  loan  may  be  suspended  if  the  audit 
documents are not received within the next 6 months. 
(iii)  When audited project financial statements have not been received within 12 months after the due date, ADB 
may suspend the loan. 
11  Available at http://www.adb.org/documents/pcp-2011?ref=site/disclosure/publications 
25 
will disclose the audited project financial statements and the opinion of the auditors on the project 
financial statements no later than 14 days of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting 
them on ADB’s website. The management letter, additional auditor’s opinions, and audited entity 
financial statements will not be disclosed.12 
V. 
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES 
A. 
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing 
39. 
All advance contracting and retroactive financing will follow the ADB Procurement Policy 
(2017,  as  amended  from  time  to  time)  and  its  associated  staff  instructions.  The  issuance  of 
consulting  service  recruitment  notices  or  invitations  to  bid  under  advance  contracting  and 
retroactive  financing  will  be  subject  to  ADB  approval. 13 ADB  has  advised  the  borrower,  the 
Department of Horticulture, and the Department of Irrigation and Public Health that approval of 
advance contracting and retroactive financing does not commit ADB to finance the PRF project. 
Advance contracting. The project will initiate advance contracting listed in below Table 
40. 
9 for the procurement of farm subtropical horticulture production inputs and for the construction 
of  irrigation  infrastructure.  The  DOH  has  quantified  its  planting  material  requirements  and 
surveyed potential suppliers and procurement of planting material will be done through Requests 
for  Quotations  from  quality-approved  nurseries.  The  DIPH  has  prepared  detailed  designs, 
drawings and bills of quantity for 16 planned irrigation investments which will be advertised for 
bidding 
the  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh’s  e-Procurement  system 
www.hptenders.gov.in. 
through 
12  Access to Information Policy: https://www.adb.org/documents/access-information-policy 
13 The date of PRF memo approval is 12 May 2020 after which    
26 
Table 9: Advance Contracting  
Activity 
Responsible 
Status 
Amount ($) 
Expected award 
date 
CIVIL WORKS 
CW01 Irrigation scheme in Mandi 
CW02 Irrigation scheme in Hamirpur 
CW03 Irrigation scheme in Bilaspur 
CW04 Irrigation scheme in Kangra 
CW06  Installation  of  water  storage  tanks  and 
drip irrigation system  
CW07 Field preparation  
CW08 Animal proof fencing  
GOODS 
G01 Horticulture planting materials 
G02 Computing software 
G03 Horticulture input  
G04 Farm equipment  
CONSULTING SERVICES 
CS01 Construction supervision (LCS)  
CS02 PMU consultants 
CS03  Horticulture 
sector 
strategy  and  
investment plan 2023-2030 
CS05 DOH capacity building consultant 
CS06 DIPH capacity building firm 
CS07 WUA facilitation  
CS08 CHPMA group facilitation and training 
CS09 Internal auditors (LCS) 
Total 
DIPH 
DIPH 
DIPH 
DIPH 
DOH 
DOH 
DOH 
DOH 
Both 
DOH 
DOH 
DIPH 
Both 
DOH 
DOH 
DIPH 
DIPH 
DOH 
Both 
D 
D 
D 
E 
E 
B 
B 
A 
F 
F 
F 
CSRN 
CSRN 
CSRN 
CSRN 
CSRN 
CSRN 
CSRN 
CSRN 
800,000 
230,000 
500,000 
670,000 
690,000 
650,000 
700,000 
350,000 
63,000 
280,000 
85,000 
150,000 
1,050,000 
380,000 
73,000 
350,000 
800,000 
840,000 
20,000 
8,680,000 
10 Dec 2020  
10 Dec 2020 
10 Dec 2020 
15 Dec 2020 
15 Nov 2020 
15 Oct 2020 
15 Oct 2020 
10 Sep 2020 
30 Oct 2020 
10 Nov 2020 
10 Nov 2020 
15 Nov 2020 
15 Nov 2020 
20 Dec 2020 
10 Oct 2020 
20 Dec 2020 
15 Dec 2020 
15 Dec 2020 
10 Oct 2020 
a Advance action status is categorized as following: Completed (signed contract submitted to ADB), A (contract signing), 
B (at the financial bid evaluation stage – preparation and submission to ADB, and ADB review and approval), C (at the 
technical bid evaluation stage – preparation and submission to ADB, and ADB review and approval), D (bidding), E 
(ADB approval of bid docs), F (submission of bid docs to ADB).   
Retroactive financing. Eligible expenditures incurred before loan effectiveness, and not 
41. 
more than 12 months before the signing of the PRF loan agreement, of up to $2.0 million (20% of 
the PRF financing) can be reimbursed from the PRF loan using retroactive financing. Procurement 
Contract Summary Sheet (PCSS) data for expenditures incurred prior to the effective date of the 
loan agreement will be entered into the LFIS only after loan effectiveness 
As advance actions, DOH and DIPH will prioritize procurement and implementation of the 
42. 
packages in Table 10. 
Table 10: Retroactive Financing  
Activity 
Responsible  Amount ($) 
CW06  Installation  of  water  storage 
tanks and drip irrigation system  
CW07 Field preparation  
CW08 Animal proof fencing  
G01 Horticulture planting materials 
G03 Horticulture inputs 
G04 Farm equipment  
G02 Computing software 
CS01 Construction supervision  
CS02 PMU consultants 
Total 
DOH 
300,000 
DOH 
DOH 
DOH 
DOH 
DOH 
Both 
DIPH 
DOH 
650,000 
700,000 
350,000 
280,000 
85,000 
63,000 
150,000 
1,050,000 
3,628,000 
27 
Expected expenditures by 
end Dec 2020 (i.e. prior to 
loan effectiveness) ($) 
150,000 
130,000 
300,000 
200,000 
70,000 
40,000 
30,000 
10,000 
105,000 
1,035,000 
DOH and DIPH are advised that approval of advance contracting and retroactive financing 
43. 
does not commit ADB to finance the investment program. 
B. 
Procurement of Consulting Services 
44. 
EA  will  recruit  all  consultants  following  the  ADB Procurement  Policy  and  its  associated 
project  administration  instructions  and/or  staff  instructions.  The  terms  of  reference  for  all 
consulting services are detailed in Attachment A.  
45. 
 About 50 person-months of international and 1,986 person-months of national consulting 
services  are  required  to  (i)  undertake  feasibility  studies  for  priority  investments,  (ii)  prepare 
detailed engineering designs and bidding documents, and (iii) strengthen the institutional capacity 
of the EA. EA will engage consulting firms using the quality- and cost-based selection method 
(with a quality–cost ratio of 90:10), least-cost selection, or direct contracting, as specified in the 
procurement plan. The EA/IA shall submit to ADB copies of the signed contracts for creation of 
PCSS. 
C. 
Procurement of Goods and Civil Works 
46. 
All procurement of goods and civil works will follow the ADB Procurement Policy (2017, 
as  amended  from  time  to  time)  and  its  associated  regulations  and  staff  instructions.  All 
procurement packages are subject to ADB approval using the prior review procedure.14 
47. 
Before  the  start  of  any  procurement,  ADB  and  the  government  will  review  the  public 
procurement  laws  of  the  central  and  state  governments  to  ensure  consistency  with  the  ADB 
Procurement Policy. EA/IA shall submit to ADB a copy of the signed contract for creation of PCSS. 
D. 
Procurement Plan 
48. 
The procurement plan, prepared through the strategic procurement planning exercise, is 
in Attachment B, describing all procurement of goods and works to be undertaken for the project 
for the first 18 months of implementation. Within 1 year after the date of loan effectiveness, PMU 
may submit a revised procurement plan for ADB approval that captures any change to all ongoing 
14 Information on prior review approval procedure is available in https://www.adb.org/documents/procurement-review. 
28 
procurement and planned procurement for the entire project. The plan shall be updated on the 
same basis at least annually or as the need arises for the duration of the project. The update shall 
always include updated cost estimates.  
E. 
Consultant’s Terms of Reference.  
Terms  of  References  for  consultants  to  be  recruited  by  the  PRF  project  is  detailed  in 
49. 
Attachment A.  
VI. 
SAFEGUARDS 
50. 
Prohibited  investment  activities.  Pursuant  to  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy  Statement 
(2009),  ADB  funds  may  not  be  applied  to  the  activities  described  on  the  ADB  Prohibited 
Investment Activities List set forth in Appendix 5 of the Safeguard Policy Statement. 
A. 
Environmental Safeguards  
51. 
The  project  is  classified  as  Category C  for  environment  in  accordance  with  ADB’s 
Safeguard Policy Statement. The PRF’s pilot-test will consist of small construction and installation 
activities  of  storage  tanks,  intake  structures,  distribution  pipes  and  conveyance  system,  and 
mostly  rehabilitation.  The  PRF  pilot  activities  are  likely  to  have  minor  environmental  impacts, 
mostly on the increase of dust and noise levels, and hazards on occupational health and safety. 
Although  environmental  risks  are  minor,  the  mitigation  measures  are  added  to  employer’s 
requirements in the bidding documents to ensure that the PRF’s piloting activities are done within 
the  scope  as  a  Category  C  project.  Also,  the  Environmental  Projection  Guidelines  (see 
Attachment are separately prepared to screen pilot sites and minimize environmental safeguards 
impacts.    
52.  Monitoring.  A  construction  supervision  firm  will  be  recruited  for  monitoring  the 
construction of irrigation works packages. Aside from monitoring the construction progress and 
ensuring  quality  construction,  they  will  supervise  the  contractors  to  meet  the  compliance  on 
environment and social safeguards. The PMU will monitor and document the implementation of 
environment  mitigation  measures  and  social  safeguard  requirements  as  part  of  the  quarterly 
progress reports (QPRs).    
Biodiversity and Natural Resources. As per the state’s policy, landowners or farmers 
53. 
are  allowed  to  cut  a  maximum  of  5  trees,  and  beyond  that  would  require  permission  from  the 
government. If required, DIPH and DOH will plant trees along the periphery of pilot-test areas as 
a  form  of  compensatory  tree  plantation  activity.  Also,  both  will  obtain  confirmations  from 
concerned  government  department  for  the  permission  for  laying  pipelines. There  is  low 
biodiversity15 at the water sources and irrigation areas. The wildlife present are common species, 
and not endangered nor critically endangered ones, however, the project will not place harm to 
existing wildlife, and conserve the natural resources of the pilot-test areas. 
54.  Waste  Disposal  and pollution  control.  In  compliance to the  government’s policy, the 
implementation of the PRF will follow standards for safe disposal of construction wastes, used oil 
15 p. 34, ADB SPS 2009: The variability among living organisms from all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine 
and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within species, 
between species and of ecosystems.  
29 
and discarded paints. DIPH and DOH will follow standards for controlling the pollution on ambient 
air, water quality and noise levels such as from the following rules: 
i.  Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, Amendment 1988 and thereafter 
ii.  Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
iii.  Hazardous Waste (Management, Handling, Trans-boundary Movement) Rules, 2008 
iv.  Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules 2016 
v.  Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 and Amendment 2002 and 2006 
55. 
Occupational  Health  and  Safety.  Workers  will  be  provided  with  a  safe  and  healthy 
working environment, taking into account risks inherent to the type of construction and specific 
classes  of  hazards  in  the  pilot-test  areas.  PMU  will  take  steps  to  prevent  workers’  accidents, 
injury,  and  disease  (i.e.  COVID-19)  arising  from,  associated  with,  or  occurring  during 
implementation of pilot test irrigation schemes.  
Physical  Cultural  Resources.  There  are  no  physical  cultural  resources16 that  will  be 
56. 
affected under the PRF implementation. PMU will continue to ensure no damage and impacts to 
physical cultural resources. Access of people for entering temples, cremation ground across, and 
other religious and culturally important places will not be blocked at any the pilot-test sites. The 
passages will be maintained open as it is even during the PRF implementation.  
B. 
Social Safeguards  
57. 
Involuntary  Resettlement.  The  PRF  is  categorized  as  category  C  for  involuntary 
resettlement. Construction of the pilot irrigation schemes will be done on government land or right 
of  way,  with  no  non-titleholders  present  in  the  pilot  areas.  The  development  of  17  plots  for 
demonstration of new model of subtropical horticulture production will be done on farmers own 
land, with no land acquisition nor physical or economic displacement. PMU has already secured 
consent from farmer beneficiaries for land utilization. The PMU will enter into agreements, in the 
form of memorandum of understanding (MOU), with the farmer beneficiaries in case of voluntary 
land donation for construction of small tanks or laying of pipelines in their field (see Attachment 
G). The PRF will not result in physical or economic displacement resulting from involuntary land 
acquisition or involuntary restriction on land use.  
58. 
Subproject Screening and Categorization. The PRF subprojects are small in scale with 
minimal or no negative social impacts, and community-driven, where communities participate in 
selection  and  implementation  of  subprojects.  Experience  has  shown  that  in  similar  projects, 
communities contribute their land for utilization resulting in smooth planning and execution of the 
subproject  with  no  negative  social  impacts.  However,  consistent  with  the  SPS,  ADB  requires 
conduct  of  due  diligence  to  ensure  that  subprojects  will  not  result  in  physical  or  economic 
displacement, as such each subproject will be screened and categorized.  
59. 
The EA will be responsible for screening and categorization of each subproject under the 
PRF pilot based on the screening checklist (see Attachment H) in the resettlement framework. 
16 p. 39, ADB SPS 2009: defined as movable or immovable objects, sites, structures, groups of structures, and natural 
features and landscapes that have archaeological, paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other 
cultural significance. Physical cultural resources may be located in urban or rural settings and may be above or below 
ground or under water. Their cultural interest may be at the local, provincial, national, or international level.  
30 
Based  on  the  screening,  the  subproject  will  be  assigned  to  one  of  the  following  categories 
depending on the significance of probable involuntary resettlement impacts:  
a)  Category  A  -  A  proposed  project  is  classified  as  Category  A  if  it  is  likely  to  have 
significant  involuntary  resettlement  impacts.  A  resettlement  plan,  including  an 
assessment of social impacts, is required. 
b)  Category B - A proposed project is classified as Category B if it includes involuntary 
resettlement impacts that are not deemed significant. A resettlement plan, including 
assessment of social impact, is required. 
c)  Category C - A proposed project is classified as Category C if it has no involuntary 
resettlement impacts. No further action is required.   
60. 
The  involuntary  resettlement  impacts  of  an  ADB-supported  project  are  considered 
significant if 200 or more persons will experience major impacts, which are defined as; (i) being 
physically displaced from housing, or (ii) losing 10% or more of their productive assets (income 
generating).  The  level  of  detail  and  comprehensiveness  of  the  resettlement  plan  will  be 
commensurate  with  the  significance  of  the  potential  impacts  and  risks.  If  there  are  any 
unanticipated  impacts  under  the  PRF,  PMU  will  promptly  inform  ADB  of  such  impacts,  and 
prepare and implement a resettlement plan that complies with ADB SPS and government laws 
and regulation. 
61. 
Land  Use  and  Donation.  The  Water  Users  Association  (WUA)  will  be  responsible  for 
providing  the  land  required  as  per  the  design  of  infrastructure  development,  which  shall  be 
regulated as per the Community Operational Manual of the DoH.  
In case no existing common land is available, then land would be taken by the WUA from 
62. 
individual or individuals through:  
a)  Temporary  land  use  (similar  to  Lease  as  per  the  Model  Lease  formats  of  the 
Department of Revenue, Himachal Pradesh;  
b)  Gift from individual(s) through registered Gift deed; and  
c)  Voluntary donation wherein the donor would automatically become a beneficiary under 
project activities and no individual or individuals would become landless. Such land 
will be registered in the name of WUA to avoid any future complications.  
63. 
The WUA shall take affidavit in the form of a MOU from individual farmers whose land may 
be taken for putting up the irrigation system as per the layout such as construction of water storage 
tanks, distribution tanks, regulation tank, pipelines, outlets, water hydrant, Kuhl, rising main, etc. 
Copies of MOU will be provided by the WUA to the PMU for record.  
64. 
In the event of the land donated is not used for the purpose it is granted by the individual 
farmer,  ownership  and  possession  of  the  said  land  shall  be  reverted  to  him/her  without  any 
encumbrances.  
Donation of private land for various subproject and components of  PRF will be allowed 
65. 
only with the following safeguards in place: 
a)  Consultation with affected people disclosing project entitlements and benefits against 
their wish to forgo the entitlements and agree for the consent to use the land. 
31 
b)  Land donation do not severely affect the living standards of households and are linked 
directly to benefits for the community. 
c)  Any land donation for the subproject will be confirmed through written record only. 
d)  Adequate grievance redress mechanism is in place 
e)  Land  donated  under  the  PRF  do  not  belong  to  the  poorest  or  most  vulnerable 
households;  
f)  Land donation will be made without any coercion; and 
g)  The land is free from any legal disputes or litigation. 
The EA, prior to obtaining consent from farmer beneficiaries, will ensure that the criteria 
66. 
shown in Table 11 will be observed for land utilization: 
Table 11: Criteria and Guidance Notes on Land Utilization 
Guidance Notes 
Criteria 
The impacts are marginal (based on percentage of 
loss and minimum size of remaining assets) 
Impacts  do  not 
in  displacement  of 
households or cause loss of household incomes or 
livelihood 
result 
The households giving land for donation are direct 
beneficiaries of the project 
Land  given  for  donation  is  free  from  dispute  of 
ownership or any other encumbrances 
•  The land taken for utilization does not exceed 
10% of the total land owned by the affected 
household. 
•  The land donated may be donated for 
permanent non-land assets (small water tanks). 
•  Land for donation will only be accepted if the 
total land owned by the household is not less 
than 3000 m2.(0.3 hectare)17 
•  The land is not used for productive purposes 
•  Structures are not affected; there is no physical 
relocation of households due to land donation. 
•  The affected household does not fall under the 
category of poor or vulnerable.18 
•  Both positive and negative impacts of the 
project on the affected household are 
considered.  
•  The affected household can identify the 
project’s direct benefits. 
•  The affected household has recognized legal 
tenure. 
•  The land is not being occupied or used by any 
other party and if it is, the occupants must be 
consulted and compensated in accordance with 
the principles set out in this RF. 
•  Ownership of the land is not disputed 
17 More than the land supposed to be owned by a BPL household (i.e. 0.25 ha) in the state. 
18 Vulnerable persons include those below the poverty line, landless, the elderly, women, and children, IPs, and those 
without legal title to land. 
32 
Criteria 
Consultations with the affected households are 
conducted in a free and transparent manner 
Proper  documentation  of  consultation  meetings, 
grievances  and  actions  taken  to  address  such 
grievances is accomplished 
Guidance Notes 
•  The affected household must be informed that 
they have the right to receive compensation for 
the land they wish to permit for utilization. 
•  The affected household receives clear and 
adequate information on the project and 
participates in project planning. 
•  Provisions for land donation are integrated in 
the decision-making process at the community 
level. 
•  The agreement is properly documented with 
signatures of affected person and witnesses. 
•  Consultation meetings, grievances and actions 
taken to address such grievances are properly 
recorded. 
67. 
Indigenous Peoples. The PRF is categorized as C for Indigenous Peoples safeguards. 
While there are scheduled tribes found in the PRF districts, they are not present in the PRF target 
areas and not among the 600 farmer beneficiaries. These scheduled tribes are a mix of permanent 
settlers and nomads, with their own cultural and social practices but no collective attachment to 
distinct habitats and territories, nor to natural resources in these habitats and territories. The PRF 
does  not  affect  the  dignity,  human  rights,  livelihood  systems,  or  culture  of  IPs  or  affect  the 
territories or natural or cultural resources that IPs own, use, occupy, or claim as their ancestral 
domain. 
C. 
Gender 
In Himachal Pradesh, women form approximately 50% of the state’s rural population, 42% 
68. 
of  the  labor  force  in  the  state  and  56%  of  the  total  cultivators’  population,  however,  their 
participation in the farming sector is mainly labor oriented.19 Women’s share of land ownership is 
negligible.  Due  to  the  patriarchal  social  system of  land  ownership.  Women  do  not  get  a  direct 
share  or  control  of  farming  income  as  the  land  ownership  is  under  male  members  of  the 
households.20 Reforms in the Panchayati Raj Act, which is related to the local self-government 
system  for  rural  areas  in  India,  and  in  some  of  the  regulations  for  participatory  irrigation 
management have enforced reservation stipulations for women in the elected entities, leading to 
increased participation of women in decision-making processes.21 
69. 
As  the  ensuing  loan  is  expected  to  be  categorized  as  Effective  Gender  Mainstreaming 
(EGM), the PRF will prepare gender analysis, collect disaggregated baseline information and draft 
the  Gender Action Plan (GAP) for the ensuing loan during PRF. Thus the PRF will ensure that 
the  men  and  women  farmers  to  get  equal  opportunities  to  participate  and  benefit  from  all  the 
project  components  and  value  addition  activities  in  horticulture  value  chains  and  income 
generating  activities  under  the  ensuing  loan.  The  project  also  proposes  to  support  the  state 
government  in  promoting  functional  WUAs  and  CHPMA  in  which  women’s  farmer  producer 
organizations membership will comprise at least 30%, and appointments to the chairperson and 
19 Government of Himachal Pradesh, Department of Economic and Statistics. 2017–2018. Statistical Abstract of Himachal Pradesh. 
Shimla. 
20 Government of Himachal Pradesh, Planning Department. 2017. Patterns and Context of Rural Livelihoods in Himachal Pradesh. 
Shimla 
21 Gender Statistics, Directorate of Economics and Statistics. https://himachalservices.nic.in/economics/en IN/index.html 
33 
vice-chairperson posts of such groups will be gender equitable. These interventions will support 
women’s  representation  and  improve  their  voice  in  agriculture  decision  making  as  well  as 
strengthen income generation opportunities especially for those from the poor households. The 
resettlement  framework  prepared  for  the  PRF  formulates  measures  to  ensure  that  socio-
economic conditions, gender impacts, and needs and priorities of women in the PRF project areas 
are adequately addressed and mitigated. 
D. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism  
70. 
The PMU will establish and maintain a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to support 
the  social  and  environmental  safeguards  of  the  project.  The  GRM  will  receive,  evaluate  and 
facilitate  the  resolution  of  impacted  people’s  feedback,  including  concerns,  complaints  and 
grievances about the social and environmental performance at the level of the Project. The GRM 
will  aim  to  provide  a  time-bound  and  transparent  mechanism  to  voice  suggestions  and 
appreciations and to resolve social and environmental concerns linked to the project. The project 
specific  GRM  is  not  intended  to  bypass  the  government’s  own  redress  process,  rather  it  is 
intended to address stakeholders’ concerns and complaints promptly, making it readily accessible 
to  all  segments  of  the  community,  and  is  scaled  to  the  risks  and  impacts  of  the  project. 
Complainant may access the formal legal system at any time. The safeguards GRM for the PRF 
is detailed in Attachment D.    
VII. 
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND 
COMMUNICATION  
A. 
Monitoring and Evaluation  
project 
performance 
Project  readiness  financing  project  performance  monitoring.  The  Department  of 
71. 
Horticulture  will  monitor  PRF 
consolidated  reports  to  ADB.  These  reports  will  include  (i)  each  activity’s  progress  measured 
against the implementation schedule, (ii) key implementation issues and solutions, (iii) an updated 
procurement plan, (iv) an updated implementation plan for the next 12 months, and (v) safeguards 
issues. To ensure PRF projects continue to be both viable and sustainable, the Department of 
Horticulture  should  adequately  review  PRF  project  financial  statements  and  the  associated 
auditor's report. In the event that an ensuring loan is not approved, the Department of Horticulture 
will submit a PRF project completion report to ADB within 6 months of physical completion of the 
PRF project. 
semiannually 
and 
provide                        
Compliance monitoring. The Project Management Unit will monitor and ensure project 
72. 
compliance  with  policy,  legal,  financial,  economic,  social,  environmental,  and  other  loan 
covenants. All non-compliance issues, if any, will be reported and remedial actions monitored in 
quarterly progress reports. Each ADB review mission, at least once a year, will also monitor the 
status  of  compliance  with  the  loan  assurances,  raise  any  noncompliance  issues  with  the 
government and agree on remedial actions. 
73. 
Safeguards monitoring. The annual PRF project performance monitoring will report on 
safeguards impacts (including safeguards feedbacks, land use and donation), if any. In addition, 
the  periodic  reports  will  assess  the  quality  and  compliance  with  O&M  specifications  in  the 
infrastructure  and  livelihood  projects.  The  ADB  will  disclose  the  environmental  safeguards 
monitoring report on the ADB website.  
34 
B. 
Reporting 
74. 
The Department of Horticulture will provide ADB with: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
semiannual progress reports on the PRF project in a format consistent with ADB's 
project performance reporting system within 45 days of the end of the reporting 
period; 
consolidated  annual  reports,  within  45  days  of  the  end  of  the  reporting  period, 
including  (a)  progress  achieved  by  output  measured  against  the  performance 
targets; (b) key implementation issues and solutions; (c) an updated procurement 
plan;  (d)  an  updated  implementation  plan  for  the  next  12  months;  (e)  any 
safeguards issues, including safeguards feedbacks;22 and 
PRF project accounts; Department of Horticulture’s audited financial statements, 
and  the  associated  auditor’s  report;  and  Department  of  Irrigation  and  Public 
Health’s audited financial statements, and the associated auditor’s report. 
VIII.  ANTICORRUPTION POLICY 
75. 
ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the 
Anticorruption  Policy  (1998,  as  amended  to  date)  relating  to  the  PRF  project  following  ADB’s 
Integrity  Principles  and  Guidelines. 23  All  contracts  financed  by  ADB  will  include  provisions 
specifying ADB’s right to review and examine the records and accounts of the executing agency 
and all PRF project contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers. This includes 
the  examination  of  project  outputs,  assets,  and  all  other  information  that  may  be  considered 
relevant  for  audit  or  inspection  by  ADB  regardless  of  project  completion,  termination,  or 
cancellation.  Investigation  of  government  officials,  if  any,  shall  be  requested  by  ADB  to  be 
undertaken by the government. Firms or individuals on ADB’s anticorruption debarment list are 
ineligible to participate in activities that are financed, supported, or administered by ADB; and may 
not be awarded any contracts under the PRF project.24 To support these efforts, ADB included 
relevant provisions in the bidding documents for the PRF project.  
76. 
ADB's  Anticorruption  Policy  designates the  Office  of  Anticorruption  and  Integrity  as the 
point of contact to report allegations of fraud or corruption among ADB-financed projects or its 
staff. Office of Anticorruption and Integrity is responsible for all matters related to allegations of 
fraud  and  corruption.  For  a  more  detailed  explanation  refer  to  the  Anticorruption  Policy  and 
Procedures.  Anyone  coming  across  evidence  of  corruption  associated  with  the  Project  may 
contact  the  Anticorruption  Unit  by  telephone,  facsimile,  mail,  or  email  at  the  following 
numbers/addresses:  
by email at integrity@adb.org or anticporruption@adb.org  
by phone at +63 2 632 5004 
by fax to +6326362152 
by mail at the following address (Please mark correspondence Strictly Confident)  
Office of Anticorruption and Integrity 
Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila, Philippines  
22 The regional departments will present the performance of the completed PRF in the project completion report of the 
ensuing loan. 
23 ADB. 2015. Integrity Principles and Guidelines (2015). Manila. 
24 ADB. Anticorruption and Integrity. 
35 
77. 
The project’s website will provide updated, detailed information on project implementation. 
For  example,  it  will  include  procurement-related  information,  such  as  the  list  of  participating 
bidders,  name  of  the  winning  bidder,  basic  details  on  bidding  procedures  adopted,  amount  of 
contract awarded, and the list of goods and/or services procured.  
IX. 
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM 
People who are, or may in the future be, adversely affected by the PRF project may submit 
78. 
complaints  to  ADB’s  Accountability  Mechanism.  The  Accountability  Mechanism  provides  an 
independent  forum  and  process  whereby  people  adversely  affected  by  ADB-assisted  PRF 
projects can voice and seek a resolution for their problems, as well as report alleged violations of 
ADB’s operational policies and procedures. Before submitting a complaint to the Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make an effort in good faith to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.  Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.25 
X. 
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL 
This section will be updated during implementation to provide a chronological history of 
79. 
changes to implemented arrangements.  
25 ADB. Accountability Mechanism. 
1 
ATTACHMENT A 
The draft terms of reference for procurement and consulting services packages are 
prepared as follows. The final terms of reference are subject to further review and 
clearance by the executing agency and the Asian Development Bank.   
Terms of Reference for Consulting Services 
Department of Irrigation and Public Health 
(JAL SHAKTI VIBHAG) 
Himachal Pradesh, India 
No. [add DIPH EOI reference numbers] 
Date 31 August 2020 
Request for Expression of Interest for Consultancy Services of  
Construction Supervision of Irrigation Civil Works & Electro- Mechanical 
works under 
Himachal Pradesh Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation, and Value Addition 
Readiness (HPSHIVA-R) Project 
Package No. : CS1 [DIPH official package reference needed] 
Package Name: Construction Supervision Consultant for CW1, CW2, CW3 and 
CW4 works   
1. 
The  Government  of  India  (GoI)  has  applied  for  financing  from  the  Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) towards the cost of Himachal Pradesh Subtropical 
Horticulture,  Irrigation  and  Value  Addition  Project:  Project  Readiness  Facility 
(HP SHIVA PRF) Project. Part of the financing will be used for payments under 
the contract named above. 
The Department of Irrigation and Public Health (Jal Shakti Vibhag), Himachal 
Pradesh  (the  “Employer”)  invites  Expression  of  Interest  (  EOI)  for  providing 
Consultancy  Services  of    Construction  Supervision  of  Irrigation  Civil  Works, 
Electro-Mechanical  works  from  the  eligible  and  registered  consultants  with 
experience in handling similar work  with Government and Externally Funding 
Agencies. 
The  Consulting  firm  shall  be  selected  and  engaged  in  accordance  with  the 
Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Consultants  by  Asian  Development  Bank  and  its 
Borrowers    (Consulting  Guidelines)  or  the  ADB  Procurement  Policy  2017 
(“Policy”)  and  the  Procurement  Regulations  for  ADB  Borrowers  2017 
(“Procurement Regulations”).   
Please  note  that  only  on-line  submission  of  EOI  in  ADB’s  Consultant 
Management  System  (CMS)  https://cms.adb.org  is  allowed  All  off-line  and 
manual submission of EOI is not permissible and will not be considered. 
Interested consulting firms are invited to submit EOI in ADB CMS on or before 
14. September 2020 through below link: [ link to be added ] 
The details of consultancy assignment are- 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
2 
7. 
(In 
Deadline for Submitting EOI 
14 September 2020 
Tentative commencement date 
Start Date of Publication 
31 August 2020 
Duration  of  Assignment 
Months) 
12 
Anticipated completion date 
December 2021 
Selection method 
Least Cost Selection 
technical 
For  your  online  submission,  your  EOI  should  demonstrate 
competence and geographical experience based on project references entered 
under the CMS profile. We encourage you to update project information under 
your CMS prior to filing EOI. 
December 2020 
Types of consultants 
Firm 
Estimated Budget (INR) 
69,33,150 
Himachal Pradesh, India   
Phone No: +91 1972-22346 
Engineer  
 M.+919816573293                                                               cum Deputy Director 
Project 
Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh                                                            HP-SHIVA  
Mail Id:- seiph_hmr123@rediffmail.com 
                                                Superintending 
                  Sd/- 
Construction Supervision of Irrigation Civil Works & Electro-Mechanical works 
Terms of Reference for Consultants 
1.  Objective and Purpose of the Assignment 
Background 
The Government of India (GoI) has applied for financing from the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB)towards the cost of Himachal Pradesh Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation, 
and Value Addition Readiness Project.  
This PRF will support the State of Himachal Pradesh with preparing the  project and 
ensuring  implementation  readiness, thereby facilitating the timely and  cost-effective 
achievement of the ensuing project’s outcomes and outputs. To achieve high level of 
project  readiness  of  the  ensuing  loan,  the  PRF  will  (i)  support  project  preparation, 
detailed  design  activities,  and  advance  procurement  actions;  (ii)  pilot  activities  to 
demonstrate a new model of subtropical horticulture production technology, marketing 
and irrigation development systems to the state, which will then be scaled up under 
the  ensuing  loan;  and  (iii)  capacity  building  of  the  executing  and  implementing 
agencies which have not implemented projects with ADB, for a smooth transition from 
preparation to implementation. The PRF’s pilot activities will comprise new irrigation 
systems  to  service  the  new  subtropical  horticultural  farming  practices,  and 
establishment of new production technologies and marketing systems. 
Under the output 1 of the PRF, Department of Irrigation and Public Health (Jal Shakti 
Vibhag),  shall    construct  /rehabilitate  17irrigation  schemes  introducing  innovative 
technologies for water extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate and 
disaster  resilience,  and  establish  and  capacitate  water  user  associations  on  the 
3 
constructed  irrigation  schemes  with  women’s  participation  and  gender  equitable 
leadership. A brief description of the project area and works is given below: 
Sl. 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
District  Subproject  Packag
Brief Work Description  
Hamirpu
r  
e No. 
LIS Kehdroo  CW -2 
LIS Bhaleu 
Mandi 
Bilaspur 
LIS Binga  CW-1 
LIS 
Sandhole 
LIS Dabrot 
LIS Kalswai 
at Ghamtal 
LIS 
MatourTand
a 
LIS Kalahod 
FIS 
KothiMajher 
LIS Talwara 
MLIP Dulet 
LIS Lanjhta 
CW-3 
Kangra 
LIS Lahat  CW-4 
LIS Rit 
FIS Sehal 
FIS Lower 
Baijnath 
FIS Dehan 
Garoon 
Approach Path, Duckbill Headweir, 
Main Storage Tank, Sump well, Main 
Delivery Tank, Office for WUA, Rising 
Main, Pumping Machinery, HDPE 
Distribution System, Supply of Power 
Intake Works, Pump House, Pumping 
Machinery, Collection Tank, Sump 
Well, Main Delivery Tank, HDPE 
Distribution System, Supply of Power 
(Including Solar Power), Metering 
System 
Intake Works, Headweir, Sedimentation 
Tank,  Reinforcement Cement 
Concrete Box Chamber, Office for 
WUA, Pump House, Pumping 
Machinery, Main Storage Tank, Sump 
Well, Main Delivery Tank, HDPE 
Distribution System, Providing & Fixing 
Automatic Rope Pulley arrangement 
with water sensor, Clarifloccculator,    
Reinforcement Cement Concrete Dyke 
Approach Path, Storage Tank, Desilting 
Tank, Sedimentation Tank, Main 
Delivery Tank, Reinforcement Cement 
Concrete Main Channel, Road 
Crossing, HDPE Distribution System, 
Supply of Power (Including Solar 
Power, Rising Main, Pumping 
Machinery 
Objective 
The Department of Irrigation and Public Health (Jal Shakti Vibhag), Himachal Pradesh 
(the “Employer”) has initiated the tendering processing for these works as one contract 
per  district.  Construction  supervision  firm  shall  be  recruited  to  supervise  the 
construction progress and quality for these contracts.  
2.  Scope of Work 
The  major  assignment  in  this  consultancy  shall  be  construction  supervision  and 
contract monitoring  of 16  irrigation  schemes across  4  Districts.  The  work shall  also 
consist, wherever required, (a) conduct necessary surveys, investigation and tests (b) 
4 
technical appraisal of subprojects and updating preliminary designs (c)review detailed 
engineering designs; (d) preparation of monitoring reports, etc. 
The construction supervision engineer shall report to Executive Engineer, Hamirpur, 
DIPH (Jal Shakti Vibhag). Duty Station shall be based Hamirpur for the Construction 
Engineers  and  Project  Coordinator  cum  MIS  Associate.  Site  Supervisors  will  be 
located  at  respective  districts  to  ensure  the  coverage  of  irrigation  schemes  are 
supervised on daily basis. 
Period  of  Engagement  will  be  12  months  with  the  extensions  if  the  irrigation  works 
contracts are extended.  
General tasks of the team 
(i) Inspection and supervision 
•  Become familiar with Department of Irrigation and Public Health (Jal Shakti Vibhag) 
construction  policies, site  selection and management  requirements  and  with  all 
key project documents, in particular the irrigation system design documents, due 
diligence reports and safeguard policies. 
•  Work  closely  with  the  DIPH  (Jal  Shakti  Vibhag)  to  engender  a  strong  team 
commitment to the agreed construction plans and processes of the project, and 
to guide the processes forward in order to achieve the sub-project’s plans and, 
ensuring that quality of construction in the field are in compliance with the DIPH 
(Jal Shakti Vibhag) and Project Engineering/Technical guideline. 
•  Conduct  daily  site  visits  to  irrigation  construction  sites  in  the  four  districts  on  6 
days  per  week/  8  hours  per day  basis  and  additionally  during  the  weekends  in 
cases of concrete casting or other important critical construction elements. 
•  Ensure  that  the  contractor  provides  shop  drawings  of  all  electro-mechanical 
equipment  and  that  such  equipment  is  inspected  before  leaving  the  factory  for 
quality of materials and accuracy of assembly as required by the approved shop 
drawings and specifications and Government of India standards. In the event that 
it is physically impractical for the supervising engineers to visit the supplier factory, 
then  the  PMU,  in  consultation  with  the  supervising  engineers,  will  contract  an 
“approved agent” to conduct the pre-delivery equipment inspection. 
•  Visit each irrigation sites at least once per week and maintain daily logs of site 
visits. These must be certified at the end of each visit by the chairperson or vice 
chairperson and at least one other member of the irrigation scheme Water User 
Association (WUA). 
•  Assist  the  WUA  members  to  read  and  understand  the  applicable  contract  and 
plans and apply them to the work at hand. 
•  Ensure the contractor meets the national and/or state’s requirements relevant to 
environment health and safety (EHS) as specified in the contract. This includes 
workers  trainings,  use  of  personal  protective  equipment,  use  of  barricades, 
availability of safe drinking water, availability of mobile toilet, disposal of waste or 
muck at designated place, use of diesel generator set with acoustic enclosures 
and muffler, transportation of material under covered conditions, availability of first 
aid box at construction site, site and waste management,  oil or chemical spills, 
condition  of 
the  site,  rehabilitation  of  disturbed  sites,  removal  of  any 
trees,management of historic and cultural resources, and provision of clean water 
5 
and  sanitation  facilities.  Any  matters  arising  in  relation  to  these  requirements 
should be included in monthly progress reports. 
•  Perform  compliance  inspection  on  EHS  requirements  and  ensure  government 
standards are met by the contractor. Report findings on the inspections to PMU 
and recommend solutions on EHS issues.   
• 
In case non-compliance to EHS requirements, provide guidance to the contractors 
on how to address issues on EHS.    
•  Certify  all  structural  works  before  casting  and  be  physically  present  during  the 
casting of the important critical construction elements. 
•  Ensure  that  the  contractors  and  WUA  are  aware  of  the  Grievance  Procedures 
available to them. 
•  Participate  in  the  final  inspection  of  completed  works  and  in  the  certification  of 
completion. 
•  Participate in the inspection at the end of the defects and liabilities period if the 
contract is still in force 
(ii)Construction Quality 
•  Ensure that all construction work is in accordance with the construction drawings 
including dimensions, lines and levels. 
•  Certify 
that 
together  with 
formwork  dimensions,  alignment  and  quality 
reinforcement  size  and  arrangements  are  correct  before  the  casting  of  any 
structure. 
• 
Inspect all materials to ensure they meet contracted specifications. 
•  Check  concrete  mix  to  ensure  it  meets  contract  specifications  and  ensure  that 
samples are randomly selected for compression testing.  
Codes Of Practice: - 
IS: 456   Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete 
IS: 457   Code  of  practice  for  general  construction  of  plain  and  reinforced 
concrete for dams and other massive structures 
IS: 3370   Code of practice for concrete structures for storage of liquids (Parts 
1 to 4) 
IS: 3935  Code of practice for composite construction. 
IS: 2204  Code of practice for construction of reinforced concrete shell roof. 
IS: 2210   Criteria  for  the  design  of  reinforced  concrete  shell  structures  and 
folded plates 
IS: 2502  Code  of  practice  for  bending  and  fixing  of  bars  for  concrete 
reinforcement 
IS: 5525  Recommendation  for  detailing  of  reinforcement  in  reinforced 
concrete works 
IS: 2751   Code of practice for welding of mild steel plain and deformed bars 
used for reinforced concrete construction 
6 
IS: 9417  Specification  for  welding  cold  worked  bars  for  reinforced  concrete 
construction 
IS: 3558   Code  of  practice  for  use  of  immersion  vibrators  for  consolidating 
concrete 
IS: 3414  Code of practice for design and installation of joints in buildings. 
IS: 4326  Code of practice for earthquake resistant design and construction of 
building 
IS: 4014   Code of practice for steel tubular scaffolding (Parts 1 & 2) 
IS: 2571   Code of practice for laying insitu cement concrete flooring. 
IS: 7861  Code  of  practice 
for  extreme  weather  concreting:  Part  1 
Recommended practice for hot weather concreting 
Applicable Codes for RCC  
Materials: - 
IS. 269  Specification for 33 grade ordinary Portland cement. 
IS. 455   Specification for Portland slag cement. 
IS. 1489   Specification for Portland-pozzolana cement (Part 1&2). 
IS: 8112  Specification for 43 grade ordinary Portland cement 
IS: 12269  Specification for 53 grade ordinary Portland cement 
IS: 12330  Specification for sulphate resisting Portland cement 
IS: 383  Specification for coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for 
concrete. 
IS: 432  Specification for mild steel and medium (tensile steel bars and hard-
drawn steel) wires for concrete reinforcement (Part 1 and 2) 
IS: 1786  Specification  for  high  strength  deformed  steel  bars  and  wires  for 
concrete reinforcement 
IS: 1566  Specification 
reinforcement 
for  hard-drawn  steel  wire 
fabric 
for  concrete 
IS: 9103   Specification for admixtures for concrete 
IS: 2645  Specification for integral cement water- proofing compounds 
IS: 4990  Specification for plywood for concrete shuttering work 
Material Testing 
IS. 4031   Methods of physical tests for hydraulic cement (Parts 1 to 15) 
IS: 4032    Method chemical analysis of hydraulic cement. 
IS: 650  Specification for standard sand for testing of cement. 
IS: 2430   Methods for sampling of aggregates for concrete. 
IS. 2386    Methods of test for aggregates for concrete (Parts 1 to 8) 
7 
IS: 3025  Methods of sampling and test (physical and chemical) for water used 
in industry 
IS: 6925  Methods  of  test  for  determination  of  water  soluble  chlorides  in 
concrete admixtures 
Material Storage 
IS: 4082   Recommendations on stacking and storing of construction materials 
at site 
Concrete Mix Design 
IS:10262  Recommended guidelines for concrete mix design. 
SP:23 (S&T) Handbook on Concrete Mixes  
Concrete Testing 
IS: 1199   Method of sampling and analysis of concrete. 
IS: 516  Method of test for strength of concrete. 
IS: 9013  Method of making, curing and determining compressive strength of 
acelerated cured concrete test specimens. 
IS: 8142  Method of test for determining setting time of concrete by penetration 
resistance.  
IS: 9284  Method of test for abrasion resistance of concrete. 
IS: 2770  Methods of testing bond in reinforced concrete. 
HDPE Pipe: - The HDPE pipes and specials shall conform to IS- 4984:1995. 
HDPE pipes and other fitting’ s like Tee, bends, adopter and pieces etc. shall 
be jointed with Butt fusion welding. The metal part of Quick-coupled (QC) shall 
be  manufactured  from  aluminium  alloy.  Holding  attachment  must  be  strong 
enough to with stand the pressure two times the working pressure of the pipe 
for which attachment are provided. The HDPE pipe shall be ISI marked.  
•  Ensure  that  structures  are  properly  compacted  during  casting  including  Proctor 
testing of fill and backfill randomly selected. 
•  Spend at least 2 hours at each site visited. Inspect the constructed works. Train 
construction  foremen  on  how  to  avoid  and,  if  necessary,  rectify  any  defects. 
Explain the next stages of the construction to the WUA. Point out the key issues 
they may need to look out for and respond to any questions they may have. 
•  Spend  at  least  4  hours  on  site  during  major  concrete  casting  works  to  ensure 
proper mix of materials and to ensure compliance with stated standards. 
8 
Matrix of Experts, Job description and qualifications  
Expert 
Key Experts 
Team Leader 
cum -
Construction 
Supervision 
Engineers - 
Civil 
Numbers  Person 
Month/ 
Expert 
Indicative Job 
Description 
Qualification 
1 
12 
•  Civil Engineering 
degree from a 
recognized Indian 
university or equivalent 
from an overseas 
institution. 
•  Five years of work 
experience in water 
storage and distribution 
construction. 
•  Evidence of direct 
personal responsibility 
for the construction of 
irrigation or other water 
control systems. 
•  Familiarity with Asian 
Development Bank or 
World Bank 
construction systems 
and procedures an 
advantage. 
• 
 Fluency in English an 
advantage. 
•  Willingness to work at 
district level in Himachal 
Pradesh. 
•  Willingness and ability 
to travel daily to 
construction sites using 
own transport and / or 
local transport including 
taxis, boats and motor 
bikes as required. 
•  Willingness to transfer 
skills to contractors, 
construction staff and 
members of village 
WUAs. 
•  Familiar with EHS in the 
field of construction and 
understand relevant 
government 
requirements.  
•  Support employer in all 
aspects of contract 
management and 
construction 
supervision to ensure 
that works are 
executed on time and 
per the specified 
quality. 
•  Visit the project sites 
as per agreed plan 
with  
•  Ensure that all the 
construction drawings 
and any revisions are 
approved and 
available before 
starting construction of 
any component of the 
project. 
•  Ensure that all civil 
works components/ 
items of work are 
executed as per 
relevant BIS codes 
standards and all 
material used should 
also confirms to 
standards as per BIS 
codes and executed 
components should 
confirm to approved 
specifications. 
•  Ensure all necessary 
tests are conducted for 
quality assurance as 
per relevant BIS codes 
and records are 
maintained for these 
tests. 
•  Supervise works for all 
the site supervisors. 
•  To impart necessary 
instructions to site 
supervisor or 
construction 
contractors for 
improvement of works 
quality and ensure 
compliance of same. 
Construction 
Supervision 
Engineers- 
Electrical 
•  Prepare all necessary 
reports. 
1 
12 
•  Visit the project sites 
•  Electrical Engineering/ 
9 
for the electro-
mechanical 
components delivery, 
installation and 
commissioning. 
•  Ensure that all 
supplied material and 
component executed 
are as per relevant BIS 
standards and 
approved 
specifications. 
•  Ensure all necessary 
tests are conducted for 
quality assurance and 
records are maintained 
for these tests. 
•  To impart necessary 
instructions to site 
supervisor or 
construction 
contractors for 
improvement of works 
quality and ensure 
compliance of same. 
•  Prepare all necessary 
reports. 
Mechanical Engineering 
degree from a 
recognized Indian 
university or equivalent 
from an overseas 
institution. 
•  Five years of work 
experience in 
installation, running and 
maintenance of 
pumping machinery and 
allied accessories for 
lifting of water.  
•  Evidence of direct 
personal responsibility 
for irrigation or other 
water control systems 
projects. 
•  Willingness to work at 
district level in Himachal 
Pradesh. 
•  Willingness and ability 
to travel daily to 
construction sites using 
own transport and / or 
local transport including 
taxis, boats and motor 
bikes as required. 
•  Willingness to transfer 
skills to contractors, 
construction staff and 
members of village 
WUAs. 
Non-Key Experts 
Site 
Supervisor 
8 
12 
•  Ensure that assigned 
•  Civil Engineering 
project sites are visited 
once everyday for 
supervision of ongoing 
works. 
•  Ensure that all works 
are carried to highest 
levels of quality and in 
the required time. 
Ensure that work is 
carried out as per the 
contract, minimise 
variation, track and 
assess variation. 
•  Prepare all necessary 
reports. 
Diploma from a 
recognized Indian 
institute or equivalent 
from an overseas 
institution. 
•  Three years of work 
experience in water 
storage and distribution 
construction. 
•  Willingness to work at 
cluster level in 
Himachal Pradesh. 
•  Willingness and ability 
to travel daily to 
construction sites using 
own transport and / or 
local transport including 
10 
taxis, boats and motor 
bikes as required. 
•  Willingness to transfer 
skills to contractors, 
construction staff and 
members of village 
WUAs. 
•  Familiar with EHS in the 
field of construction and 
understand relevant 
government 
requirements.  
•  Graduate from a 
recognized Indian 
university or equivalent 
from an overseas 
institution. With 
certificate/diplomas in 
computer applications/ 
programming 
•  Minimum three years of 
project MIS 
development and 
Management 
experience. 
Project 
Coordinator 
1 
12 
•  Support team leader in 
project coordination, 
data entry, preparation 
of reports. 
•  Support in coordination 
with the employer and 
the site supervisors 
•  Prepare and Mange a 
project MIS 
•  Prepare all necessary 
reports. 
Distribution of Site Supervisors for Irrigation Schemes  
S.No 
District 
1 
Mandi 
No's of 
Clusters 
6 
2 
Bilaspur 
3 
4 
Hamirpur 
Kangra 
4 
2 
5 
Name of scheme 
Site Supervisor 
LIS Binga 
LIS Sandhole 
LIS Dabrot 
LIS Kalswai at Ghamtal 
LIS MatourTanda 
LIS Kalahod 
FIS KothiMajher 
LIS Talwara 
MLIP Dulet 
LIS Lanjhta 
LIS Kehdroo 
LIS Bhaleu 
LIS Lahat 
LIS Rit 
FIS Sehal 
LIS Lower Baijnath 
FIS DehanGaroon 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3.  Output/Reporting Requirements: 
11 
• 
Inception report: An inception report within 2 weeks of signing up of the 
contract including a work plan for the whole contract period. 
•  Mid Monthly Reports: Prepare mid-monthly progress reports for all irrigation 
schemes as per standardized reporting forms. 
•  Monthly Reports: Prepare detailed monthly progress reports giving the 
scheduled and actual progress of each of the irrigation schemes. 
•  Check and submit additional reports as necessary to support contractors’ 
invoices requesting payment. 
•  Contract Completion Report: Within 60 days of the completion of each 
irrigation scheme contract, submission of a contract completion reports as per 
format agreed with the employer. 
•  Attend the monthly meetings of the whole engineering team held in Shimla to 
assess the progress and quality of the work in the previous month, discuss and 
solve problems together. 
12 
Package CS2 
PMU Technical Support ToRs. 
The Government of Himachal Pradesh (GOHP) intends to apply the proceeds 
1. 
of an Asian Development Bank loan for the implementation of the Himachal Pradesh 
Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project (HP-SHIVA). The overall 
HP-SHIVA project, comprising a Project Readiness Facility ((PRF) US$10 million over 
two years) and the ensuing loan, aims to increase the income of at least 25,000 farm 
households in seven districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and 
Una)  of  subtropical  areas  of  Himachal  Pradesh.  In  the  long-term,  the  HP-SHIVA 
project will contribute to (i) increased income of rural households in Himachal Pradesh; 
and (ii) strengthened climate resilience in Himachal Pradesh. The HP-SHIVA project 
will expand irrigation to farmers, increase subtropical horticulture production and its 
climate  resilience,  and  raise  the  profitability  and  farm  gate  price  of  subtropical 
horticulture production through value chain development of targeted commodities.  
Project Readiness Facility (PRF) loan will pilot the development of drip-irrigated 
2. 
high-density horticulture production at 17 locations in 4 districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, 
Kangra,  Mandi)  and  13 blocks  incorporating  168 ha  of  irrigated  land  across 
16 irrigated  areas  and  involving  480 male  and  female  beneficiary  landowning 
households.  
3. 
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
(i)  Output 1: 
Irrigation 
infrastructure  development  and 
farmer 
management  systems  established.  This  output  will  be  management  by 
DIPH.  Output 1  will  (a) construct  or  rehabilitate  16 irrigation  schemes 
introducing  innovative  technologies  for  water  extraction,  distribution  and 
storage,  and  enhanced  climate  and  disaster  resilience  (PRF  pilot); 
(b) establish  and  capacitate  WUAs  on  the  constructed  irrigation  schemes 
with women’s participation and gender equitable leadership; and (c) finalize 
the  draft  WUA  act  to  be  submitted  for  the  HP  legislative  assembly’s 
enactment.  
(ii) Output 2: 
  Subtropical  horticulture  production  technology  and 
marketing systems demonstrated. This output will be managed by DOH. 
Output 2  will:  (a) develop  17 subtropical  horticulture  plots  covering 
168 hectares,  engaging  approximately  600  male  and  female  farmers  for 
irrigated high- and ultra-high density production of citrus, guava, litchi and 
pomegranate  (PRF  pilot);  (b) fence  all  horticulture  plots  to  protect  from 
animal predation (PRF pilot); (c) form CHPMA in the PRF areas and build 
their capacities for business/marketing; and (d) facilitate the development of 
CHPMA  investment  plans  for  subtropical  horticulture  value  addition  and 
market development.  
(iii)  Output 3: Enabling environment, tools and capacity for promoting 
irrigated  subtropical  horticulture  provided.  This  output  focuses  on 
developing capacity building tools and creating an enabling environment for 
the  implementation  of  the  ensuing  project.  Specifically,  the  project  will: 
(a) support  DOH  to  prepare  the  Himachal  Pradesh  Horticulture  Sector 
Investment  Plan  2023-2030;  (b) provide 
Development  Strategy  and 
13 
technical  training  and  experimental  study  tours,  as  well  as  investment 
project management including safeguards, procurement, gender, financial 
management  and  institutional  strengthening  for  DOH  and  DIPH  staff; 
(c) train CHPMA members on orchard management through preparing the 
packages of practice for key subtropical horticulture crops and providing on-
site  training;  (d) provide  technical  support  to  subtropical  horticulture 
nurseries; and (e) establish scientific and project monitoring system in the 
Project Management Unit (PMU).    
(iv)  Output  4:  Ensuing  investment  project  and  its  implementation 
readiness prepared. This output will support DOH and DIPH to prepare the 
feasibility studies, detailed engineering design and surveys, due diligence 
assessment,  safeguards  preparation  work  and  bid  documents  for  the 
ensuing  loan,  supported  by  PRF  consultants.  Possible  public-private 
partnership  pathways  will  be  explored  in  collaboration  with  the  Private 
Sector Operations Department as part of the ensuing loan preparation.   
1. 
The  PRF  will  be  coordinated  by  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  led  by  the 
Department of Horticulture and including DOH and Department of Irrigation and Public 
health (DIPH) technical and administrative staff.  
2. 
To  strengthen  the  PMU  project  implementation  capacity,  the  PMU  will 
individually  recruit  national  gender,  social  safeguard,  environment  safeguard,  data 
management, Geographic Information System (GIS) and financial and procurement 
management, specialists to support the PMU with project implementation. Terms of 
reference for these positions are as follows: 
Position:  Gender and development specialist 
Location:  PMU 
Category : National Consultant 
Period of Engagement : 9.6 person months over 2 years (4.8, 4.8 person months).  
Reports to: Project Director  
Positions Supervised: None 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications  
•  Master’s degree in social sciences, gender studies, development studies or related 
discipline;  
•  At least 10 years of relevant experience in gender-related programming / projects, 
rural community development and women’s economic empowerment; 
•  Familiarity with policies and practice in  India of donor-funded projects, preferably 
with ADB-financed projects; 
•  Skills in designing and delivering capacity building and awareness-raising training 
courses related to gender and social inclusion; 
•  Strong analytical and problem solving and communication skills; 
•  Strong networking, team-building, decision-making, organizational skills;  
•  Computer literate. 
JOB SPECIFICS 
14 
Job Objective: 
•  The  Gender  and  Development  Specialist  ensures  that  gender  development 
mechanisms policies, principles, procedures and requirements are integrated into all 
project activities and are compliant with ADB and GOI standards. 
Job Outputs: 
•  By mid PY2, prepare a Gender Action Plan that clearly specifies how the project will 
address gender and development concerns in the HP-SHIVA project 
•  By end PY1, facilitation guides to ensure the active participation of women and other 
vulnerable groups; 
•  By end PY1, capability building modules on gender development for DoH and DIPH 
staff and WUA and CHPMA members and committees; 
•  By end PY1, a plan for increasing women farmer participation in training and access 
to information; 
•  Required monthly and quarterly reports. 
Primary Tasks: 
As Focal Person for Gender Equality and Social Inclusion: 
i.Review the SPRSS to confirm its relevance for target project areas. 
ii.Design and deliver awareness-training courses / capacity building in gender equity 
and  women’s  empowerment;  prevention  of  gender-based  violence  and  sexual 
harassment in the workplace, and the rights of the child, at the start of the project 
for all project staff and other stakeholders as appropriate.  
iii.Work closely with the implementing partners in all project areas and support them 
in implementing the activities that constitute the Gender Action Plan.  
iv.Ensure that gender and social inclusion issues are effectively addressed during all 
phases of the project; and assess and carefully track subtropical horticulture-based 
livelihood developments of women, youth and other vulnerable groups.  
v.Facilitate  knowledge-sharing  on  gender  and  social  inclusion  related  issues, 
including  through  partner  forums,  web  pages  and  reports  and  including  lessons 
learned / best practice from India and elsewhere where relevant. 
vi.Design,  as  part  of  the  HP-SHIVA  baseline  survey,  a  household  representative 
aimed  at  obtaining  data  on  the  gender  division  of  labor  in  farming  and  related 
productive activities in farm households and in reproductive work. information that 
may  be  focused  within  the  survey  will  include:  (i) gender-based  patterns  of  work 
allocation; (ii) access to and control over productive resources; (iii) patterns of male 
and female access to benefits arising out of their labor (wages, incomes and profits, 
savings) and control over the use of such benefits; (iv) relative access of women 
and  men  to  training  and  extension  for  improved  productivity  and  incomes;  and 
(v) gender-based opportunities and constraints on participation in decision making. 
vii.Support  HPSHIVA  PRF  to  develop  a  gender  action  plan  for  activities  under  the 
ensuing loan and ensure women farmers participate and benefit from all the project 
components. Additionally, at the level of strategic gender needs, on the basis of the 
foregoing  gender  analysis,  the  consultant  will  be  required  to  develop  strategy  to 
promote women’s full participation in HPSHIVA project planning, implementation, 
access to benefits from the project, and management, monitoring, and evaluation. 
15 
viii.Ensure that all results of the gender analysis are incorporated in the project design, 
implementation, and evaluation. 
At project management level:  
i.  Provide leadership for implementing of GAP and particularly lead and ensure that 
women’s  empowerment  indicators  are  effectively  incorporated  into  the  M&E 
processes.  
ii.  Review  implementation  and  provide  feedback  on  how  to  achieve  best  possible 
project outcomes with respect to gender equity and women’s empowerment. 
iii.  Prepare  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  and  regular  Project  Progress  Reports 
following GoHP and ADB rules and guidelines; as well as any other gender reports 
as required and requested by the EA. 
iv.  Work  on  emerging  plans  with  project  specialists  and  recommend  good-practice 
gender-sensitive  methods  relevant  to  the  component  under  consideration.  This 
should include advocating with decision-makers in each sector for gender/diversity 
responses, and the rights of marginalized groups. 
v.  Ensure that there are adequate communication materials on gender issues. 
At project implementation level: 
i.  Disseminate evidence for influencing policy and practice. 
ii.  Prepare a plan for increasing women farmer participation in training and access to 
information and extension services on group formation and management, financial 
and business management, and entrepreneurship 
iii.  Participate  actively  in  networks  of  and  for  women  and  marginalized  groups  and 
these  groups.  Network  with  all  gender-related 
facilitate 
organizations and other departments related to the project.  
linkages  among 
iv.  Guide and assist community WUA and CHPMA facilitators in their outreach to rural 
communities;  interact with  women  in  communities  to gain  better understanding  of 
women’s’  perceptions  and  guide  service  providers  in  approaches  to  integrating 
women into project activities. 
v.  Review  the  participation  of  women  in  project  activities  and  decision-making 
processes and make recommendations to improve processes. 
vi.  Perform other tasks as may be assigned by the Project Director. 
Position:  Social Safeguards specialist 
Location:  PMU 
Category: National Consultant 
Period of Engagement: 9.6 person months over 2 years (4.8, 4.8 person months) 
Reports to:  Project Director  
Positions Supervised: None 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications  
•  Master’s degree in social sciences, development studies or related discipline;  
•  At  least  10 years  of  relevant  experience  in  social  safeguards  monitoring  and 
management; 
16 
•  Familiarity with policies and practice in India of donor-funded projects, preferably 
with ADB-financed projects; 
•  Experience in developing strategies for community-led development programs; 
•  Strong analytical and problem solving and communication skills; 
•  3 years of experience working in the field of grievance redress will be an advantage; 
•  Strong networking, team-building, decision-making, organizational skills;  
•  Computer literate. 
JOB SPECIFICS 
Job Objective: 
•  The  Social  safeguards  specialist  will  ensure  that  social  safeguards,  and  feedback 
handling mechanism policies, principles, procedures, and requirements are integrated 
in  all  project  subprojects,  are  operational,   and are  compliant  with  GoHP and ADB 
standards. 
Job Outputs: 
•  By mid PY 2, a poverty and social analysis survey (as part of the HP-SHIVA baseline 
survey)  that  provides  a  baseline  against  which  envisaged  improvements  in  the 
communities' lives can be measured 
•  Ensure 
the 
integration  of  social  safeguards 
in  subproject  planning  and 
implementation;  
•  Capability  building  modules  on  social  safeguards  and 
feedback  handling 
mechanisms; 
•  Required monthly and quarterly reports; 
•  Periodic and annual project social safeguards survey; 
•  Annual project social safeguards report; 
•  Occaisional social safeguards studies. 
Primary Tasks: 
As Focal Person for Social Safeguards 
i.  Determine the capacities and assess the needs of the project teams for them to 
be able to implement subprojects based on the social and cultural context of the 
communities they are working with; 
Identify key stakeholders (poor and vulnerable groups in particular), their project 
related interests and any socio-economic barriers to delivery of project benefits; 
iii.  Recommend strategies for addressing the concerns of these stakeholders and 
ii. 
maximizing the socio-economic benefits of the projects; 
iv.  Consult stakeholders in the proposed project areas and prepare, as part of the 
HP-SHIVA  baseline  study,  a  poverty  and  social  analysis  that  provides  a 
baseline against which envisaged improvements in the communities' lives can 
be measured; 
Train  relevant  PMU  staff  and  other  relevant  agencies  in  safeguard  related 
project policies, principles, procedures and requirements. 
v. 
vi.  Capacitate project implementers to conduct meaningful consultations with the 
impacted communities during each stage of subproject development. 
vii.  Develop  plans  and  strategies  to  ensure  compliance  with  project  social 
safeguard requirements; 
17 
viii.  Prepare resettlement plans and/or Indigenous Peoples plans (if required) and 
ensure  livelihood  restoration  measures  for  project  affected  households  and 
businesses  are  included  in  any  project  resettlement  plans  and  the  plans  are 
gender sensitive; 
ix.  Monitor compliance with safeguards project requirements to identify gaps and 
issues and provide technical assistance support when necessary. 
Facilitate compliance with safeguards reporting requirements. 
x. 
xi.  Prepare plans, reports, field notes, thought papers and other documents. 
xii.  Ensure that related plans and other documents are properly disclosed;  
xiii.  Define  strategies  for  information  dissemination  to  effectively  communicate 
social safeguard programs and strategies. 
xiv.  Perform other tasks as may be assigned by the Project Director. 
As focal Person for Feedback Handling: 
i.  Develop procedures for the implementation of the project Feedback Handling 
ii. 
mechanism (FHM). 
Train  relevant  PMU  and  DoH/DIPH  staff  on  the 
management of the FHM. 
implementation  and 
iii.  Ensure proper recording of all feedback and grievances received by the PMU 
and  facilitate  resolution  and  responses  to  received  feedback  as  appropriate, 
within the prescribed period. 
iv.  Monitor implementation and operation of the GRM, collect and consolidate data 
on the GRM and prepare regular reports on these data. 
v.  Provide training for WUA and CHPMA members and  committees on the FHM. 
National Environmental Safeguards Specialist  
9.6 person months over 2 years (4.8, 4.8 person months) 
Position: 
Location:         PMU 
Duration: 
Reports to:   Project Director 
Positions Supervised: None  
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Minimum general experience of 10 years in rural development and environmental 
safeguards. 
At  least  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  environmental  engineering,  environmental 
management or relevant areas. 
Significant international financial institution project implementation experience. 
Familiarity  with  rural  development  issues  in  India  at  sub-national  and  national 
levels. 
Ability to develop and maintain close association with government agencies and 
communities. 
(vi)  Strong  analytical,  communication,  documentation  and  presentation  skills  with 
experience in facilitating and chairing meetings with multiple stakeholder groups. 
(vii)  Good organizational and planning skills and an ability to adhere to deadlines. 
(viii)  Excellent writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English and Hindi. 
18 
(ix) 
Previous experience with the ADB or World Bank would be a distinct asset. 
Job Objective: 
JOB SPECIFICS 
•  The environment safeguards specialist will ensure that the Project is implemented 
in accordance with the environmental safeguarding requirements of the GoHP and  
ADB. S/he will be attached to the PMU and will coordinate and facilitate all related 
environment monitoring and reporting activities.  
Job Outputs: 
•  Ensure  the  integration  of  environmental  safeguards  in  subproject  planning  and 
implementation;  
•  Capability  building  modules  on  environmental  safeguards  and  related  feedback 
handling mechanisms; 
•  Periodic and annual project environment safeguards survey; 
•  Annual project environment safeguards report; 
•  Contribution  to  quarterly  progress  reports  concerning  environmental  safeguards 
issues; 
•  Occaisional environmental safeguards studies. 
Primary Tasks: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Assist  the  PMU  to  comply  with  the  GoHP  and  ADB  environmental  safeguard 
requirements. 
Coordinate and facilitate all environmental safeguarding monitoring and reporting 
activities for the Project. 
Preparing detailed monitoring schedules and monitoring environmental reports 
for submission to ADB to ensure that the environmental safeguard requirements 
associated with the selected subprojects are effectively met. 
Train  relevant  DoH  and  DIPH  staff  and  WUA  and  CHPMA  members  in 
environmental safeguard requirements for the Project. 
Assist the WUA and CHPMA facilitators in integrating environmental safeguard 
guidelines into the subproject implementation and monitoring. 
(vi)  Provide  training  to  engineers  and  technicians  in  the  PMU  to  implement  and 
(vii) 
monitor environmental safeguard measures set out under the RF. 
Liaise on environmental matters with other technical agencies that will provide 
support services to the Project. 
(viii)  Assist  the  PMU  in  applying  the  ADB  Rapid  Environmental  Assessment  (REA) 
checklists, and the environment categorization forms for subprojects. 
(ix)  Assist the PMU in the preparation of Initial Environmental Examinations (IEEs) 
(x) 
for category B subprojects. 
Apply  the  set  of  environmental  safeguard  guidelines  to  ensure  that  the 
subprojects  are  designed  in  a  way  that  does  not  alter  the  environmental 
19 
classification  of  the  Project  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Safeguard  Policy 
Statement 2009. 
(xi)  Keep a detailed record of the public consultation activities and ensure that the 
public has access to public documents related to the environmental safeguarding 
process. 
(xii)  Provide training to the grievance point persons (GPPs) in applying environment 
aspects of the grievance redress mechanism set out in the RF. 
Monitoring and Evaluation SQL Specialist 
Position: 
Location:         PMU  
Duration: 
Reports to:   Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Positions Supervised: None 
24 person months over 2 years (12, 12 personmonths) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications : 
(i). Bachelor’s Degree in computer science, Computer Programing. 
(ii). Must have at least 5 years extensive experience on SQL Development and design 
tables and indexes for the best database architecture and performance. 
(iii).  Must  be  knowledgeable  in  the  following  databases:  MySQL,  SQL  Server  and 
SQLite. 
(iv).  Working knowledge of written and spoken English. 
(v). Preferably with working experience on IFI-financed development projects. 
JOB SPECIFICS 
Job Objective: 
•  To develop and administer data base system for the HP-SHIVA PRF project.  
Job Outputs: 
•  Approved technical workshop/session design; 
•  Project progress and outcome reports [with source code reviews]; 
•  Terminal Report.  
Primary Tasks: 
i.  Conduct  technical  sessions  on  the  development  and  management  of  SQL-based 
applications. 
ii.  Conduct testing and refinement of system components prior its implementation. 
iii.  Conduct mentoring activities for PMU staff in the following areas. 
a.  Review query performance and optimize code; 
b.  Write queries used for front-end applications (websites, desktop applications, 
or cloud apps); 
c.  Design and code database tables to store the application’s data; 
d.  Data modeling to visualize database structure; 
20 
e.  Work with application developers to create optimized queries; 
f.  Create database triggers for automation, e.g., automatic email notifications; 
g.  Create table indexes to improve database performance; 
h.  Programme views, stored procedures, and functions; 
i.  Assist the M&E specialist with standard database maintenance. 
Geographic  Information  Systems  (GIS)  and  computer  assisted 
24 person months over 2 years (12, 12 personmonths) 
Position: 
drawing (CAD) specialist 
Location:         PMU  
Duration: 
Reports to:   Project Director 
Positions Supervised: None 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications : 
(i). Graduate of a bachelor’s degree in Geography, Geodetic Engineering, 
Environmental Science or related discipline 
(ii). Training:  
(iii). 
Related training in GIS and computer assisted drawing operations 
Experience:  At least 3 years of relevant and progressive work experience in 
large-scale or development program related GIS operation and maintenance and 
the use of computer assisted drawing software 
(iv).  Others: 
Proficiency in the use of general computer applications 
JOB SPECIFICS 
Job Objective: 
•  Day-to-day operation and maintenance of the HP-SHIVA PRF geo-database 
system, generation of maps and other GIS-based thematic data as required by the 
project. 
•  Support the DIPH in geo-referencing project irrigation system planning information 
as required by the department; 
•  Support the DIPH to purchase and install CAD software and train staff in its 
application to irrigation system infrastructure drawing.  
Job Outputs: 
•  Functional and updated geo-database 
•  Regular and on-demand GIS-based thematic data analysis and maps 
•  GIS system enhancements and tools 
•  PMU, DOH and DIPH staff trained on GIS 
•  DIPH staff trained in the use of CAD software 
Primary Tasks: 
21 
i.  Set  up  the  GIS  platform  for  the  HP-SHIVA  PRF  and  develop  a  real  time  data 
exchange mechanism from  beneficiary communities and supporting DIPH and DOH 
offices to state level using applicable smartphone apps or  software; 
ii.  Day-to-day operation and maintenance of the HP-SHIVA PRF geo-database system 
including consolidation of geo-tagged files; 
iii.  Generate regular and on-demand GIS-based thematic data analysis and maps for 
operations, monitoring, evaluation, reporting, and feedback;   
iv.  Take part in enhancing the GIS component required by project and in developing the 
necessary guidelines, references and tools for GIS operations that may be required 
under HP-SHIVA PRF; 
v.  Support DIPH staff  in georeferencing project  irrigated  areas  and  associated  water 
catchments for both planning and monitoring purposes;   
vi.  Provide  technical  assistance  in  training  of  PMU,  DOH  and  DIPH  staff  on  geo-
database management and geo-tagging; 
vii.  Conduct training, with focus on climate & disaster risk and vulnerability analysis in 
GIS environment 
viii.  Supports the PMU in analyzing in GIS environment the available data 
ix.  Coordinate  with  other  DOH  and  DIPH  GIS  platforms  for  data  sharing  and 
development; 
x.  Support  the  DIPH  with  the  purchase  and  application  of  a  selected  CAD  software 
program including the systematic training of key DIPH staff in the use of the software 
for preparing irrigation system plans and technical drawings; 
xi.  Perform other duties that may be assigned by the Project Director. 
Financial management specialist 
Position: 
Location:         PMU  
Duration: 
Reports to:   Project Director 
Positions Supervised: PMU/PIU accountants 
24 person months over 2 years (12, 12 personmonths) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications : 
(i). a recognized professional accountancy qualification (e.g., CPA, CA or equivalent) 
or equivalent in related fields;  
(ii). an overall 10 years of working experience with 5 years of experience in 
project/program financial management and training/ capacity building; and 
experience in similar capacity and sound knowledge of ADB 
(iii). 
procedures/policies and working on externally funded projects/programs shall have 
added advantage. 
JOB SPECIFICS 
22 
Job Objective: 
The objective of the services is to strengthen the Financial Management capacity of the 
PMU/DOH and DIPH implementing the ADB’s assisted Project to ensure:  
•  all program funds are used for the intended purpose and with due attention to 
• 
considerations of economy and efficiency; and  
full  compliance  with  ADB’s 
financial  management  and  disbursement 
requirements  as  outlined  in  the  relevant  sections  of  Loan/grant  agreements, 
Project  Administration  Manual,  and  ADB’s  loan  disbursement  handbook, 
minutes of the loan negotiations, etc. 
Job Outputs: 
•  Produce monthly, quarterly and annual consolidated project financial reports 
Primary Tasks: 
i.  Support the PMU/DOH and DIPH in ensuring that separate accounts for the project 
are  duly  maintained  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  are  duly  segregated  by 
financing source (e.g. ADB and Government funding);  
ii.  Support  the  PMU/DOH  and  DIPH  in  improving  the  FM  systems  including  the 
following: 
A.  Support the setting-up of the accounting software in the PMU; 
B.  Prepare/modify the Chart of Accounts (CoA) as necessary  and automating the 
financial reporting to the extent possible; 
C.  Contribute to the Development of an FM manual for the value chain financing 
activities  to  be  implemented  under  the  ensuing  loan.  The  manual  should 
summarize  the  applicable  FM  arrangements  and  cover  the  flow  of  funds, 
accounting,  financial  reporting  and  audit  arrangements  under  the  related 
activities; as well as, 
D.  Contribute  to  the  strengthening  of  the  internal  audit  function  for  the  project 
activities to be implemented under the ensuing loan including. 
iii.  Support the PMU/DOH and DIPH in ensuring that a) all payments are duly prepared, 
reviewed, authorized, and recorded in the accounting system correctly and in a timely 
manner, and all expenditure items meet the eligibility criteria as defined in the ADB 
financing  agreement,  and  are  supported  by  adequate  documentation  (invoice, 
contracts,  evidence  of  payments  etc..)  as  outlined  in  the  ADB  disbursement 
handbook; 
iv.  Conduct  periodic  analysis  of  the  execution  of  the  procurement  and  disbursement 
projections and provide analysis of the any significant variances between planned vs 
actual expenditures;  
v.  Conduct an analysis of the financial execution of the approved procurement plan and 
budget, disbursement projections as well as financial vs physical progress. Analyze 
and document any significant variations; 
vi.  Support the PMU/DOH and DIPH in conducting quarterly reconciliation of the project 
disbursement records and ADB’s disbursement data available in the LFMIS to ensure 
the  correctness  and  completeness  of 
financial 
reports/statements. Follow-up on any discrepancies to ensure these are resolved in 
a prompt manner; 
records  and 
the  project 
23 
vii.  Assist the PMU/DOH and DIPH in preparing Withdrawal applications and in collection 
and filing of all supporting documentation in accordance with the relevant procedures 
outlined in the ADB loan disbursement handbook; 
viii.  Assist the PMU/DOH and DIPH in preparing financial information and analysis to be 
included  in  the  quarterly  progress  reports  in  an  agreed  format  to  be  submitted  to 
ADB; 
ix.  Assist the PMU/DOH and DIPH in preparing separate project financial statements 
annually covering the activities financed under all the funding sources (e.g. ADB and 
Government funding) in a format agreed with ADB;  
x.  Support the PMU/DOH and DIPH in ensuring that the project financial statements 
are audited and that the audit report, the audited consolidated financial statements 
and the management letter(s) are submitted to ADB in a timely manner;  
xi.  Support  the  PMU/DOH  and  DIPH  in  the  follow-up  of  internal  and  external  audit 
recommendations to further improve the internal controls of the project. 
xii.  Assist the PMU/DOH and DIPH in other tasks as assigned by the PMU director or 
equivalent. 
Procurement management specialist 
Position: 
Location:         PMU  
Duration: 
Reports to:   Project Director 
Positions Supervised: PMU procurement staff 
24 person months over 2 years (12, 12 personmonths) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications : 
(v). A university degree or professional qualifications in engineering, finance, public 
administration or a related field; 
(vi). 
Demonstrate knowledge of the institutional, technical, commercial, 
community level aspects of procurement; 
(vii). 
At least 7 years of cumulative experience working in procurement-related  
activities for the Asian Development Bank and or other Multilateral Development 
Banks  (MDB)- funded projects (working experience under ADB projects will be an 
advantage);  
JOB SPECIFICS 
Job Objective: 
The objective of the services is to assist the Project Director of the HP_SHIVA PRF 
Project Management Unit in activities related to procurement of goods, works and 
consultancy services to be implemented according to the ADB Procurement 
Guidelines. 
Job Outputs: 
•  HP-SHIVA PRF Procurement Plan 
•  Procurement Review and Recommendations 
24 
•  Produce monthly, quarterly and annual consolidated project financial reports 
Primary Tasks: 
xii.  Ensuring that project procurement procedures are carried out in accordance with the 
RCDP Procurement Plan and relevant Asian Development Bank Guidelines; 
xiii.  Preparing  the  General  Procurement  Notice  (GPN),  Specific  Procurement  Notices 
(SPNs), Invitation for Bids (IFBs), Request for Expressions of Interest (REOIs) and 
other solicitation documents whenever required; 
xiv.  Preparing and amending the bidding documents as needed; 
xv.  Contribute to the preparation of Terms of References (TORs); 
xvi. 
In  case  of  procurement  actions  requiring  ADB’s  “No  Objection”  coordinating  the 
dispatch  of  procurement  document  to  ADB,  monitoring  ADB’s  response  time  on 
issuing “No Objections” at different levels of the procurement process and following 
up accordingly; 
xvii.  Monitoring and ensuring timely responses to procurement questions raised by the 
ADB,  for  services,  following  up  with  the  short-listed  consultants  within  10  days  of 
RFP dispatch, to ensure their participation in the selection exercise; 
xviii.  Preparing  and  updating  the  Projects’  Annual  Procurement  Plan  and  Budget  as 
necessary;  detailing  contract  packages  (including  estimated  cost)  for  goods, 
consultancy  services  and  non-consulting  services  the  procurement/selection 
methods and processing times until completion of each procurement activity; 
xix.  Monitoring  procurement  implementation  of  and  update  the  Procurement  Plan 
whenever it becomes necessary to do so; 
xx.  Support the PMU in carrying out procurement of Civil Works, Consultancy Services 
materials and equipment as required; 
xxi.  Help ensure timely receipt of the goods and consultant status reports; 
xxii.  Support the PMU in maintaining records of all correspondence, budding documents, 
evaluation reports and other documents related to the project; 
xxiii.  Contribute to preparing  the quarterly, 6-monthly and annual progress reports; 
xxiv.  Participate  in  bid/proposal  opening  sessions,  bid  and  proposal  evaluations  and 
ensure that the appropriate Guidelines are followed to arrive at the recommendations 
for award of contracts; 
xxv.  Participate in procurement audits and reviews of the project; 
xxvi.  Support the PMU Procurement Team in preparing/updating the project procurement 
manual as well as related training modules and materials; and 
xxvii.  Assist  the  PMU  in  dealing  with  claims,  bid  challenges  and  litigations  relating  to 
contracts and procurement. 
CS3 Package 
Himachal Pradesh Horticulture Development 
Strategy and Investment Plan 2023-2030 
Terms of Reference 
26 
Introduction 
The  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  (GoHP)  proposes  to  prepare  a  Horticulture 
Sector  Development  Strategy  and  Investment  Plan  (HSDSIP),  the  development  of 
which will be financed through the Asian Development Bank (ADB) financed Himachal 
Pradesh  –  Sub-tropical  Horticulture,  Irrigation  and  Value  Addition  (SHIVA)  Project: 
Project  Readiness  Facility  (PRF)  Loan.  The  HSDSIP  will  be  prepared  between 
September 2020 and March 2021. This document presents the objective, scope, terms 
of reference and implementation arrangements for the HSDSIP preparation. 
Background  
India horticulture production. With the changing food consumption patterns, India’s 
agriculture landscape is restructuring, with horticulture now a prominent component of 
the agriculture economy and its fastest growing segment, forming about 30% of India’s 
agricultural GDP and utilizing from 8.5% of the cropped area. Total India horticulture 
production reached 314.5 million tons in 2018/19, up from 257.3 million MT in 2011/12 
and 96.6 million MT in 1991/92 and has exceeded food grain production for the last 
7 years. Total area under horticulture crops in 2018/19 was 25.5 million ha, up from 
23.2 million  ha  in  2011/12  and  12.8  million  ha  in  1991-92.  Growing  interest  in 
horticulture has been catalysed by changing food consumption patterns (from cereals, 
primary rice and wheat, to a richer mix, including fruits, vegetables, eggs and meat) 
and growing incomes, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat, and Uttar Pradesh are the leading fruit producing states in India, producing 
nearly 60% of the national horticulture output. 
A shifting agriculture environment. The Government of India (GoI) recognizes the 
need for certain strategic shifts to enable and facilitate the structural transformation of 
Indian  agriculture,  more  fully  capitalizing  on  the  sector’s  potential  contributions  to 
economic growth and job creation. Four such shifts reflect underlying trends in food 
supply and demand, including: (i) a shift away from traditional food grain production 
and towards diversification into the production of higher value agricultural commodities 
such as fruits, vegetables, and dairy products; (ii) a shift away from emphasizing on-
farm production and towards value addition in the post-harvest segments of agriculture 
value chains; (iii) a shift away from focusing on productivity and towards resilience of 
agriculture production systems for addressing the effects of climate change; (iv) a shift 
away  from  a  focus  on  agricultural  production  and  towards  nutrition  sensitive 
agriculture.1 
A  changing  consumption  and  marketing  pattern.  Organized  retail,  including  e-
retail, is rapidly growing giving consumers a wider choice of goods, more convenience, 
and often more competitive prices. The benefits of this trend are expected to extend 
to  the  mass  of  Indian  consumers.  Second,  changes  in  consumption  patterns  are 
driving rapid changes in the production basket, which is diversifying in favor of high 
value commodities such as fruit, vegetables, livestock and fisheries. This change in 
consumer tastes and preferences has set the stage for expanding and  modernizing 
handling, storage and distribution networks.1 
Himachal Pradesh economy. Himachal Pradesh (HP) is one of the smaller states in 
1 Himachal Pradesh Horticulture development Project. Project Appraisal Document. The World Bank 
27 
India,  being  ranked  17th  among  the  country’s  29 States  and  7 Union  Territories  in 
terms of size and 21st in terms of population . More than 50% of the state is under 
forest, pasture and grassland, with less than 10 % under cultivation.  Despite its hilly 
topography, since the 1990s, HP has outperformed the national average in most socio-
economic indicators including Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) growth rate, per 
capita income, literacy, life expectancy and poverty reduction.  Most notably, poverty 
has declined from 36.8% to 8.5% between 1993-94 and 2010-11, and male literacy 
improved  from  75.3%  to  89.5%  and  female  literacy  from  52.1%  to  75.8%  between 
1991 and 2011 ─ at least 10% higher than the national average respectively. In 2018-
19,  HP  per  capita  income  was  ranked  14th  among  Indian  states.  In  2015-16  the 
agricultural  and  allied  sectors  contributed  less  than  15%  of  the  GSDP  while  the 
secondary and tertiary sectors contribute 39.7% and 44.86% respectively.  
Horticulture in HP has been responsible for many of the positive outcomes in 
employment, wages, and in turn, poverty reduction. Employment in horticulture as 
a  percentage  of  all  agricultural  employment  in  HP  increased  from  0.9 percent  to 
28 percent  between  1983  and  2009-10.  Crop  diversification  has  made  a  significant 
impact on income and employment among small and marginal farmers. The expansion 
of  area  cultivated  with  non-food  grain  crops  was  a  significant  factor  influencing  the 
growth of rural non-farm employment in the state. Ninety percent of the population of 
Himachal Pradesh resides in rural areas as of the latest census, and 88 percent are 
small  and  marginal farmers. The average  operational land  holding is less  than  one 
hectare. About 70 percent of the state’s overall employment is in agriculture and the 
rural  economy.  Women  are  significant  contributors  in  agriculture,  horticulture,  and 
livestock/dairying sectors. In horticulture, women continue to provide significant labor 
and  supervisory  input  to  pre-harvest  and  post-harvest  activities.  Their  access  to 
horticulture  technologies  and  extension  services,  market  infrastructure/information, 
skill and entrepreneurship development opportunities and decision making structures, 
However, remains weak. 
HP has two distinct horticulture production systems ─ (i) temperate and sub-temperate 
horticulture; and (ii) sub-tropical horticulture. Temperate horticulture, which occurs in 
the  high  hills  and  valleys  and  cold/dry  zones  is  dominated  by  apple  cultivation  on 
107,686 ha, while sub temperate horticulture, which is predominantly in the mid-hills 
zone  includes  peach,  plum  and  apricot,  produced  on  17,288  ha.  Sub-tropical 
horticulture primarily occurs in the Low Hill and Valley zone, areas near the plains, and 
includes mango, litchi, guava, loquat, citrus fig, ber, papaya, early varieties of grapes, 
jack fruit and banana production. While crop diversification is increasing in Himachal 
Pradesh,    a  significant  increase  in  fruit  and  vegetable  crop  production  is  mostly 
concentrated in districts of the mid-hills  and high hills and valleys zones, leaving a 
substantial income gap between temperate and sub-temperate horticulture producers 
and  those  farmers  producing  subtropical  crops.  Farmers  of  temperate  horticulture 
earn, on average, $1,550 per month while horticulture farmers in the subtropical low 
hills zone and some mid-hills subhumid zones earn, on average only $116 month or 
7.4% of temperate horticultural farmers’ income  
Subtropical  horticulture  development  in  HP  faces  multiple  challenges  despite  the 
climate  potential.  A  key  bottleneck  is limited access  to  water sources  and  irrigation 
services.  Nearly  75%  of  annual  rainfall  concentrates  falls  during  the  three-month 
monsoon season and this flow is lost as run-off without utilization or conservation. Only 
about  20%  of  cultivated  area  is  irrigated  and  agriculture  is  largely  dependent  on 
27 
28 
rainfall. There is potential to increase irrigation services to about 60% of the cultivated 
area. Another key stress factor to crop production comes from monkey and wild animal 
menace, which affects about 156,000 ha of agriculture land. This menace causes crop 
losses up to 89% of the normal yield of crops, costing the agriculture and horticulture 
sector  over  Rs500  crore  annually.  Without  profitable  solutions  to  the  pest  menace, 
farmers are giving up cultivation of fruits, vegetables and maize.  
The  strategy  of  GoI  and  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  (GoHP)  to  address  the 
constraints to the rapid and sustainable development of the horticulture sector includes 
a variety of initiatives. These focus on growth through diversification into high value 
horticulture  production  by  creating  an  environment  that  enables  the  farming 
community to acquire the necessary technical knowledge and capacity to capitalize 
on  emerging  market  opportunities.  Infrastructure  development,  including  pest  proof 
fencing, an expanded irrigation area and improved road infrastructure ─ high transport 
costs are a major constraint to Indian horticulture production, both domestically and in 
international markets. Government is also focused on is improved horticulture market 
linkage, particularly through e-commerce.  The HP Horticulture Department lists the 
following development priorities/strategies2: 
improvement of productivity of existing horticulture plantations; 
• 
•  quality improvement of horticulture produce; 
•  diversification of the horticulture industry; 
•  modernization of the nursery production programme for the production of virus 
• 
free certified planting material on suitable rootstock; 
introduction of improved fruit varieties and rootstocks from advanced countries 
and their multiplication for supply to the farmers; 
•  new orientation to the planting density in the fruit orchards from the present low-
density plantation to medium and high-density plantation, with the objective of 
obtaining higher productivity of quality fruits per unit area; 
•  minimum  use  of  pesticides  with  emphasis  on  Integrated  Pest  Management 
(IPM) and Biological Control of pests and diseases; 
•  utilization of the information technology for the dissemination of technical know 
• 
how and marketing information to the fruit growers; 
improvement of water management practices in the orchards through adoption 
of scientific water harvesting, storage and application practices; 
•  utilization  of  high-tech  horticulture  technologies  like  protected  cultivation  of 
horticulture produce, use of biotechnology, micro irrigation technologies, use of 
plastics etc. for the improvement of horticulture productivity; 
creation of scientific post-harvest management infrastructure; 
value addition and diversification in processing industry; 
• 
• 
•  market promotion through branding, advertisement and exports. 
HP  Horticulture  Sector  Development  Strategy  and  Investment  Plan  (HSDSIP) 
2023-2030.  The  GoHP  proposes  to  apply  part  of  the  HP-SHIVA  PRF  loan  for  the 
development  of  the  HSDSIP  2023-2030,  which  will  guide  the  overall  future 
2 
file:///C:/Users/garry/Documents/Work%20Files/ADB%20Himachal%20Pradesh/Background%20reading/Hortic
ulture%20production/HP%20Hort%20strategy.html 
29 
development  of  the  HP  horticulture  sector  and  the  HP-SHIVA  project  design  in 
particular. It is proposed that the HSDSIP be prepared over a 6 month period between 
September 2020 and March 2021. The HSDSIP preparation team input is detailed in 
Table  1.  The  schedule  of  consulting  service  inputs  is indicative, and  the  successful 
bidder may, at its discretion, propose a modified service input schedule and skills mix, 
if needed, to undertake the HSDSIP 2023-2030 preparation. Terms of reference for 
each specialist are outlined hereunder. 
Table 1. HSDSIP preparation team 
Consultant 
International 
Horticulture development specialist (Team 
leader) 
Economist 
Horticulture value chain specialist 
National 
Horticulture specialist 
Horticulture marketing specialist 
Person 
months 
4.5 
3 
3.5 
4.5 
3.5 
Consultant Terms of Reference 
The TA consultants will be jointly responsible for the following tasks: 
(i) select the horticulture commodities in which HP has a comparative advantage and 
potential for developing the respective value chains; 
(ii) undertake a desk review of relevant activities conducted by government or other 
development partners on the selected horticulture commodity value chains; 
(iii) establish public-private engagement platforms for market-based horticulture 
value chain strategic planning; 
(iv) conduct value chain analyses for each of the selected horticulture commodities. 
The value chain assessments will entail: the agronomic production profiles (e.g. 
horticulture management practices, land ownership and use practices); value chain 
mapping (key stakeholders, flow of supplies and products, flow of funds and 
information, etc.); functional analysis of each value chain (profiling of industry 
structure, adoption of skills, technology and innovation); climate change implications; 
economic analysis of potential opportunities to add value along the chain; and policy 
and institutional conditions necessary to create suitable enabling environment for 
value chain development; 
(v) conduct assessments of demand and market conditions for products within 
selected value chains including analysis of input and output markets, their structure 
and dynamics between actors, procurement processes, related standards, existence 
of monopolies, identification of lead firms, etc.; 
(vi) based on the above tasks, identify constraints and barriers (financial, technology, 
infrastructure, human resources/skills, marketing, regulatory, policy, institutional) that 
must be addressed to enable the development of the value chains;  
(vii) recommend public investments required to support the selected value chains. In 
the case of public infrastructure (soft and hard), recommend arrangements for 
financing (i.e. public, private, public-private) and mechanisms for sustainable 
operation and maintenance; 
(viii) support the development of appropriate models for public-private partnerships 
(PPPs) in agribusiness; 
29 
30 
(xi) evaluate the public organization and capacity of supporting government 
institutions and their staff (production, research, extension, regulatory, policy, etc,) 
and propose institutional, policy and capacity building reforms with a view to 
improved public services to the sector and strengthened public-private partnerships; 
(x) consolidate the outcome of the above tasks and prepare a development strategy 
for the HP horticulture sector and action and investment plans for increased 
commercialization of the selected commodities 
Deliverables. The firm shall submit the following reports: (i) Inception report; (ii) 
Draft final HSDSIP 2023-2030 report; and (iii) Final HSDSIP 2023-2030 report after 
incorporating all comments and/or recommendations of the government, horticulture 
value chain stakeholders and the ADB. All the reports are expected to be in English. 
Maximum Budget and Payment Schedule. The maximum budget for the HDSIP 
2023-2030 assignment is $290,000. The payment schedule is as follows: (i) 10% 
after signing the contract; (ii) 15% following the submission of the Inception Report; 
(iii) 50% following the submission of the draft final HDSIP 2023-2030 report to the 
government; (iv) 25% after incorporating comments of the government, stakeholders 
and the ADB;  
Consultant’s Qualification. The minimum requirements for the firm are (i) extensive 
and proven experience in conducting horticulture or agriculture sector studies and 
investment plans  in various countries; (ii) at least 15 years of experience for the 
team leader and 10 years of experience for other key staff in similar sector 
development projects; and (iii) recent and solid experience in work related to 
agriculture/horticulture development and agriculture/horticulture value chain 
investment in India 
Specific scope of work 
Horticulture development specialist (International) 
The Specialist must have at least a Master’s degree in horticulture production and at 
least 15 years of practical experience in the field of horticulture and rural development 
in  the  Asia Pacific region,  especially related  to  horticulture  enterprise  development. 
Past relevant work experience in India would be considered a significant advantage. 
The Specialist must also have a proven record of leading teams of international and 
national  consultants;  strong  skills  in  coordination,  intercultural  communication  and 
networking; and excellent skills in spoken and written English. 
As Team Leader, the consultant will: (i) prepare a work plan for the overall TA (which 
would involve scheduling the inputs of all consultants and associated consultations, 
surveys,  studies  and workshops); (ii) supervise  and  coordinate  the  inputs  (i.e.  desk 
reviews  and  field  work)  of  the  other  consultants;  (iii) supervise  updates  of  the  work 
plan and preparation of  progress  reports for  submission  to  the  DoH;  (iv) advise  the 
DoH  on  technical  content  of  workshops,  consultations  and  other  meetings;  (v) 
coordinate the preparation of the HSDSIP 2023-2030. Technical responsibilities of the 
consultant include: 
for 
Agronomic production profile: (i) Identify the key horticulture crops in HP that will be 
the  focus  of  the  strategy;  (ii) identify  the  currently  dominant  agronomic  production 
practices 
improved  agricultural 
management practices of soil & water management, pest & pesticide management, 
practices of land clearing and land use change, tree nursery practices (if managed by 
farmers  as  opposed  to  upstream  actors)  and  use  of  non-household  labour.  The 
consultant is required to pay particular attention to the horticulture varieties used as 
these  horticulture  crops;  and  (iii) specify 
31 
well  as  to  varieties  mostly  required  by  the  output  markets,  and  to  the  farming 
techniques required to achieve market standards. 
Climate  change  analysis  of  horticulture  production.  Analysis  of  climate  change 
implications  on  HP  horticulture  production,  highlighting  potential  areas  of  climate 
change  impacts  on  the  operations  of  the  targeted  horticulture  crops,  as  well  as 
recommendation  of  options  for  climate  smart  horticulture  adoption  as  opposed  to 
conventional  horticulture  currently  practiced  by  the  horticulture  producers.  The 
analysis at farm level may be guided by the following elements: Adaptation (capturing 
as many as possible of the following elements): - a description of expected changes 
in average day and night temperatures, total water availability and distribution, CO2 
concentration - estimation of the negative yield effect from higher day temperatures 
through  lowering  photosynthesis  and  higher  night  temperatures  through  increased 
respiration  -  estimated  yield  effect  from  differential  water  availability  -  a  detailed 
discussion of these climate change impacts on the reproductive stage (flowering: when 
pollination & fertilization occur) - the needed changes in fertilization and water supply 
to  translate  higher  CO2  levels  in  increased  vegetative  growth  and  yield  benefits  - 
priority  areas  and  expected  improvements  from  targeted  breeding  (heat,  drought 
tolerance) - the impact of temperature increases on pest and disease prevalence. In 
this context and where relevant the issues of nutrient loss, shallow rooting, drought 
injury, limited maturation, fruit shed, and plant death should be investigated. Mitigation: 
-  identification  of  main  emission  sources  and  main  mitigation  potentials  (land  use 
change, fertilization, soil management, biomass growth, etc). 
31 
32 
Economist (International) 
The  international  Agricultural  Economist  must  have  at  least  a  Master’s  degree  in 
Agricultural Economics, Agricultural Development, or Development Economics with a 
specialization in Agriculture and at least 10 years of practical experience in the field of 
agriculture  and  rural  development  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region,  especially  related  to 
agricultural enterprise and value chain development. Past relevant work experience in 
India would be considered a significant advantage. 
The Agricultural Economist (international) consultant will support the overall scope of 
work outlined above. In particular, the consultant will: (i) prepare an economic analysis 
of the specific agribusiness related interventions along the targeted value chains, i.e., 
the  value  added  creation  and  distribution  across  key  economic  agents  at  specific 
stages of the value chain; and  (ii) assess the socio-economic context of the producer 
profile, specifying the costs of production, the farm gate price and income of average 
production household whose main crop is a target crop. The economic analysis will 
focus  on  the  economic  viability  for  key  private  economic  agents  (i.e.  cost-benefit 
analysis based on market prices of revenues, costs and margins) willing to engage in 
specific interventions within the value chain. It will also focus on the economic viability 
to the State (i.e. cost and benefits to the State based on social prices) from investing 
in  the  value  chains.  Based  on  the  economic  analyses,  the  consultant  will  make 
recommendations  on:  (i) the  macro-economic  rationale  for  prioritizing  horticulture 
value  chains;  (ii)  pricing  structures  to  incentivize  private  agents  to  engage  in  value 
chains;  (iii)  terms  and  conditions  for  public-private  collaboration  engagements  at 
various stages of the value chains including the construction and operation of value 
chain infrastructure. The consultant will also support the rest of the TA team with the 
market  and  demand  assessments  associated  with  each  value  chain  and  other 
economic assessment related to promoting a value chain approach. 
Horticulture value chain specialist (International) 
The  consultant  must  have  at  least  a  Master’s  Degree  in  Agricultural  Economics, 
Agricultural  Development,  or  Development  Economics  with  a  specialization  in 
horticulture  and  at  least  10 years  of  practical  experience  in  the  field  of  horticulture 
value  chain  development  in  Asia.  The  consultant  must  have  experience  with  value 
chain analysis (i.e. have supported at least five value chain assessments); have strong 
knowledge of private sector operations in agribusiness; strong skills in coordination, 
strong communication and networking capacities; and excellent skills in spoken and 
written  English.  Past  relevant  work  experience  in  India  would  be  considered  a 
significant advantage. The consultant will be responsible to: 
Product and market analysis.  
• 
• 
• 
Demand for value chain outputs: investigate the current and potential demand 
of  the  key  HP  horticulture  products,  their  various  market  destinations  and 
related price trends so as to allow analysts to identify constraints, barriers and 
opportunities. Specify past price trends and price volatility and present future 
price outlook at the national and global levels, where applicable (making use of 
internationally recognized price outlooks, as well as other sources);  
Give a short characterization of the position of HP horticulture products in the 
India horticulture market  
Describe the major existing national horticulture product quality standards and 
33 
specify how HP horticulture products meet those standards. Describe the most 
important  constraints  in  front  of  quality  improvements  to  meet  national 
standards.  
Describe and evaluate the feasibility of commercialization and market linkages 
needed  for  the  expansion  of  targeted  horticulture  products  into  national  and 
(where relevant) international markets. Give an assessment of the feasibility of 
participating in such higher value market segments of the chain. Also assess 
the availability of major certification schemes in HP for the target crops  
Identify the main actors and other stakeholders (supporters and influencer) and 
how  are  they  linked  and  interact  in  the  value  chain;  assessing  the  flow  of 
products,  information  and  financial  resources  along  the  value  chains  –  both 
descriptive and as a value chain map.  
Profile  of  the  industry  structure,  skills  and  value  addition  opportunities  and 
technology  by  identifying,  describing  and  quantifying  in  physical  terms  the 
sequence  of  operations  concerning  commodity  production,  processing, 
marketing  and  final  consumption  and  related  agents  carrying  them  out. 
Describing the factors affecting the value chain actors.  
Examine  the  input  and  output  market  and  their  structure.  Procurement 
processes,  accessibility  to  and  availability  of  varieties  required  as  well  as 
related standards and information. Identification of final buyer for output market, 
type of contractual arrangements and transaction costs involved.  
Analyse the degree of competitiveness, including the existence of monopolies, 
monopsonies,  oligopolies,  market  share  and  market  segmentation  for  both 
input and output markets; and identify potential lead firms for each value chain.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Policy environment & institutional analysis  
• 
Identify and appraise the set of interactions taking place among agents and the 
formal and/or informal rules governing them.  
•  Detail  services  provided  to  producers  by  government  services  and  service 
conditions  provided  to  producers  by  input  providers,  traders,  banking 
institutions, commercial extension providers etc. 
•  Detail the degree of organization of producers and the constitution and services 
provided by producer organizations 
Horticulture specialist (national). The consultant should have at least a bachelor’s 
degree  in  horticulture  production  and  7 years  general  experience  of  in  horticulture 
development,  familiarity with high-density horticulture production in India at national 
and sub-national levels and an ability to develop and maintain close association with 
government agencies and communities. 
The  consultant  would  assist  the  international  horticulture  specialist  through  (i) the 
assembly  of  a  detailed  statistical  database  on  horticulture  production  in  HP;  (ii)the 
identification of key horticulture crops by location with potential for development under 
the strategy; (ii) assessing technology gaps in horticulture production in HP and the 
means  for  their  redress;  (iii) assessing  the  resourcing  and  outputs  of  horticulture 
research  and  extension  in  HP,  identifying  gaps  and  the  means  for  their  redress; 
(iv) evaluating farmer horticulture producer associations and their organization, scale 
and  market  linkages;  and  (v)evaluating  the  regulatory  environment  for  horticulture 
production  and  marketing  in  HP,  identifying  regulatory  gaps  and  opportunities  for 
33 
34 
regulatory streamlining to improve horticulture marketing and farmers’ share of retail 
price. 
Horticulture marketing specialist (national). The consultant should have at least a 
bachelor’s  degree  in  horticulture  production  and  7 years  general  experience  of  in 
horticulture  marketing,  familiarity  with  horticulture  value  chains  in  India  supplying 
domestic  and  international  markets,  and  an  ability  to  develop  and  maintain  close 
association with government agencies and communities. 
The consultant would assist the international value specialist through: (i) preparing a 
detailed description of marketing systems for the key horticulture crops produced In 
HP;  (ii) identifying  lead  companies  engaged  in  horticulture  value  addition  and 
marketing in HP; (iii) detailing horticulture production input markets in HP and, through 
discussion  with  lead  suppliers,  identifying  constraints  to  their  effective  operation; 
(iv) describe  the  major  existing  national  horticulture  product  quality  standards  and 
specifying how HP horticulture products meet those standards; (v) through discussion 
with  horticulture  producers  and  lead  firms,  identify  opportunities  for  potential 
international  markets  for  HP  horticulture  products  and  associated  constraints  to 
international  market  entry;  and  (vi) in  partnership  with  the  national  horticulture 
their 
consultant,  evaluating 
organization, scale and market linkages. 
farmer  horticulture  producer  associations  and 
Suggested methodology  
Desk review The desk research includes research into the supply and demand side 
of horticulture products in India and India’s horticulture export markets. The consultant 
team  will  collect  all  relevant  studies,  materials,  and  statistics  already  produced  by 
relevant government agencies and other donors, NGOs and/or research institutes in 
the recent past, and detail the outcomes of these studies, as a starting point to map 
the  targeted  horticulture  value  chains  and  to  reveal  the  main  constraints  and 
opportunities.  
Field work - data collection Primary data collection in the field is undertaken by the 
consultant team  who are  expected  to  conduct  the  fieldwork to  collect missing  data, 
assess  the  specific  situation  and  engage  with  potential  stakeholders  and  key 
informants for the collection of their views. The fieldwork comprises:  
• Identification of key production areas and interviews with lead farmers 
Identification of other key chain actors; interviews with them where possible;  
• Interviews with the target companies (value addition/lead firms); assessing demand 
for value chain outputs and what the constraints in their exporting business are;  
•  Interviews  with  other  chain  stakeholders  such  as  input  providers  such  as  state 
agencies, financial institutions, universities, consulting and donor organisations;  
•  Conduct  economic  analysis  of  the  selected  value  chain  and  analysis  (diagnose) 
potential added values;  
• Field survey to quantify/collect statistics on number of chain actors, prices, current 
exports, employment, market trends, sustainability standards etc.;  
•  Technical  consultation  workshops  with  value  chain  stakeholders,  including  lead 
farmers, to validate research findings.  
Data processing and reporting Field information and data will be analysed by the 
35 
consultant  team  in  order  to  produce  first  draft  reports  for  the  key  identified  value 
chains. A workshop will be organized by DoH where the consultant team will present 
their findings and proposed strategies and action plans for supporting in upgrading the 
value  chains  for  comments  from  invited  participants  including  representatives  from 
value  chain  stakeholders,  research  institutions,  farmer  producer  organizations  and 
DoH.  The  final  report  will  be  produced  taking  into  account  the  feedback  from  the 
consultation workshop. 
35 
CS6 Package 
DIPH Capacity Building Consultant ToRs 
1. 
The  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  intends  to  apply  the  proceeds  of  an  Asian 
Development  Bank  loan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Himachal  Pradesh  Subtropical 
Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project (HP-SHIVA). The overall HP-SHIVA project, 
comprising a Project Readiness Facility ((PRF) US$10 million over two years) and the ensuing 
loan,  aims  to  increase  the  income  of  at  least  25,000  farm  households  in  seven  districts 
(Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and Una) of subtropical areas of Himachal 
Pradesh. In the long-term, the HP-SHIVA project will contribute to (i) increased income of rural 
households  in  Himachal  Pradesh;  and  (ii)  strengthened  climate  resilience  in  Himachal 
Pradesh.  The  HP-SHIVA  project  will  expand  irrigation  to  farmers,  increase  subtropical 
horticulture production and its climate resilience, and raise the profitability and farm gate price 
of  subtropical  horticulture  production  through  value  chain  development  of  targeted 
commodities. 
Project Readiness Facility (PRF) loan will pilot the development of drip-irrigated high-
2. 
density  horticulture  production  at  17  locations  in  4  districts  (Bilaspur,  Hamirpur,  Kangra, 
Mandi)  and  13  blocks  incorporating  168  ha  of  irrigated  land  across  16  irrigated  areas  and 
involving 480 male and female beneficiary landowning households. 
3. 
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
introducing 
rehabilitate  16 
irrigation  schemes 
(i) 
Output 1: Irrigation infrastructure development and farmer management 
systems established. This output will be management by DIPH. Output 1 will (a) 
construct  or 
innovative 
technologies for water extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate 
and  disaster  resilience  (PRF  pilot);  (b)  establish  and  capacitate  WUAs  on  the 
constructed irrigation schemes with women’s participation and gender equitable 
leadership;  and  (c)  finalize  the  draft  WUA  act  to  be  submitted  for  the  HP 
legislative assembly’s enactment.  
Output 2:  Subtropical horticulture production technology and marketing 
(ii) 
systems demonstrated. This output will be managed by DOH. Output 2 will: (a) 
develop  17  subtropical  horticulture  plots  covering  168  hectares,  engaging 
approximately  600  male  and  female  farmers  for  irrigated  high-  and  ultra-high 
density production of citrus, guava, litchi and pomegranate (PRF pilot); (b) fence 
all horticulture plots to protect from animal predation (PRF pilot); (c) form CHPMA 
in  the  PRF  areas  and  build  their  capacities  for  business/marketing;  and  (d) 
facilitate 
for  subtropical 
the  development  of  CHPMA 
horticulture value addition and market development.  
(iii) 
Output  3:  Enabling  environment,  tools  and  capacity  for  promoting 
irrigated  subtropical  horticulture  provided.  This  output  focuses  on  developing 
the 
capacity  building 
implementation of the ensuing project. Specifically, the project will: (a) support 
DOH  to  prepare  the  Himachal  Pradesh  Horticulture  Sector  Development 
Strategy  and  Investment  Plan  2023-2030;  (b)  provide  technical  training  and 
experimental study tours, as well as investment project management including 
safeguards,  procurement,  gender,  financial  management  and  institutional 
strengthening  for DOH and  DIPH staff;  (c)  train  CHPMA  members  on  orchard 
management  through  preparing  the  packages  of  practice  for  key  subtropical 
horticulture crops and providing on-site training; (d) provide technical support to 
subtropical  horticulture  nurseries;  and  (e)  establish  scientific  and  project 
monitoring system in the Project Management Unit (PMU).    
tools  and  creating  an  enabling  environment 
investment  plans 
for 
37 
(v)  Output 4: Ensuing investment project and its implementation readiness prepared. 
This output will support DOH and DIPH to prepare the feasibility studies, detailed 
engineering  design  and  surveys,  due  diligence  assessment,  safeguards 
preparation  work  and  bid  documents  for  the  ensuing  loan,  supported  by  PRF 
consultants.  Possible  public-private  partnership  pathways  will  be  explored  in 
collaboration with the Private Sector Operations Department as part of the ensuing 
loan preparation.   
The  GOPH  wishes  to  apply  a  portion  of  the  loan  recruit  an  international  irrigation 
4. 
systems design and management specialist, an international  hydrology and climate change 
specialist, and a national natural resource management and climate change specialist to build 
DIPH capacity to plan and design climate and disaster resilient irrigation infrastructure under 
the HP-SHIVA project. The terms of reference for these tasks are detailed below. 
Climate Resilient Irrigation Systems Design and management Specialist 
Position:  Irrigation Engineer 
Location:  Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Category : International Consultant 
Period of Engagement :  5 person months over 2 years (3, 2 person months). 
Reports to:  PMU Project Director (PD)  
Positions Supervised: None. 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications  
•  Minimum general experience of 10 years in irrigation systems design; 
•  At least a bachelor’s degree in civil engineering; 
•  Significant water user association establishment experience; 
•  Familiarity with irrigation and water management issues in India at national and sub-
national levels; 
•  Ability  to  develop  and  maintain  close  association  with  government  agencies  and 
communities; 
•  Strong  analytical,  communication,  documentation  and  presentation  skills  with 
experience in facilitating and chairing meetings with multiple stakeholder groups; 
•  Good organizational and planning skills and an ability to adhere to deadlines; 
•  Excellent writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English; and 
•  Previous experience with the ADB or World Bank would be a distinct asset. 
JOB PARTICULARS 
Job Objective: 
The Irrigation Engineer will support the Irrigation and Public Health Department (DIPH) in 
the design of planned HP-SHIVA-financed irrigation systems and implementation of Project 
Readiness  Financing  Facility  (PRF)  investments,  with  a  view  to  increasing  innovation  in 
systems design and the climate resilience of the resulting infrastructure.  
37 
38 
Job Outputs: 
•  Quality assurance of all DIPH HP-SHIVA irrigation infrastructure design; 
•  DIPH capacity in innovative, climate resilient irrigation systems design strengthened; 
•  DIPH has capacity to support the formation of water user groups, associations and 
federations; 
•  DIPH  has  approved  contracts  to  the  value  of  40%  of  the  planned  irrigation 
infrastructure development by loan negotiation. 
Primary Tasks: 
i.  Review  of  DIPH  and  DoH  proposed  infrastructure  designs  or  design  changes 
recommended by the ADB TA team.  
ii.  Review progress of and provide technical guidance on the construction of the PRF-
financed  irrigation  infrastructure  and  advise  on  subsequent  water  management 
performance across the various systems designs. 
iii.  Develop,  in  partnership  with  DIPH,  a  performance  monitoring  system  for  PRF 
irrigation infrastructure construction and operation.  
iv.  Support the development of the DIPH WUA training team (State, Sub-district, Block 
and Facilitator levels) and WUA manual(s), the design and implementation of PRF 
WUA development program, and the monitoring of WUA performance. 
v.  Perform other tasks that may be assigned by the PD and attend to other priority 
irrigation systems development issues under the Project that may be occur during 
the engagement period. 
vi.  (ix)  With other team members, prepare a detailed training manual and  supporting 
training tools on climate resilient irrigation system design and train DIPH trainers in 
its conent and application. 
Hydrology and Climate Change Specialist 
Position:  Senior Hydrologist/ Climate Change Specialist 
Location:  Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Category : International Consultant 
Period of Engagement :  5 person months over 2 years (3,2 person months 
Reports to:  PMU Project Director (PD)  
Positions Supervised: National Hydrologist. 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications  
•  Minimum  general  experience  of  10  years  in  hydrology  and  climate  change 
assessments; 
•  An MSc in Hydrology or closely related relevant qualification; 
•  Significant experience in assessing climate change aspects of hydrology and water 
resources; 
39 
•  Familiarity  with  hydrology and  climate  change  issues  in  India  at  national and  sub-
national levels would be an asset; 
•  Ability to develop and maintain close association with government agencies related 
to hydrology, climate change and water related environmental disasters; 
•  Good organizational and planning skills and an ability to adhere to deadlines; 
•  Excellent writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English; and 
•  Previous experience with the ADB or World Bank would be a distinct asset. 
Job Objective: 
JOB PARTICULARS 
The Hydrologist / Climate Change Specialist will support the Department of Irrigation 
and  Public  Health  (DIPH)  in  the  hydrological  related  design  aspects  of  planned 
Project Readiness Financing Facility (PRF) investments in irrigation systems design 
and  implementation,  with  a  view  to  increasing  climate  resilience  of  the  resulting 
infrastructure.  
Job Outputs: 
•  Hydrology  and  climate  change  technical  report  that  includes  hydrological  design 
parameters for irrigation supply, flood design and changes to water demand due to 
climate changes; 
•  Assessment  Report  on 
the  subproject  cachment  areas,  erosion  risk  and 
sedimentation impacts on the proposed subprojects;   
•  Support to the Irrigation Engineer and DIPH in their capacity in innovative, climate 
resilient irrigation systems design strengthened. 
Primary Tasks: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Collect relevant hydrological, catchment and climate data from the hydrological 
data collecting agencies including the DIPH Hydrological unit.  
Support  the  DIPH  Hydrological  unit  in  recieving,  evaluating  and  analysing 
hydrological data for supporting irrigation development at the subproject sites.  
(iii)  Carry out hydrological assessments comprising studies of catchment areas and 
landuse  including  erosion  and  landslide  risk  in  the  determination  of  monthly 
reliable  flows,  sediment  loads,  and  flood  design  criteria  using  both  standard 
Indian  methodologies  and  internationally  accepted  systems  such  as  USBR’s 
HEC-HMS. 
(iv)  Support  the  Irrigation  Engineer  in  assessing  evapotranspiration  rates  and 
(v) 
determination of irrigation demands for the proposed subprojects.   
Carry out climate change studies drawing on the experience of the ADB’s3 climate 
change  impacts  on  Himachal  Pradesh  and  the  World  Bank’s  Climate  Change 
Knowledge Portal4 to assess probable climate change impacts on scheme design 
criteria including changes in flow reliability, flood design discharges, the effect of 
increases in evapotranspiration on irrigation demands and water storage needs 
to meet demands for a planning horizon of 30 years.  
3 Climate change adaptation in Himachal Pradesh: Sustainable strategies for water resources. ADB, 2010. 
4 http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/ 
39 
40 
(vi)  Prepare  ToR  for  the  procurement  and  installation  of  automatic  water  level 
recorders and  flow and sediment monitoring gauges with telemetric equipment 
at the proposed subproject intake locations where needed.  
(vii)  Prepre ToR for the instllation of rainfall and climte stations to intensify the existing 
network of stations where needed. 
(viii)  Prepare a draft hydrology and climate change report during the first 3 months of 
the Project and a Final Report drawing on lessons learnt from the PRF program 
in readiness for the Loan Project. 
(ix)  With other team  members, prepare  a detailed  training manual and    supporting 
training tools on climate resilient irrigation system design and train DIPH trainers 
in its conent and application. 
Natural Resource Management and Climate Change Specialist  
Position:  Environment, Natural Resources Management, and Climate Change Specialist 
Location:  Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Category : National Consultant 
Period of Engagement :  12 person months over 2 years (6, 6 person months) 
Reports to:  PMU Project Director (PD)  
Positions Supervised: None. 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications  
•  Minimum 15 years of experience in environmental and natural resources management 
for agriculture and rural development (ARD) programs; 
•  Demonstrated  successful  experience  in  designing  processes  and  programs  for 
mainstreaming environmental and natural resources management into ARD investment 
projects and programs; 
•  An MSc degree in a relevant discipline and at least 5 years’ experience leading multi-
disciplinary teams or a BSc in a relevant discipline with at least 8 years of experience; 
•  Significant  experience  with  smallholder  “climate  smart  agriculture”,  watershed 
development, community-based natural resources management, and provision of farmer 
training and extension services within the Indian context; 
•  Familiarity with watershed and water management, and climate change issues in India 
at national and sub-national levels; 
•  Ability  to  develop  and  maintain  close  association  with  government  agencies  and 
communities. 
•  Strong analytical, communication, documentation and presentation skills with experience 
in facilitating and chairing meetings with multiple stakeholder groups; 
•  Good organizational and planning skills and an ability to adhere to deadlines; 
•  Excellent writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English and Hindi; 
•  Previous experience with the ADB or World Bank desirable. 
41 
Objective: 
PARTICULARS 
The  Environment,  Natural  Resources  Management,  and  Climate  Change  Specialist  will 
support the HP-SHIVA Project Management Unit (PMU) and work with the Departments of 
Horticulture  (DoH)  and  Irrigation  and  Public  Health  Department  (DIPH)  in  the  design, 
mainstreaming and implementation of the environmental & natural resources management 
and  climate  change  resilience/adaptation  aspects  of  the  planned  HP-SHIVA  Horticulture 
Pilot Project, to be financed by the ADB’s Project Readiness Financing Facility (PRF).  The 
consultant will be responsible to guide the PMU in: (i) ensuring that concerns and needs for 
environmental sustainability, climate resilience, and the application of good agricultural and 
natural  resources  practices  are  incorporated  in  design  and  implementation;  and  (ii) that 
experiential learning and good practices are captured and systematized for inclusion in the 
subsequent HPSHIVA loan project.  
Deliverables: 
•  Assessment of current planning and design practices and procedures of DIPH and DoH 
as regards integration of concerns and good practices for: 
o  sustainable  water 
in 
resources  management, 
colloboration  with 
the 
Hydrologist/Climate Change Specialist; 
o  sustainable land management & agroecosystem conservation5;  
o  climate  change  resilience  and  adaptation,  including  disaster  risk  management  and 
vulnerability reduction; weather risk management, and climate smart practices; and 
o  compliance with relevant national and state enviromental laws and regulations. 
integration  of  concerns  and  good  practices 
•  Assessment  of  DoH’s  Packages  of  Practice  (POPs)  for  target  horticultural  crops  as 
regards 
for:  natural  disaster  risk 
management;  climate  resilience  (crop/cultivar  &  soil/site  matching,  soil  &  moisture 
conservation,  soil  &  soil  fertility  management,  pest  &  disease  management,  others); 
environmental/sustainable  land  management  (IPM,  safe  use  &  handling  of  pesticides, 
internalization of good watershed managment practices to avoid/mitigate negative, off-
site impacts,others); 
•  Assessment of the effectiveness of DoH’s and DIPH’s extension and farmer/Water User 
Association  (WUA)  training,  and  of  experience/good  practices  in  India  for  alternative 
modalities  and delivery  mechanisms  (e.g.,  Farmer Field Schools,  lead farmers, cross-
visits, private service providers, enterprise led extension, others); 
•  Development  of  environmental 
impact  assessment  and  environmental  scoping 
framework  for    proposed  PRF  interventions,  including  aspects  of  consultation  with 
affected persons and local participation within assessments; 
•  Review  and  assessment  of  environmental  scoping  of  16 proposed  PRF  irrigation 
interventions; 
5 “Agroecosystem  conservation”  refers  to  maintenance  of  landscape  elements  that  provide,  inter  alia,  habitat  and  refugia  for 
beneficial insects, insectivorous birds, and other beneficial fauna; hydrologic services; and locally important medicinal and/or 
wild food crops. 
41 
42 
•  Development of a PRF Environmental Management Plan (EMP), including institutional & 
implementation  arrangements,  and  identification  of  incremental  budgetary  resources 
required for its implementation overall and on a per scheme basis6; 
•  Development and implementation framework of a capacity building, technical assistance 
and TOT to support the implementation of the PRF’s EMP by DoH, DIPH, WUAs, and 
farmers; 
•  Provide  inputs  for  the  inclusion  of  necessary  environmental  &  natural  resources 
management  and  climate  change  (ENRM/CC)  aspects  necessary  adjustments  in  the 
implementation  and  improving  practices,  and  good  practices  for  participation  of  key, 
including  backwards  linkages  to  institutional  actors  responsible  for  making  local 
stakeholders in M&E and learning. 
Primary Tasks: 
i.  In partnership with the PMU and DoH and DIPH, develop a detailed work program for 
the development and delivery of the products for which the consultant is responsible, and 
within which the roles and responsibilities of the DoH and DIPH are agreed and detailed. 
ii.  Collaborate with the Hydrologist/Climate Change Specialist on the assessment of water 
resources management and climate change resilience in irrigation works and systems; 
and as relevant, (ii) for the environmental scoping of the irrigation development. 
iii. Review progress of and provide technical guidance on the implementation of the EMP, 
including  support  for  the  supervision  of  staff  or  consultants  carrying  environmental 
scoping  (or  EIAs,  where  required);  review  and  comment  on  draft  reports;  advise  on 
design  and  implementation  performance  of  ENRM/CC  elements  across  the  16 pilot 
schemes (17 irrigation communities). 
iv. Identify innovative and best practice options and alternatives for testing and inclusion in 
the PRF for natural disaster mitigation; soil & moisture conservation, soil &  soil fertility 
management, IPM, and community-based watershed managment practices.  
v.  Support the development of the capacity building, technical assistance and training-of-
trainer (TOT) activities for  implementation of the PRF’s EMP by DoH, DIPH, WUAs, and 
farmers. 
vi. Monitor performance and effectiveness of the capacity building efforts for inclusion and 
implementation of ENRM/CC aspects. 
vii. 
Support  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  PRF’s  M&E  process  and 
learning system for ENRM/CC aspects. 
viii.  Monitor  the  performance  and  effectiveness  of  the  of  the  PRF’s  M&E  process  and 
learning system for ENRM/CC aspects.  
ix. Perform  other  tasks  that  may  be  assigned  by  the  PD  and  attend  to  other  priority 
ENRM/CC  issues under the Project that may be occur during the implementation period. 
x.  With other team members, prepare a detailed training manual and  supporting training 
tools on climate resilient irrigation system design and train DIPH trainers in its conent and 
6 For the World Bank-financed Himachal Pradesh Horticulture Development Project, both a detailed Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and a Project Implementation Plan that integrates the ESMF have been developed.  The consultant will review these 
and the experience with their implementation, and to the extent possible, update and adapt these for purposes of the PRF’s EMP. 
application. 
43 
43 
CS5 Package 
DOH Capacity Building Consultant ToRs 
1. 
The  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  intends  to  apply  the  proceeds  of  an  Asian 
Development  Bank  loan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Himachal  Pradesh  Subtropical 
Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project (HP-SHIVA) The overall HP-SHIVA project, 
comprising a Project Readiness Facility ((PRF) US$10 million over two years) and the ensuing 
loan,  aims  to  increase  the  income  of  at  least  25,000  farm  households  in  seven  districts 
(Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and Una) of subtropical areas of Himachal 
Pradesh. In the long-term, the HP-SHIVA project will contribute to (i) increased income of rural 
households  in  Himachal  Pradesh;  and  (ii)  strengthened  climate  resilience  in  Himachal 
Pradesh.  The  HP-SHIVA  project  will  expand  irrigation  to  farmers,  increase  subtropical 
horticulture production and its climate resilience, and raise the profitability and farm gate price 
of  subtropical  horticulture  production  through  value  chain  development  of  targeted 
commodities.  
Project Readiness Facility (PRF) loan will pilot the development of drip-irrigated high-
2. 
density  horticulture  production  at  17  locations  in  4  districts  (Bilaspur,  Hamirpur,  Kangra, 
Mandi)  and  13  blocks  incorporating  168  ha  of  irrigated  land  across  16  irrigated  areas  and 
involving 480 male and female beneficiary landowning households.  
3. 
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
(i)  Output  1:  Irrigation  infrastructure  development  and  farmer  management  systems 
established.  This  output  will  be  management  by  DIPH.  Output  1  will  (a)  construct  or 
rehabilitate  16  irrigation  schemes  introducing  innovative  technologies  for  water 
extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate and disaster resilience (PRF 
pilot);  (b)  establish  and  capacitate  WUAs  on  the  constructed  irrigation  schemes  with 
women’s participation and gender equitable leadership; and (c) finalize the draft WUA 
act to be submitted for the HP legislative assembly’s enactment. 
(ii)  Output  2:    Subtropical  horticulture  production  technology  and  marketing  systems 
demonstrated.  This  output  will  be  managed  by  DOH.  Output  2  will:  (a)  develop  17 
subtropical horticulture plots covering 168 hectares, engaging approximately 600 male 
and female farmers for irrigated high- and ultra-high density production of citrus, guava, 
litchi and pomegranate (PRF pilot); (b) fence all horticulture plots to protect from animal 
predation (PRF pilot); (c) form CHPMA in the PRF areas and build their capacities for 
business/marketing; and (d) facilitate the development of CHPMA investment plans for 
subtropical horticulture value addition and market development.  
(iii) Output 3: Enabling environment, tools and capacity for promoting irrigated subtropical 
horticulture  provided.  This  output  focuses  on  developing  capacity  building  tools  and 
creating  an  enabling  environment  for  the  implementation  of  the  ensuing  project. 
Specifically,  the  project  will:  (a)  support  DOH  to  prepare  the  Himachal  Pradesh 
Horticulture Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan 2023-2030; (b) provide 
technical  training  and  experimental  study  tours,  as  well  as  investment  project 
management  including  safeguards,  procurement,  gender,  financial  management  and 
institutional  strengthening  for  DOH  and  DIPH  staff;  (c)  train  CHPMA  members  on 
orchard  management  through  preparing  the  packages  of  practice  for  key  subtropical 
horticulture  crops  and  providing  on-site  training;  (d)  provide  technical  support  to 
subtropical  horticulture  nurseries;  and  (e)  establish  scientific  and  project  monitoring 
system in the Project Management Unit (PMU).    
(iv) Output 4: Ensuing investment project and its implementation readiness prepared. This 
output will support DOH and DIPH to prepare the feasibility studies, detailed engineering 
design  and  surveys,  due  diligence  assessment, safeguards  preparation work  and  bid 
documents for the ensuing loan, supported by PRF consultants. Possible public-private 
partnership pathways will be explored in collaboration with the Private Sector Operations 
Department as part of the ensuing loan preparation.  
4. 
The  GOPH  plans  to  apply  part  of  this  loan  to  secure  the  services  of  a  subtropical 
horticulture production specialist with a view to preparing Packages of Practice (PoPs) for up 
to eight subtropical horticulture crops likely to be produced under the HP-SHIVA main project 
and to developing a subtropical horticulture training program, built around the agreed PoPs. 
45 
Horticulture  Technology  Capacity  Building  Specialist 
Position: 
(International) 
Location:         PMU  
Duration: 
Reports to:   PMU Director 
Positions Supervised: None 
3 person months (2,1 person months) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
Qualifications: 
(vi).  Master’s degree in horticulture production and,. 
(vii).  Must  have  at  least  10 years  of  practical  experience  in  the  field  of  sub-
tropical horticulture development in the Asia Pacific region; 
(viii).  Experience  in  the  development  of  Packages  of  Practice  (PoPs) for  sub-
tropical crops essential; 
(ix).  Experience in the preparation and implementation of horticulture capacity 
building programs required; 
(x). Past  relevant  work  experience  in  India  would  be  considered  a  significant 
advantage. 
JOB SPECIFICS 
Job Objective: 
To support the DOH in developing a staff and farmer capacity building program 
in  the  efficient  and  sustainable  production  of  selected  sub-tropical  horticulture 
crops in Himachal Pradesh (HP) State. 
Job Outputs: 
•  PoPs for the key sub-tropical horticulture crops in HP; 
•  A DOH sub-tropical horticulture technology capacity building strategy; 
•  Core  training  material for  implementing  a  sub-tropical  horticulture  training 
program in Himachal Pradesh State (building off PoPs information) 
Primary Tasks: 
ii.  Assist  PMU-recruited  national  horticulture  specialists  to  prepare  detailed 
PoPs for priority sub-tropical horticulture crops in HP; 
iii.  Assess horticulture development capacities of DOH staff at state, district and 
lower levels and develop a structured capacity program to address knowledge 
gaps, including those related to climate change adaptation and mitigation; 
iv.  On the basis of the aforementioned knowledge gap analysis, design capacity 
building  programs for DOH staff at state, district and lower levels; 
45 
46 
v.  Develop relevant training material for the agreed capacity building program 
based on the final PoPs; 
vi.  With the support of the national PoP specialists, conduct a ten-day Training 
of Trainers course for DOH horticulture specialists; 
vii.  Supervising a district level DOH staff horticulture production training program 
implemented by the Trained Trainers. 
CS7 Package 
Water User Association Establishment and Capacity 
Building 
1. 
The  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  intends  to  apply  the  proceeds  of  an 
Asian  Development  Bank  loan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Himachal  Pradesh 
Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project (HP-SHIVA) The overall 
HP-SHIVA project, comprising a Project Readiness Facility ((PRF) US$10 million over 
two years) and the ensuing loan, aims to increase the income of at least 25,000 farm 
households in seven districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and 
Una)  of  subtropical  areas  of  Himachal  Pradesh.  In  the  long-term,  the  HP-SHIVA 
project will contribute to (i) increased income of rural households in Himachal Pradesh; 
and (ii) strengthened climate resilience in Himachal Pradesh. The HP-SHIVA project 
will expand irrigation to farmers, increase subtropical horticulture production and its 
climate  resilience,  and  raise  the  profitability  and  farm  gate  price  of  subtropical 
horticulture production through value chain development of targeted commodities.  
Project Readiness Facility (PRF) loan will pilot the development of drip-irrigated 
2. 
high-density horticulture production at 17 locations in 4 districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, 
Kangra, Mandi) and 13 blocks incorporating 168 ha of irrigated land across 16 irrigated 
areas and involving 480 male and female beneficiary landowning households.  
3. 
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
rehabilitate  16 
(i)  Output  1:  Irrigation  infrastructure  development  and  farmer  management 
systems established. This output will be management by DIPH. Output 1 will (a) 
innovative 
construct  or 
technologies for water extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate 
and  disaster  resilience  (PRF  pilot);  (b)  establish  and  capacitate  WUAs  on  the 
constructed irrigation schemes with women’s participation and gender equitable 
leadership;  and  (c)  finalize  the  draft  WUA  act  to  be  submitted  for  the  HP 
legislative assembly’s enactment. 
irrigation  schemes 
introducing 
(ii) Output  2:    Subtropical  horticulture  production  technology  and  marketing 
systems demonstrated. This output will be managed by DOH. Output 2 will: (a) 
develop  17  subtropical  horticulture  plots  covering  168  hectares,  engaging 
approximately  600  male  and  female  farmers  for  irrigated  high-  and  ultra-high 
density production of citrus, guava, litchi and pomegranate (PRF pilot); (b) fence 
all horticulture plots to protect from animal predation (PRF pilot); (c) form CHPMA 
in  the  PRF  areas  and  build  their  capacities  for  business/marketing;  and  (d) 
facilitate 
for  subtropical 
the  development  of  CHPMA 
horticulture value addition and market development.  
investment  plans 
(iii) Output  3:  Enabling  environment,  tools  and  capacity  for  promoting  irrigated 
subtropical  horticulture  provided.  This  output  focuses  on  developing  capacity 
building tools and creating an enabling environment for the implementation of the 
ensuing  project.  Specifically,  the  project  will:  (a)  support  DOH  to  prepare  the 
Himachal  Pradesh  Horticulture  Sector  Development  Strategy  and  Investment 
Plan 2023-2030; (b) provide technical training and experimental study tours, as 
well  as  investment  project  management  including  safeguards,  procurement, 
gender, financial management and institutional strengthening for DOH and DIPH 
staff; (c) train CHPMA members on orchard management through preparing the 
48 
packages of practice for key subtropical horticulture crops and providing on-site 
training; (d) provide technical support to subtropical horticulture nurseries; and 
(e) establish scientific and project monitoring system in the Project Management 
Unit (PMU).    
(iv)Output  4:  Ensuing  investment  project  and  its  implementation  readiness 
prepared.  This  output  will  support  DOH  and  DIPH  to  prepare  the  feasibility 
studies,  detailed  engineering  design  and  surveys,  due  diligence  assessment, 
safeguards preparation work and bid documents for the ensuing loan, supported 
by  PRF  consultants.  Possible  public-private  partnership  pathways  will  be 
explored in collaboration with the Private Sector Operations Department as part 
of the ensuing loan preparation.  
4. 
The  GOHP  proposes  to  use  a  portion  of  the  loan  to  recruit  a  firm  or  non-
government  organization  to  assist  the  DIPH  to  establish  sustainable  water  user 
associations  (WUAs)  covering  the  total  irrigable  area  of  the  16 irrigation  schemes 
being  developed  under  the  HP-SHIVA  PRF.  The  contract  will  also  involve  the 
development  of  WUAs  on  the  approximately  4,000 ha  of  irrigable  area  (about 
40 irrigation schemes) to be identified and designed under the PRF and constructed 
during the first phase of the HP-SHIVA project.  
Position:  Water User Association (WU A) establishment and capacity building 
Team Leader 
Location:  Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Category : National  consultant company or NGO 
Period of Engagement :  24 person months over 2 years. 
Reports to:  PMU Project Director (PD)  
Positions Supervised: block level WUA facilitators. 
Qualifications (Team Leader) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
•  Minimum general experience of 10 years in establishing and training WUAs; 
•  At least a bachelor’s degree in water management or related subject; 
•  Experience  in  the  transfer  of  irrigation  system  maintenance  and/or 
management to WUAs; 
•  Familiarity with irrigation water management issues in India at national and 
levels  and  practical  experience  of  participatory  water 
sub-national 
management at field level; 
•  Ability to develop and maintain close association with government agencies 
and communities; 
•  Strong  analytical,  communication,  documentation  and  presentation  skills 
facilitating  and  chairing  meetings  with  multiple 
with  experience 
in 
stakeholder groups including farmers; 
•  Good  organizational  and  planning  skills  and  an  ability  to  adhere  to 
deadlines; 
•  Excellent writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English; and 
•  Previous experience with the ADB or World Bank would be a distinct asset. 
49 
Job Objective: 
JOB PARTICULARS 
The  WUA  Establishment  and  Training  Team  Leader  will  support  the 
Department of Irrigation and Public Health (DIPH) and coordinate with the 
Department  of  Horticulture  (DoH)  in  WUA  establishment,  forming  training 
units in the DIPH and at target districts and coordinating the deployment of 
WUA  facilitators  at  block  level.  WUAs  will  be  established  and  trained  to 
participate  in  planning,  implementation,  O&M  and  handover  of  irrigation 
systems for management prior to the introduction of irrigation networks.  
Job Outputs: 
•  establish  a  WUA  unit  within  the  DIPH  and  district  WUA  training  teams, 
initially  in  in  the  four  PRF  project  districts,  then  in  the  other  3  HP-SHIVA 
project districts as irrigation schemes are identified and designed; 
•  A unified DIPH-prepared WUA manual; 
•  An information technology-based WUA-based water use monitoring system 
for remote reporting to the HP-SHIVA monitoring and evaluation unit; 
•  Trained and functioning WUAs and higher levels of association7 managing 
handed over sections of irrigation infrastructure on all  HP-SHIVA-financed 
irrigation systems; 
•  Monthly, Quarterly, Annual and Final WUA Development Progress reports 
and contributions to the particular subproject O&M Manuals. 
i. 
ii. 
Coordinate with the DIPH to establish and mentor a WUA unit within DIPH 
to work with all PRF subprojects as well as establishing training teams at 
district  levels and trained staff at Sub-district, Block and Facilitator levels.  
Working with the DIPH and the World Bank-financed HPHDP and JICA-
financed HPADP, assist the DIPH to prepare a unified WUA manual to be 
“owned” by the government of Himachal Pradesh (HP)8 incorporating best 
Indian  and  international  practice  as  well  as  recommendaions  from  HP-
SHIVA. Additions to the manual to include standardisation of nomenclature 
of WUGs, WUAs (associations), WUFs (federations), their respective roles, 
and relations between the different levels, inclusion of women in WUAs to 
an  agreed  minimum  percentage,gender  equity  in  WUA  management, 
handover  of  irrigation  infrastructure  for  WUA  management  and  fees  for 
volumetric water use. The manual will be updated towards the end of the 
PRF  based  on  lessons  learned  in  WUA  establishment  and  participatory 
water management during the PRF. 
iii. 
Prepare  a  WUA  Development  Plan  that  schedules  the  institutional 
development and training of the WUAs to be mobilized during the system 
7 Nomenclature recommended is WUG (water user group of farmers supplied by a hydrant, WUA (water user association (all 
WUGs supplied by the same lateral pipe) and WUAF (water user federation comprised of all WUAs supplied from a single 
source of water or scheme). 
8 At present there are two WUA manuals in use, one developed by the World Bank financed HPHDP and another by the  JICA 
financed HPADP. The DIPH, which, under the Water Law, is responsible for WUA development, does not have a WUA manual 
and has relatively weak in-house capacity in this area. There is a need to develop a single, DIPH-approved WUA manual, which 
various  projects  (HPHDP,  HPADP  Phase  II  and  HP-SHIVA)  will  use  when  collaborating  with  DIPH  in  the  development  of 
irrigations schemes and associated WUAs. 
49 
50 
design  process  and  effective  with  the  start  of  the  irrigation  scheme 
distribution system installation. 
iv.  Establish  systems  and  procedures  to  monitor  the  progress  of  WUA 
establishment  and  training,  ensuring  that  WUA  committee  positions  are 
democratically elected, that the chairperson and deputy chairperson are a 
man  and  a  woman  or  vice-versa,  all  participating  WUAs  are  legally 
constituted  and  registered,  have  bank  accounts  and  are  fully  trained  to 
manage the distributary irrigation systems. 
v.  Advise  and  prepare  recommendations  on  participation  of  the  WUAs  in 
aspects  of  planning  and  design  (including  system  walkthrough  with  the 
pipeline alignment design engineers), and construction activities.  
vi.  Advise the DIPH systems design unit on design and construction aspects 
that best lend themselves to WUA’s participation such as installing small 
solar  powered  pumps,  assembling  water  tanks  and  simpler  methods  of 
joining  pipes.  Develop  a  methodology  whereby  legal  WUA  construction 
contracts could be formulated and implemented by the WUAs.   
vii.  Develop methodoligies with the DIPH Design Unit tailored to the needs of 
each  scheme  including    field  testing  of  equitabe  means  of  water 
management, irrigation scheduling, volumetrically measured cost recovery 
and other aspects of system management and infrastructure handover. For 
instance, the WUA should appoint a water superintendant (WS) onto their 
committee who would record all volumetric water use `and report by mobile 
phone  to  the  appointed  DIPH  opertions  engineer  who  should  confirm 
supplied  flows  match  demands  at  a  target  performance  level.  The 
Operations  Engineer and WS  should meet  on  a  weekly basis to  resolve 
water management issues.. 
viii.  Discuss with DIPH and DoH the effectiveness of the PMU and District WUA 
training teams, and Subdistrict and and Block technical staff in supporting 
the  WUA  development  program  and  recommend  changes  in  their 
organisational  structure,  training,  operations  and  financial  structure  that 
might better support the program. 
ix.  Prepare monthly, Quarterly and Final PRF reports on WUA development 
progress and, working with the DIPH Design Team, help prepare individual 
scheme O&M Manuals. Ensure that information on the WUA development 
and management program, including digitally recorded system water use, 
are incorporated into the Project MIS and GIS systems. 
Position:  Water User Association (WUA) establishment and capacity building 
Facilitators 
Location:  DIPH Block offices in project districts (PMU) 
Category : National  consultant company or NGO 
Period of Engagement : Initially, 60 person months in PY1 and approximately 180 
person months in PY2 following the design of the initial HP-SHIVA irrigation area 
of 4,000 ha  (each facilitator will cover at least 3 WUAs). 
51 
Reports to:  Water User Associations (WUA) establishment and capacity building 
Team Leader 
Positions Supervised: WUAs. 
Qualifications (Facilitators) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
•  Minimum general experience of 3 years in establishing and training WUAs; 
•  At least a diploma in water management or related subject; 
•  Experience  in  the  transfer  of  irrigation  system  maintenance  and/or 
management to WUAs; 
•  Familiarity with irrigation water management issues in India at sub-national 
levels and practical experience of participatory water management at field 
level; 
•  Ability to develop and maintain close association with farming communities; 
•  Experience in facilitating and chairing meetings with farmers; 
•  Good  organizational  and  planning  skills  and  an  ability  to  adhere  to 
deadlines; 
•  Good writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English; and 
JOB PARTICULARS 
Job Objective: 
The WUA Establishment and Training Facilitators will mentor the farmers in 
WUA establishment. WUAs will be established and trained to participate in 
planning,  implementation,  O&M  and  handover  of  irrigation  systems  for 
management prior to the introduction of irrigation networks.  
Job Outputs: 
•  establish  WUAs  within  the  assigned  block  in  accordance  with  the  DIPH-
prepared WUA manual; 
•  Train WUA farmer members in group and financial management, water use 
planning,  and  distribution  systems  maintenance  and  management  with  a 
view  to  the  management  of  irrigation  infrastructure  on  all  HP-SHIVA-
financed irrigation systems being transferred to WUAs or their higher levels 
of association ; 
•  Monthly, Quarterly, Annual and Final WUA Development Progress reports 
and contributions to the particular subproject O&M Manuals. 
Based on a unified WUA manual, an agreed WUA Development Plan and an 
approved monitoring systems:  
51 
52 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
vi. 
iv. 
v. 
Conduct project orientation in the villages on WUA development to 
effectively  communicate  irrigation  systems  management  objectives 
and obtain buy-in for the program; 
Encourage project beneficiaries to collectively participate in the WUA 
development process, with special attention to the participation of the 
most marginalized-vulnerable groups; 
Identify  potential  leaders  from  among  the  beneficiaries  and  assess 
their readiness & capabilities; 
Facilitate organization of WUAs from among the project beneficiaries;  
Orient  the  project  beneficiaries  on  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of 
WUA committee and ordinary members; 
Train  and  coach  WUA  members  in  undertaking  their  roles  in 
community-based 
irrigation  systems 
irrigation  system  design, 
management,  organizational  development  and  management, 
networking, and conflict resolution; 
Build the capacity of the WUA members to identify, implement. and 
monitor social safeguards in subproject planning and implementation; 
viii.  Organize  and  coordinate  WUA  related  meetings,  assemblies, 
workshops,  training  and  other  events,  ensuring  attendance  of 
required personnel; 
Facilitate  resolution  of  conflicts  &  grievances  to  ensure  smooth 
implementation, buy-in and support of all stakeholders; 
Assist  the  Team  leader  and  WUAs  in  crafting  of  irrigation  system 
operation  and  management  (O&M)  plans  and  facilitates  capacity-
building of the WUA O&M team; 
Coach the WUAs in complying with documentary, data gathering and 
reporting  requirements  and  in  developing  and  operationalizing  a 
village-based irrigation scheme monitoring and evaluation system; 
Assist in the conduct of  environmental and social audits, and other 
project related events; and 
vii. 
xii. 
ix. 
xi. 
x. 
xiii.  Performs other related tasks assigned by the Team Leader. 
CS8 Package 
Community Horticulture Production and marketing 
Association (CHPMA) establishment and capacity building 
1. 
The  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  intends  to  apply  the  proceeds  of  an 
Asian  Development  Bank  loan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Himachal  Pradesh 
Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project (HP-SHIVA) The overall 
HP-SHIVA project, comprising a Project Readiness Facility ((PRF) US$10 million over 
two years) and the ensuing loan, aims to increase the income of at least 25,000 farm 
households in seven districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and 
Una)  of  subtropical  areas  of  Himachal  Pradesh.  In  the  long-term,  the  HP-SHIVA 
project will contribute to (i) increased income of rural households in Himachal Pradesh; 
and (ii) strengthened climate resilience in Himachal Pradesh. The HP-SHIVA project 
will expand irrigation to farmers, increase subtropical horticulture production and its 
climate  resilience,  and  raise  the  profitability  and  farm  gate  price  of  subtropical 
horticulture production through value chain development of targeted commodities.  
Project Readiness Facility (PRF) loan will pilot the development of drip-irrigated 
2. 
high-density horticulture production at 17 locations in 4 districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, 
Kangra, Mandi) and 13 blocks incorporating 168 ha of irrigated land across 16 irrigated 
areas and involving 480 male and female beneficiary landowning households.  
3. 
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
rehabilitate  16 
(v) Output  1:  Irrigation  infrastructure  development  and  farmer  management 
systems established. This output will be management by DIPH. Output 1 will (a) 
innovative 
construct  or 
technologies for water extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate 
and  disaster  resilience  (PRF  pilot);  (b)  establish  and  capacitate  WUAs  on  the 
constructed irrigation schemes with women’s participation and gender equitable 
leadership;  and  (c)  finalize  the  draft  WUA  act  to  be  submitted  for  the  HP 
legislative assembly’s enactment. 
irrigation  schemes 
introducing 
(vi)Output  2:    Subtropical  horticulture  production  technology  and  marketing 
systems demonstrated. This output will be managed by DOH. Output 2 will: (a) 
develop  17  subtropical  horticulture  plots  covering  168  hectares,  engaging 
approximately  600  male  and  female  farmers  for  irrigated  high-  and  ultra-high 
density production of citrus, guava, litchi and pomegranate (PRF pilot); (b) fence 
all horticulture plots to protect from animal predation (PRF pilot); (c) form CHPMA 
in  the  PRF  areas  and  build  their  capacities  for  business/marketing;  and  (d) 
facilitate 
for  subtropical 
the  development  of  CHPMA 
horticulture value addition and market development.  
investment  plans 
(vii) 
tools  and  creating  an  enabling  environment 
Output  3:  Enabling  environment,  tools  and  capacity  for  promoting 
irrigated  subtropical  horticulture  provided.  This  output  focuses  on  developing 
the 
capacity  building 
implementation of the ensuing project. Specifically, the project will: (a) support 
DOH  to  prepare  the  Himachal  Pradesh  Horticulture  Sector  Development 
Strategy  and  Investment  Plan  2023-2030;  (b)  provide  technical  training  and 
experimental study tours, as well as investment project management including 
safeguards,  procurement,  gender,  financial  management  and  institutional 
strengthening  for DOH and  DIPH staff;  (c)  train  CHPMA  members  on  orchard 
for 
54 
management  through  preparing  the  packages  of  practice  for  key  subtropical 
horticulture crops and providing on-site training; (d) provide technical support to 
subtropical  horticulture  nurseries;  and  (e)  establish  scientific  and  project 
monitoring system in the Project Management Unit (PMU).    
(viii) 
Output 4: Ensuing investment project and its implementation readiness 
prepared.  This  output  will  support  DOH  and  DIPH  to  prepare  the  feasibility 
studies,  detailed  engineering  design  and  surveys,  due  diligence  assessment, 
safeguards preparation work and bid documents for the ensuing loan, supported 
by  PRF  consultants.  Possible  public-private  partnership  pathways  will  be 
explored in collaboration with the Private Sector Operations Department as part 
of the ensuing loan preparation.  
4. 
The  GOHP  proposes  to  use  a  portion  of  the  loan  to  recruit  a  firm  or  non-
government organization to, initially, assist the DOH to establish sustainable CHPMAs 
incorporating  480 farmers  engaged  in  irrigated  sub-tropical  horticulture  production 
developed  under  the  HP-SHIVA  PRF.  The  contract  will  subsequently  involve  the 
development of CHPMAs amongst the estimated 10,000 farmers who will be engaged 
in  irrigated  sub-tropical  horticulture  production  on  the  approximately  4,000 ha  of 
irrigable sub-tropical horticulture production area (about 40 irrigation schemes) to be 
identified and designed under the PRF and developed during the first phase of the HP-
SHIVA project.  
Position:  CHPMA establishment and capacity building Team Leader 
Location:  Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Category : National  consultant company or NGO 
Period of Engagement :  24 person months over 2 years. 
Reports to:  PMU Project Director (PD)  
Positions Supervised: block level CHPMA facilitators. 
Qualifications (Team Leader) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
•  Minimum general experience of 10 years in value chain development; 
•  At least a bachelor’s degree in horticulture, marketing or a related subject; 
•  Experience in the development of farmer marketing organizations and their 
linkage to value chains; 
•  Familiarity with agricultural product marketing issues in India at national and 
sub-national levels and practical experience of farmer marketing organization 
development at field level; 
•  Ability to develop and maintain close association with government agencies 
and communities; 
•  Strong analytical, communication, documentation and presentation skills with 
experience  in  facilitating  and  chairing  meetings  with  multiple  stakeholder 
groups including farmers; 
•  Good organizational and planning skills and an ability to adhere to deadlines; 
•  Excellent writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English; and 
•  Previous experience with the ADB or World Bank would be a distinct asset. 
JOB PARTICULARS 
55 
Job Objective: 
The  CHPMA  Establishment  and  Training  Team  Leader  will  support  the 
Department of Horticulture (DoH) in CHPMA establishment, forming training 
units in the DOH and at target districts and coordinating the deployment of 
CHPMA facilitators at block level. CHPMAs will be established and trained to 
assess and plan market entry opportunities, build linkages to key public and 
private sector market “gatekeepers”, ensure the supply of consistently high-
quality  products  in  market  demand,  add  value  to  horticulture  products, 
negotiate prices and contracts, etc.  
Job Outputs: 
•  Within 3 months, establish a CHPMA unit within the DOH and DOH CHPMA 
training teams in the four project districts; 
•  Within 3 months, finalize a CHPMA operational manual; 
•  Within one year, up to 17 trained and functioning CHPMAs engaged in up to 
4  multi-stakehoder platforms (MSPs); 
•  Within  two  years,  approximately  220  trained  and  functioning  CHPMAs 
engaged in up to 7  multi-stakehoder platforms (MSPs); 
•  Monthly, Quarterly, Annual and Final CHPMA development progress reports 
and contributions to the particular subproject O&M Manuals. 
i. 
ii. 
Coordinate with the DoH to establish and mentor a CHPMA unit within the 
DOH as well as establishing DOH training teams at district levels and trained 
staff at  Sub-district, Block levels.  
Working with the DoH prepare a CHPMA manual incorporating best Indian 
and  international  practice  to  identify  value  addition  and  market  entry 
positions and to prepare financially viable business plans. The manual will 
be updated towards the end of the PRF based on lessons learned in CHPMA 
establishment  and  participatory  market  assessment  and  building  value 
chains and public-private partnerships for improved farmer market access 
and prices. 
iii. 
Prepare  a  CHPMA  Development  Plan  that  schedules  the  institutional 
development and training of the CHPMAs. 
iv.  Establish  systems  and  procedures  to  monitor  the  progress  of  CHPMA 
establishment and training, ensuring that CHPMA committee positions are 
democratically elected, that the chairperson and deputy chairperson are a 
man  and  a  woman  or  vice-versa,  all  participating  CHPMAs  are  legally 
constituted and registered, have bank accounts and are fully trained to add 
value to their products and access markets. 
v.  Create a series of fora at district and state level with a view to linking key 
stakeholders, including CHPMA representatives, public mandis managers, 
private sector actors (traders, processors, input suppliers, investors, finance 
institutions)  and  government  actors  (municipal  governance,  research, 
extension) engaged in specific commodity markets, thereby strengthening 
private  and  public-private  relationships  across  those  commodity  markets, 
innovation  and  providing  a  conducive 
with  a  view 
to  promoting 
55 
56 
environment/space for the brokerage of business and financial agreements 
between potential value chain stakeholders. 
vi.  Advise  and  prepare  recommendations  on  development  of  a  value  chain 
development fund (VCDF) that provides risk-based co-financing to catalyse 
innovative  investments  by  public  and  private  agri-enterprises  and  farmer 
organizations into prioritised value chains.  
vii. 
Prepare monthly, Quarterly and Final PRF reports on CHPMA development 
progress  and  ensure  that  information  on  the  CHPMA  development  and 
management  program  are  incorporated  into  the  Project  MIS  and  GIS 
systems. 
57 
Position:  CHPMA establishment and capacity building Facilitators 
Location:  Project Management Unit (PMU) 
Category : National  consultant company or NGO 
Period of Engagement :  60 person months in PY1 and 180 person months in PY2 
as CHPMAs are established across the farmer beneficiries of the 4,000 ha HP-
SHIVA phase one irrigation area development (each facilitator will cover at least 
three CHPMAs). 
Reports to:  CHPMA establishment and capacity building Team Leader 
Positions Supervised: CHPMAs. 
Qualifications (Facilitators) 
QUALIFICATION GUIDE 
•  Minimum  general  experience  of  3  years  in  farmer  marketing  organization 
development; 
•  At least a diploma in agriculture, marketing or a related subject; 
•  Experience in the linkage of farmer organizations to markets, including though 
value chain engagement; 
•  Familiarity  with  agriculture  marketing  systems  and  issues  in  India  at  sub-
national levels and practical experience of farmer organization at field level; 
•  Ability to develop and maintain close association with farming communities; 
•  Experience in facilitating and chairing meetings with farmers; 
•  Good organizational and planning skills and an ability to adhere to deadlines; 
•  Good writing skills; fluency in written and spoken English; and 
JOB PARTICULARS 
Job Objective: 
The CHPMA Establishment and Training Facilitators will mentor the farmers 
in CHPMA establishment. CHPMAs will be established and trained to identify 
mechanisms to add value to their products and improve their market prices, 
including through value chain participation.  
Job Outputs: 
•  Establish  CHPMAs  within  the  assigned  block  in  accordance  with  the  DoH-
prepared CHPMA manual; 
•  Train  CHPMAs  farmer  members  in  group  and  financial  management, 
agriculture product quality  control,  value addition and marketing, and  value 
chain linkage; 
•  Monthly,  Quarterly,  Annual  and  Final  WUA  Development  Progress  reports 
and contributions to the particular subproject O&M Manuals. 
Based on a unified CHPMAs manual, an agreed CHPMAs Development Plan and 
an approved monitoring systems:  
57 
58 
xiv.  Conduct project orientation in the villages on CHPMAs development to 
xv. 
xvi. 
improve market access and farm gate prices; 
Encourage  project  beneficiaries  to  collectively  participate  in  the 
CHPMAs  development  process,  with  special  attention 
the 
participation of the most marginalized-vulnerable groups; 
Identify  potential  leaders  from  among  the  beneficiaries  and  assess 
their readiness & capabilities; 
to 
xvii.  Facilitate  organization  of  CHPMAs 
from  among 
the  project 
beneficiaries;  
xviii.  Orient  the  project  beneficiaries  on  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of 
xix. 
CHPMAs committee and ordinary members; 
Train and coach CHPMAs members in undertaking their roles in high 
quality  horticulture  production  and  community-based  market 
development/access; 
Build the capacity of the CHPMAs members to identify, implement. and 
monitor social safeguards in subproject planning and implementation; 
xxi.  Organize  and  coordinate  CHPMAs  related  meetings,  assemblies, 
workshops, training and other events, ensuring attendance of required 
personnel; 
xx. 
xxii.  Facilitate  resolution  of  conflicts  &  grievances  to  ensure  smooth 
implementation, buy-in and support of all stakeholders; 
xxiii.  Assist the Team leader and CHPMAs in identifying and testing market 
opportunities and building linkages to value chains; 
xxiv.  Coach  the  CHPMAs  in  complying  with  documentary,  data  gathering 
and reporting requirements and in developing and operationalizing a 
village-based  horticulture  marketing  monitoring  and  evaluation 
system; 
xxv.  Assist  in  the  conduct  of  environmental  and  social  audits,  and  other 
project related events; and 
xxvi.  Performs other related tasks assigned by the Team Leader. 
CS9 Package 
HP-SHIVA Ensuing Loan Project Document Preparation 
ToRs 
1. 
The  Government  of  Himachal  Pradesh  intends  to  apply  the  proceeds  of  an 
Asian  Development  Bank  loan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Himachal  Pradesh 
Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project (HP-SHIVA) The overall 
HP-SHIVA project, comprising a Project Readiness Facility ((PRF) US$10 million over 
two years) and the ensuing loan, aims to increase the income of at least 25,000 farm 
households in seven districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and 
Una)  of  subtropical  areas  of  Himachal  Pradesh.  In  the  long-term,  the  HP-SHIVA 
project will contribute to (i) increased income of rural households in Himachal Pradesh; 
and (ii) strengthened climate resilience in Himachal Pradesh. The HP-SHIVA project 
will expand irrigation to farmers, increase subtropical horticulture production and its 
climate  resilience,  and  raise  the  profitability  and  farm  gate  price  of  subtropical 
horticulture production through value chain development of targeted commodities.  
2. 
Project Readiness Facility (PRF) loan will pilot the development of drip-irrigated 
high-density horticulture production at 17 locations in 4 districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, 
Kangra, Mandi) and 13 blocks incorporating 168 ha of irrigated land across 16 irrigated 
areas and involving 480 male and female beneficiary landowning households.  
3. 
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
rehabilitate  16 
(ix)Output  1:  Irrigation  infrastructure  development  and  farmer  management 
systems established. This output will be management by DIPH. Output 1 will (a) 
innovative 
construct  or 
technologies for water extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate 
and  disaster  resilience  (PRF  pilot);  (b)  establish  and  capacitate  WUAs  on  the 
constructed irrigation schemes with women’s participation and gender equitable 
leadership;  and  (c)  finalize  the  draft  WUA  act  to  be  submitted  for  the  HP 
legislative assembly’s enactment. 
irrigation  schemes 
introducing 
(x) Output  2:    Subtropical  horticulture  production  technology  and  marketing 
systems demonstrated. This output will be managed by DOH. Output 2 will: (a) 
develop  17  subtropical  horticulture  plots  covering  168  hectares,  engaging 
approximately  600  male  and  female  farmers  for  irrigated  high-  and  ultra-high 
density production of citrus, guava, litchi and pomegranate (PRF pilot); (b) fence 
all horticulture plots to protect from animal predation (PRF pilot); (c) form CHPMA 
in  the  PRF  areas  and  build  their  capacities  for  business/marketing;  and  (d) 
facilitate 
for  subtropical 
the  development  of  CHPMA 
horticulture value addition and market development.  
investment  plans 
(xi)Output  3:  Enabling  environment,  tools  and  capacity  for  promoting  irrigated 
subtropical  horticulture  provided.  This  output  focuses  on  developing  capacity 
building tools and creating an enabling environment for the implementation of the 
ensuing  project.  Specifically,  the  project  will:  (a)  support  DOH  to  prepare  the 
Himachal  Pradesh  Horticulture  Sector  Development  Strategy  and  Investment 
Plan 2023-2030; (b) provide technical training and experimental study tours, as 
well  as  investment  project  management  including  safeguards,  procurement, 
gender, financial management and institutional strengthening for DOH and DIPH 
staff; (c) train CHPMA members on orchard management through preparing the 
60 
packages of practice for key subtropical horticulture crops and providing on-site 
training; (d) provide technical support to subtropical horticulture nurseries; and 
(e) establish scientific and project monitoring system in the Project Management 
Unit (PMU).    
(xii) 
Output 4: Ensuing investment project and its implementation readiness 
prepared.  This  output  will  support  DOH  and  DIPH  to  prepare  the  feasibility 
studies,  detailed  engineering  design  and  surveys,  due  diligence  assessment, 
safeguards preparation work and bid documents for the ensuing loan, supported 
by  PRF  consultants.  Possible  public-private  partnership  pathways  will  be 
explored in collaboration with the Private Sector Operations Department as part 
of the ensuing loan preparation.  
4. 
In  pursuit  of  output 4,  the  GOHP  proposes  to  use  a  portion  of  the  loan  to 
contract either a consulting company to design the HP-SHIVA main loan project. As 
detailed in Error! Reference source not found., below, in total, 26 person months of 
international  expertise  and  34 months  of  national  expertise  would  be  employed  to 
prepare the detailed project design and supporting documents to ADB requirements. 
Table 2: HP-SHIVA project design consultant input 
Key Expert 
Team Leader/value chain specialist 
Deputy Team Leader/Irrigation Specialist 
Irrigation engineer 
Horticulture specialist 
Social safeguards specialist 
Environmental safeguards specialist 
Economist 
Monitoring and Evaluation specialist 
Climate Change and Natural Resources Management Specialist 
Project implementation specialist 
Gender specialist 
Water user association specialist 
Farmer organization specialist 
Capacity building specialist 
Procurement specialist 
Finance specialist 
Administrative officer 
     Total 
International 
(person-months) 
6 
National 
(person-months) 
5 
3.5 
1.5 
1.5 
2.5 
2.5 
1.5 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
26.0 
5 
4 
2 
2 
3 
0 
0 
1 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
4 
34 
Terms  of  reference  for  the  HP-SHIVA  project  design  consultant  inputs  are 
5. 
detailed below. 
6. 
Team  Leader  (international).  The  international  specialist  should  have  a 
postgraduate degree in agriculture, agriculture economics or commerce with at least 
15  years  of  international  experience  in  designing  and  implementing  agriculture  or 
horticulture  value  chain  development  investment  projects.  Familiarity  with  rural 
livelihoods and climate change-related issues of India will be an advantage. 
7. 
As team leader. The consultant will provide support to the executing agency in 
leading  TA  activity  implementation  to  arrive  at  a  detailed  design  of  the  HP-SHIVA 
project,  in  line  with  the  government's  policy  and  strategies  and  ADB  requirements, 
implementation 
including  scope, 
arrangements, monitoring,  evaluation  and  reporting,  economic,  financial,  social and 
environmental analysis, sector and thematic assessments, due diligence and risk and 
targeting,  cost  estimates, 
financing  plan, 
61 
mitigation  measures.  This  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  performance  targets  and 
indicators;  external  assistance  to  the  sector  and  lessons  learned;  design  and 
monitoring framework; project outputs and description; detailed project cost estimates; 
implementation  arrangements  and  schedule;  indicative  procurement  packaging  and 
draft procurement plans; staffing; terms of reference for consulting services; project 
impacts  benefits  and  risks;  and  project  performance  monitoring  system;  and 
preparation  of  a  project  administration  manual  (PAM);  inputs  to  the  Report  and 
Recommendation  to  the  President  for  the  ensuing  project;  review  outputs  of  the 
consulting  team  and  ensure  timely  achievement  of  all  milestone  activities;  prepare 
regular reports discussing the progress of project preparation to be submitted to ADB 
and the government; develop a project roll out plan for the project; and complete any 
other tasks as may be reasonably requested by the ADB or the government. The Team 
leader will also support the ADB Project Officer/ Mission Leader in preparation of the 
Aide Memoire and post-mission follow-up and implement any other tasks as may be 
reasonably requested by the ADB or the government. 
Investment  Plan  2023-2030,  be  responsible 
As a value chain specialist,  the consultant will, building off the Horticulture 
8. 
Development  Strategy  and 
for: 
(i) investigating the current and potential demand of the key HP subtropical horticulture 
products,  their  various  market  destinations  and  related  price  trends  so  as  to  allow 
analysts to identify constraints, barriers and opportunities; (ii) describing and evaluate 
the feasibility of commercialization and market linkages needed for the expansion of 
targeted  subtropical  horticulture  products  into  national  and  international  markets; 
(iii) identifying the main actors and other stakeholders (supporters and influencer) and 
how are they linked and interact in the value chain; assessing the flow of products, 
information and financial resources along the value chains – both descriptive and as 
a  value  chain  map;  (iv) examining  the  input  and  output  market  and  their  structure. 
Procurement processes, accessibility to and availability of varieties required as well 
as related standards and information (v) identification of final buyer for output market, 
type of contractual arrangements and transaction costs involved; (vi  and (vi) analyse 
the degree of competitiveness, including the existence of monopolies, monopsonies, 
oligopolies, market share and market segmentation for both input and output markets; 
and  identify  potential  lead  firms  for  each  targeted  value  chain;  and  (vii)  identifying 
linkages  between  subtropical  horticulture  producer 
mechanisms 
associations and value chain lead firms (gatekeepers) including mechanism for public-
private partnerships to support value chain development. 
for  building 
irrigation  engineer,  subject 
Irrigation  engineer  (international).  The 
9. 
to 
satisfactory  performance  under  the  PRF,  will  be  the  same  engineers  assisting  the 
PMU with PRF implementation. The engineers shall: (i) support the development of a 
water resources planning unit within the PMU structure; (ii) guide the planning unit in 
coordinating  with  DoH and  DIPH in  developing a  long  list  of possible  schemes and 
priority criteria for shortlisting for both entry into the loan and for design and tender 
preparation  of  40%  of  the  total  planned  project  irrigation  infrastructure;  (iii) identify 
innovative systems and structures for the rehabilitation of existing and development of 
green-field irrigation schemes, including their increased resilience to climate change 
and disaster; (iv) support DIPH in the determination of monthly reliable flows and flood 
design criteria whilst taking into account possible changes in such parameters due to 
climate change for a 30 year planning horizon; (v) support DIPH in ensuring that the 
water demand for proposed subprojects cropping patterns can be supplied within the 
61 
62 
accepted standard of reliability; (vi) assist DIPH with the preparation of manuals and 
guidelines for the design of the irrigation infrastructure, drawing from lessons learnt 
during the PRF pilot program, including modernization of the management systems 
and  conclusions  from  climate  change  studies;  (vii) assist  DPIH  to  draft  terms  of 
reference for design consultants to prepare detailed engineering designs and contract 
documents  for  infrastructure  design  on  40%  of  the  proposed  irrigation  schemes; 
(viii) assist  the  DIPH  to  tender,  evaluate  and  approve  irrigation  infrastructure 
construction contracts for implementation at loan effectiveness; and (ix) complete any 
other tasks as may be reasonably requested by ADB or the government. 
10.  Deputy  Team  leader/irrigation  engineer  (national).  The  Engineer  should 
have  at  least  7 years  general  experience  of  in  irrigation  systems  design,  at  least  a 
bachelor’s degree in civil engineering, significant water user association establishment 
experience, familiarity with irrigation and water management issues in India at national 
and sub-national levels and an ability to develop and maintain close association with 
government agencies and communities. 
11. 
The  deputy  team  leader/engineer  would:  (i) assist  the  Team  leader  in 
(a) support the team leader in building effective communication channels with the EA; 
(b)  the preparation of a project administration manual (PAM); (c) developing a project 
roll out plan; (d) mapping of resource and service providers and developing a directory 
of  potential  partners  and  resource  institutions  that  can  support  the  project.;  and 
(ii) assist the irrigation engineer in: (a) the development of a water resources planning 
unit  within  the  PMU  structure;  (b) developing  a  long  list  of  possible  schemes  and 
priority criteria for shortlisting for both entry into the loan and for design and tender 
preparation of 40% of the total planned project irrigation infrastructure; (c) support to 
DIPH  in  the  determination  of  monthly  reliable  flows  and  flood  design  criteria  whilst 
taking into account possible changes in such parameters due to climate change for a 
30  year  planning  horizon;  and  (d) assist  the  DIPH  to  tender,  evaluate  and  approve 
irrigation infrastructure construction contracts for implementation at loan effectiveness. 
12.  Horticulture specialist (international). The specialist shall have an advanced 
degree in agriculture, horticulture or in a related discipline. He/she should have at least 
10 years of experience in designing and managing horticulture production programs 
in Asia and experience in high-density subtropical horticulture production. 
international  best  practice  and  revise 
13. 
The  specialist  would:  (i) in  partnership  with  national  academic  horticulture 
specialists,  conduct  a  review  of  the  PRF-prepared  POPs  in  light  of  PRF 
implementation  experience  and 
them 
accordingly; (ii) review agro-climatic conditions within the proposed project locations 
and  advise  the  PMU  on  their  suitability  for  intensive  smallholder-based  subtropical 
horticulture  production;  (iii) with  the  project  economist,  review  and  revise  existing 
subtropical  crop  production  models,  taking  into  account  possible  climate  change 
impacts over the life expectancy of the crop; (iv) with the capacity building specialist, 
assess  the  skill  sets  of  DoH  staff  at  state,  district,  sub-district  and  block  levels  and 
prepare recommendations for targeted capacity building under the project; (v) review 
the  availability  of  quality  genetic  material  for  project  implementation  and  prepare 
recommendations for its improvement, particularly from the private sector; (vi) review 
prevailing nursery management practices and prepare recommendations and propose 
investment support for their improvement; and (vii) complete any other tasks as may 
be reasonably requested by ADB or the government. 
63 
14.  Horticulture specialist (national). The consultant should have at least 7 years 
general  experience  of  in  horticulture  development,  at  least  a  bachelor’s  degree  in 
horticulture production, familiarity with high-density horticulture production in India at 
national  and  sub-national  levels  and  an  ability  to  develop  and  maintain  close 
association with government agencies and communities. 
15. 
The  consultant  would  assist  the  international  horticulture  specialist  in:  (i) the 
identification of key subtropical horticulture crops by location for development under 
the Project;  (ii) assessing  technology  gaps  in  high density  horticulture  production  in 
HP;  (iii) assessing  farmer  capacity  for  intensive  horticulture  production  and  the 
development of  appropriate  capacity  building  programs;  (iv) support the  DoH  in  the 
determination of horticulture production inputs under the project and the mapping of 
potential  suppliers;  and  (v) assisting  the  DoH  to  tender,  evaluate  and  approve 
horticulture production input contracts for implementation at loan effectiveness. 
16.  Economist  (international)  The  specialist  shall  have  an  advanced  degree  in 
economics, finance, or in a related discipline. He/she should have at least 10 years of 
experience in preparing economic and financial analyses, and designing of agriculture 
or rural development project costing, budgeting and financial management of donor-
financed  and  government-implemented  development  projects  in  several  countries. 
Experience in India would be an advantage.  
The  specialist  shall:  (i) in  collaboration  with  the  team  leader,  prepare  the 
17. 
detailed sector assessment and thematic reports for the proposed PRF; (ii) prepare 
the economic and financial analyses for the proposed project accordance with ADB 
revised guidelines on economic analysis for investment projects including distribution 
and sensitivity analysis; (iii) prepare financial sustainability analysis for the proposed 
project; (iv) based on this analysis, contribute to the selection of priority investments; 
(v) provide  inputs  to  the  Financial  Management  and  Procurement  Specialists  in 
preparing  the  project  financial  and  procurement  plans;  (vi) in  collaboration  with  the 
Financial Management Specialist prepare detailed project cost estimates, in form and 
substance  agreeable  to  ADB;  (vii) provide  inputs  in  the  preparation  of  a  PAM; 
(viii) support  the  consultant  team  leader  in  the  submission  of  periodic  reports;  and 
(ix) complete  any  other  tasks  as  may  be  reasonably  requested  by  ADB  or  the 
government. 
18. 
Financial  Management  Specialist.  (national)  The  national  specialist  should 
have  a  degree  in  finance  and  management  with  at  least  10 years  of  experience  in 
agriculture or rural development project financial management, project implementation 
and  operations.  The  specialists  should  preferably  possess  a  professional 
accountancy/finance  qualification  such  as  a  chartered  accountant,  certified  public 
accountant,  or  equivalent  and  be  familiar  with  the  financial  guidelines  and  related 
procedures of ADB and the government. 
The  specialist  will:  (i) conduct  financial  management  assessment  of  the 
19. 
executing  agency  and  the  PRF,  looking  into  governance,  integrity  and  risks  in 
accordance  with  ADB  guidelines;  (ii) recommend  mitigation  measures  to  help 
safeguard risk exposures; (iii) prepare financial and funds flow for community grants, 
project management and administration budget line items, training and other relevant 
cost items of the project; (iv) prepare a financing plan for the project and describe the 
flow of funds and disbursement procedures; (v) provide inputs to the PAM; (vi) review 
63 
64 
implementation/implementation-related  documents  of  other 
available  project 
internationally  financed  projects  in  Himachal  Pradesh  (HP)  (Project  Appraisal 
Document of World Bank Loans, Operations Manuals, Impact Evaluation Study, audit 
reports, etc.) and extract relevant and useful learning from these projects; (vii) review 
the  current  staffing  and  staffing  policies  and  structures  of  the  EA  and  assess  the 
requirements in terms of number and qualifications of financial management staff and 
map  required  staff  and  positions  to  determine  recruitment  needs;  (viii) review  and 
recommend options for hiring or contracting out services of consultants and staff and 
develop terms of reference for the staff and project financial management consultants 
at national levels; (ix) undertake an overall governance and risk assessment of the PF 
and the EA and develop specific actions for management of risks, including capacity 
development recommendations; (x) analyze information on country and project level 
governance and capacity; (xi) review structures, personnel management, budget, and 
staff  for  project  implementation  and  identify  human  and  other  resource  constraints; 
and  (xii) complete  any  other tasks  as  may  reasonably  be  requested  by  ADB  or the 
government. 
20.  Climate  Change  and  Natural  Resources  Management  Specialist 
(international). The CC and NRM engineer, subject to satisfactory performance under 
the PRF, will be the same specialist assisting the PMU with PRF implementation. The 
specialist shall: (i) support the development of NRM/CC planning and implementation 
within  the  PMU  structure,  including  processes,  procedures  and  budgets  for 
for 
compliance  with  ADB  safeguards  and  GOI  environmental  requirements 
environmental  permitting  of  project  investments;  (ii) update  the  PRF  Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) to provide a first draft EMP that attends to the full range of 
investments entertained under the HP-SHIVA loan (e.g., addition of ago-processing, 
supply chain infrastructure, others); (iii) guide the planning unit, in coordination with 
DoH and DIPH, to develop the implementation framework (including institutional and 
implementation arrangements, and budgets) for the EMP under the HP-SHIVA loan; 
(iv) identify key lessons-learned, successful experiences, challenges and weaknesses, 
and gaps from the PRF, viz. ENRM/CC aspects, for inclusion in and strengthening of 
the design of the HP-SHIVA loan project; (v) assist the planning unit, in coordination 
with DoH and DIPH, with the preparation of manuals and guidelines for the integration 
of ENRM/CC aspects into the design of the HP-SHIVA investments and interventions, 
drawing from lessons learnt during the PRF pilot program; (vi) assist the planning units 
in coordination with DoH and DIPH to draft terms of reference for design consultants 
to prepare detailed NRM/CC aspects within the design of the HP-SHIVA investments 
and  interventions;  and  to  supervise  and  review  the  consultants’  work;  and 
(vii) complete  any  other  tasks  as  may  be  reasonably  requested  by  ADB  or  the 
government. 
21.  Social Safeguard/Resettlement Specialist (international). The specialist shall 
have at least a master’s degree in social sciences, sociology, anthropology, or other 
relevant  disciplines  for  the  assignment,  with  10  years  working  experience  in 
indigenous  peoples,  human  settlement  and  safeguards  in  developing  countries. 
Experience  in  India  is  an  advantage.  The  specialist  must  be  familiar  with  ADB’s 
safeguards policies and procedures.  
22. 
The  specialist  shall:  (i) design  socioeconomic  surveys  and  social  impact 
assessments  at  community  level  to  be  undertaken  by  project  staff  and  volunteers; 
65 
(ii) prepare  screening  checklist  and  procedure  for  the  conduct  of  consultations 
specially for areas populated by ethnic groups; (iii) prepare and finalize the indigenous 
peoples  planning  framework  and  (if  required)  the  resettlement  framework,  in  case 
there are land acquisition and resettlement impacts, including indigenous peoples and 
involuntary impact categorization; (iv) prepare due diligence report based on initial list 
of PRF investments including on land acquisition and resettlement as required under 
the  ADB  guidelines;  (v) coordinate  with  the  PRF  team  to  ensure  that  mitigation 
measures are integrated into the PRF design features; (vi) assess the capacity of the 
EA 
frameworks; 
(vii) recommend  appropriate  capacity  development  activities  to  develop  or  enhance 
safeguards knowledge and skills of executing agency; (viii) provide inputs on social 
dimension and safeguard component on all project documents in the completion of the 
PAM;  (ix) support  the  consultant  team  leader  in  the  submission  of  periodic  reports; 
and  (x) complete  any  other  tasks  as  may  be  reasonably  requested  by  ADB  or  the 
government. 
impacts,  prepare  and 
resettlement 
to  screen 
implement 
23.  Social  Safeguard/Resettlement  Specialist  (national).  The  specialist  shall 
have at least a degree in social sciences, sociology, anthropology, or other relevant 
disciplines for the assignment, with 7 years working experience in indigenous peoples, 
human settlement and safeguards in India. Experience outside India is an advantage. 
The specialist must be familiar with ADB’s safeguards policies and procedures. 
The  national  specialist  shall  assist  the 
24. 
implementation  of  his/her 
socioeconomic surveys and social impact assessments.  
taking 
tasks, 
lead 
the 
international  specialist 
the 
implementation  of 
in 
in 
the 
(international).  The  Environment 
25.  Environment  safeguards  specialist 
safeguards  specialist  will  lead  the  preparation  of  the  environmental  impact 
assessment  and  loan  documents  as  per  ADB  requirement.  The  specialist  will 
preferably  have  a  master’s  degree  in  Environmental  Sciences  or  equivalent  and  at 
least 7 years of experience in preparing environmental impact assessments (EIAs) for 
donor agencies including the ADB.  
The specialist will be responsible for preparing the environmental assessment 
26. 
study  for  the  PRF.  He/she  will  survey  and  analyze  potential environmental  impacts 
and conduct public consultation with impacted communities in the process of preparing 
an environmental management plan in accordance with ADB requirements. This will 
include: (i) consultation with the technical team to confirm the project design, schedule 
location  and  detailed  activities;  (ii) conduct  a  scoping  assessment  to  define 
environmental  parameters/indicators  that  will  be  affected  by  the  project  activities; 
the  geophysical  environment,  ecological  environment,  and  social 
(iii) define 
environment of the project area; (iv) identify potential environmental impacts from the 
project; (v) identify potential mitigation measures for any potential impact; (vi) assess 
institutional  arrangement 
implement  proposed  mitigation  measures  and 
arrangements for handling grievance from affected people; (vii) prepare and discuss 
with  the  technical  team  an  environmental management  plan  (EMP)  matrix  showing 
activities and causal impacts, potential impacts, proposed mitigation measures, who 
will implement the measures and monitor their implementation; (viii) estimate the cost 
of implementing mitigation measures; and (ix) discuss the proposed EMP matrix and 
grievance  redress  mechanism  (GRM)  with  government  and  secure  an  in-principle 
agreement for all proposed mitigation measures. 
to 
65 
66 
27.  Plan  a  public  consultation  process  with  government  detailing  locations  and 
contact persons for each location and have the EMP matrix translated for distribution 
prior  to  the  agreed  public  consultation.  Build  the  capacity  of  government  staff  to 
adequately  and  clearly  explain  the  proposed  project  including  the  potential 
environmental impacts, the location of those impacts, the persons affected and how 
the  impacts  will  be  mitigated.  Ensure  affected  people  participate  and  raise  their 
concerns and that those concerns are addressed. Ensure the details of participants 
are recorded. 
28.  Prepare  an  environmental  assessment  report  compliant  with  ADB’s  SPS 
including reference to compliance with the requirements for environmental clearance 
from the Ministry of Environment. 
29.  Environment  safeguards  specialist  (national).  The  national  environment 
safeguards  specialist  will  preferably  have  a  Degree  in  Environmental  Sciences  or 
equivalent  and  at  least  5 years  of  experience  in  preparing  environmental  impact 
assessments (EIAs) in India. 
The  national  specialist  shall  assist  the 
the 
30. 
implementation  of  his/her  tasks,  taking  the  lead  in  (i) the  conduct  of  a  scoping 
assessment to define environmental parameters/indicators that will be affected by the 
project  activities;  (ii) defining  the  geophysical  environment,  ecological  environment, 
and  social  environment  of  the  project  area;  and  (iii) planning  and  implementing  the 
public consultation process. 
international  specialist 
in 
31.  Gender  and  Social  Development  Specialist  (national).  The  national 
specialist  shall  have  a  postgraduate  degree  in  gender,  anthropology,  international 
development, environmental management, social development, sociology, or related 
fields with at least 10 years of relevant professional experience in the field of social 
development, community development, social protection, or gender and development. 
Familiarity  with  ADB  policies  on  social  safeguards,  gender  development,  and  core 
labor standards is required. Working experience in agriculture and natural resource 
sector in India is preferred.  
32. 
The specialist will be responsible for the following: (i) prepare and finalize the 
poverty,  social  and  gender  assessments  in  accordance  with  ADB’s  Guidelines; 
(ii) prepare  and  finalize  a  social  and  poverty  analysis  report  that  adheres  to  ADB 
requirements;  (iii) prepare  and  finalize  a  summary  poverty  reduction  and  social 
strategy, including any action or mitigation plans or other measures as appropriate; 
(iv) prepare  and  finalize  a  gender  equity  and  social  analysis  action  plan  (GESIAP) 
based on ADB’s Policy; (v) conduct a social development and gender assessment and 
core labor standards  assessment, particularly on child and forced labor and equal pay 
for equal work and conduct field surveys and/or focus group discussions to inform the 
social development and gender assessments; (vi) provide inputs on social dimension 
and safeguard component on all project documents and in the completion of the PAM; 
(vii) support  the  consultant  team  leader  in  the  submission  of  periodic  reports;  and 
(viii) complete  any  other  tasks  as  may  be  reasonably  requested  by  ADB  or  the 
government. 
33.  Project Implementation specialist (international). The specialist should have 
a  degree  in  finance  and  management  with  at  least  10 years  of  experience  in 
agriculture  or  livelihood  project  financial  management,  project  implementation  and 
operations. The specialist  must be familiar with procurement guidelines and related 
procedures of ADB and the government.  
67 
(iii) review  available  project 
The  specialist  will  (i) look  into governance,  integrity  and  risks,  in  accordance 
34. 
with  ADB  guidelines;  (ii) recommend  mitigation  measures  to  help  safeguard  risk 
exposures; 
implementation/implementation-related 
documents of projects in India (Project Appraisal Document of World Bank HPHDP 
Loan, Operations Manuals, Impact Evaluation Study, audit reports, etc.) and extract 
relevant  and  useful  learning  from  these  projects;  (iv) review  and  revise  the 
procurement  capacity  and  financial  management  assessments  in  accordance  with 
ADB  guidelines  and  requirements;  (v) undertake  an  overall  governance  and  risk 
assessment  of  the  project,  the  executing  agency  and  develop  specific  actions  for 
management of risks, including capacity development recommendations; (vi) analyze 
information  on  country  and  project  level  governance  and  capacity;  (vii) assess  the 
the  proposed  project  and  provide 
for 
management  capacity  of 
recommendations for risk management and capacity development and other support 
needed  for project  implementation;  (viii) develop a  risk management  action  plan  for 
managing risks; (ix) prepare relevant sections for the PAM; and (x) complete any other 
tasks as may reasonably be requested by ADB or DoH. 
the  EA 
35.  Capacity  building specialist  (national).  The  national specialist  shall  have a 
resource  management,  education,  public 
post-graduate  degree 
administration  or  relevant  fields  with  at  least  10 years  of  experience  in  conducting 
training for project staff of agriculture-related projects. 
in  human 
The specialist shall be responsible for the following: (i) a capacity and training 
36. 
needs assessment report on the implementing partners and target districts, blocks and 
villages, based on the requirements of the project; (ii) design of the training program, 
manuals and training aids to support the project; (iii) institutional mapping of possible 
resource  institutions  and  partners  in  the  provision  of  continuing  training;  (iv) the 
development of a human resource development plan, describing the project staffing 
and skills needs throughout the project life, identifying skills gaps and how to fill them 
and developing the terms of reference for the various positions and expertise required 
by  the  project;  (v) a  recruitment  plan  supporting  the  project  roll-out  schedule,  in 
consultation with ADB and the government; (vi) pre-and in-service training plan and 
materials  for  the  staff  to  be  hired;  (vii) provide  inputs  in  the  preparation  of  a  PAM; 
(viii) support to the consultant team leader in the submission of periodic reports; and 
(ix) any other tasks as may be reasonably requested by ADB or the government. 
37.  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Specialist  (international).  The  international 
specialist shall have post graduate degree in economics or statistics, with 10 years of 
experience  in  monitoring  and  evaluation  and  undertaking  impact  evaluation  studies 
and  surveys  using  randomized  control  trials  or  semi-experimental  methods  for 
agriculture  and  rural  development  projects  in  several  countries.  Familiarity  with 
statistical analysis software programs is preferred.  
38. 
The  consultant  will  be  responsible  for,  but  not  limited  to,  the  following: 
(i) develop  and  recommend  an  M&E  framework  for  the  PRF,  including  reporting 
templates for use by project staff, that is consistent with government M&E systems; 
(ii) design a baseline study to generate information in support of the M&E framework; 
67 
68 
(iii) prepare terms of reference for impact evaluation studies to be undertaken at PRF 
mid-term and end term; (iv) recommend other impact or special studies and prepare 
terms  of  reference  to  measure  impact  of  the  project  at  selected  stages  of  project;  
(v) prepare a training design and train national project staff or staff of the government 
EA in the use of the M&E framework; (vi) oversee the implementation of a baseline 
study for the PRF; (vii) prepare the detailed sector assessment and thematic reports 
for the proposed PRF; (viii) provide inputs in the preparation of a PAM; (ix) support the 
consultant  team  leader  in  the  submission  of  periodic  reports;  and  (x) complete  any 
other tasks as may be reasonably requested by ADB or the government. 
39.  Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (national). The national specialist shall 
have  a  degree  in  economics  or  statistics,  with  at  least  7 years  of  experience  in 
monitoring  and  evaluation  and  undertaking  impact  evaluation  studies  and  surveys 
using randomized control trials or semi-experimental methods for agriculture and rural 
development projects in India. Familiarity with statistical analysis software programs 
is preferred. 
The  national  specialist  shall  assist  the 
40. 
the 
implementation of his/her tasks, taking the lead in coordinating the implementation of 
the baseline survey. 
international  specialist 
in 
41. 
Financial  Management  Specialist.  (national)  The  national  specialist  should 
have  a  degree  in  finance  and  management  with  at  least  10 years  of  experience  in 
agriculture or rural development project financial management, project implementation 
and  operations.  The  specialists  should  preferably  possess  a  professional 
accountancy/finance  qualification  such  as  a  chartered  accountant,  certified  public 
accountant,  or  equivalent  and  be  familiar  with  the  financial  guidelines  and  related 
procedures of ADB and the government. 
The  specialist  will:  (i) conduct  financial  management  assessment  of  the 
42. 
executing  agency  and  the  PRF,  looking  into  governance,  integrity  and  risks  in 
accordance  with  ADB  guidelines;  (ii) recommend  mitigation  measures  to  help 
safeguard risk exposures; (iii) prepare financial and funds flow for community grants, 
project management and administration budget line items, training and other relevant 
cost items of the project; (iv) prepare a financing plan for the project and describe the 
flow of funds and disbursement procedures; (v) provide inputs to the PAM; (vi) review 
available  project 
implementation/implementation-related  documents  of  other 
internationally  financed  projects  in  Himachal  Pradesh  (HP)  (Project  Appraisal 
Document of World Bank Loans, Operations Manuals, Impact Evaluation Study, audit 
reports, etc.) and extract relevant and useful learning from these projects; (vii) review 
the  current  staffing  and  staffing  policies  and  structures  of  the  EA  and  assess  the 
requirements in terms of number and qualifications of financial management staff and 
map  required  staff  and  positions  to  determine  recruitment  needs;  (viii) review  and 
recommend options for hiring or contracting out services of consultants and staff and 
develop terms of reference for the staff and project financial management consultants 
at national levels; (ix) undertake an overall governance and risk assessment of the PF 
and the EA and develop specific actions for management of risks, including capacity 
development recommendations; (x) analyze information on country and project level 
governance and capacity; (xi) review structures, personnel management, budget, and 
staff  for  project  implementation  and  identify  human  and  other  resource  constraints; 
and  (xii) complete  any  other tasks  as  may  reasonably  be  requested  by  ADB  or the 
69 
government. 
43.  Procurement  specialist  (national)  The  specialist  will  hold  preferably  a 
graduate  degree  in  a  relevant  discipline  (e.g.,  Procurement,  Engineering,  Law, 
Management  or  Business)  and  preferably  have  at  least  10 years  of  experience  in 
procurement  practices  in  Asia,  with  a  background  in  the  implementation  of 
development projects. Experience in the area of procurement of civil works and goods 
following  ADB’s  Procurement  Guidelines  (2015,  as  amended  from  time  to  time), 
undertaking  country  procurement  assessments,  and  national  procurement  reform 
programs will be a strong advantage.  
The  expert  will  (i) carry  out  procurement  risk  assessment,  including  a 
44. 
procurement capacity assessment of the EA (ii) prepare a procurement plan including 
packaging  of  works,  services,  and  goods  with  estimated  cost  and  time  schedule; 
(iii) prepare requests for proposals and bidding documents for procurement of works, 
services and goods; (iv) provide inputs in the preparation of a PAM; and (v) assist the 
EA in the recruitment of consultants and procurement of goods and works contracts. 
45.  WUA specialist, (national). Subject to satisfactory performance under the PRF, 
the  WUA  specialist  will  be  the  same  specialist  assisting  the  PMU  with  WUA 
development under the PRF. The WUA specialist shall: (i) expand the WUA support 
Unit in the PMU and training teams at all levels to manage the HP-SHIVA Loan Project 
WUA development program.  The Consultant will: (i) ensure that s/he and the training 
teams are partnered at all levels by DIPH staff with the view of capacity transfer and 
institutionalizing  best  WUA  development  and  management  experience  within  the 
DIPH;  (ii) support  the  DIPH  in  further  updating  the  WUA  Manual  as  necessary  as 
experience  develops  in  irrigating  maturing  horticulture  crops;  (iii) continue  with  the 
activities developed under the PRF’ above in expanded form to cover all HP-SHIVA 
schemes under the loan; and (iv) prepare a Final WUA Development Report drawing 
on the experience and lessons learnt during both the PRF and the HP-SHIVA loan. 
Guide    the  DIPH    Design  and  WUA  teams  in  preparing  individual  scheme  O&M 
manuals for schemes implemented during the loan.  
46.  CHDMA specialist, (national). Subject to satisfactory performance under the 
PRF, the CHMDA specialist will be the same specialist assisting the PMU with CHMDA 
development  under  the  PRF.  The  CHMDA  specialist  shall:  (i) expand  the  CHDMA 
support  Unit  in  the  PMU  and  training  teams  at  all  levels  to  manage  the  HP-SHIVA 
Loan Project CHDMA development program.  The Consultant to ensure that s/he and 
the training teams are partnered at all levels by DoH staff with the view of capacity 
transfer and institutionalizing best CHDMA development and management experience 
within the DoH at headquarters and field levels; (ii) support the DoH in upgrading the 
CHDMA  Manual  as  necessary  as  experience  develops  in  the  value  addition  and 
marketing of horticulture  crops;  (iii) continue with  the  activities  developed  under the 
PRF  in  expanded  form  to  cover  all  HP-SHIVA  schemes  under  the  loan;  and 
(iv) working with the international value chain specialist: (a) establish a series of fora 
at district and state level with a view to linking key stakeholders, including prospective 
HP-SHIVA  CHDMA  representatives,  public  mandis managers,  private  sector actors 
(traders, processors, input suppliers, investors, finance institutions) and government 
actors  (municipal  governance,  research,  extension)  engaged  in  specific  commodity 
markets; and (b) support the establishment of a value chain development fund (VCDF) 
and supporting manuals that provides risk-based co-financing to catalyse innovative 
69 
70 
investments  by  public  and  private  agri-enterprises  and  farmer  organizations  into 
prioritised value chains 
47.  Administrative  officer, 
(national).  The  administrative  officer  shall: 
(i) coordinate  team  meetings  and  travel  programs;  (ii) manage  and  maintain  team 
member  timesheets;  (iii) coordinate  team  member  expense  payments  and  their 
reconciliation; (iv) manage mission banking matters; (v) establish and maintain a filing 
systems  covering  all  mission  activities;  (vi) coordinate  with  the  PMU  on  the 
implementation of the HP-SHIVA project design. 
71 
CS10 Package 
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR INDEPENDENT INTERNAL AUDIT FIRM 
Introduction 
The Government of Himachal Pradesh intends to apply the proceeds of an Asian 
1. 
Development Bank loan for the implementation of the Himachal Pradesh Subtropical 
Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project (HP-SHIVA) The overall HP-SHIVA 
project, comprising a Project Readiness Facility ((PRF) US$10 million over two years) 
and the ensuing loan, aims to increase the income of at least 25,000 farm households in 
seven districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and Una) of 
subtropical areas of Himachal Pradesh. In the long-term, the HP-SHIVA project will 
contribute to (i) increased income of rural households in Himachal Pradesh; and (ii) 
strengthened climate resilience in Himachal Pradesh. The HP-SHIVA project will 
expand irrigation to farmers, increase subtropical horticulture production and its climate 
resilience, and raise the profitability and farm gate price of subtropical horticulture 
production through value chain development of targeted commodities.  
Project Readiness Facility (PRF) loan will pilot the development of drip-irrigated 
2. 
high-density horticulture production at 17 locations in 4 districts (Bilaspur, Hamirpur, 
Kangra, Mandi) and 13 blocks incorporating 168 ha of irrigated land across 16 irrigated 
areas and involving 480 male and female beneficiary landowning households.  
3. 
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
(xiii) 
Output 1: Irrigation infrastructure development and farmer management 
systems established. This output will be management by DIPH. Output 1 will (a) 
construct or rehabilitate 16 irrigation schemes introducing innovative technologies 
for water extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate and disaster 
resilience (PRF pilot); (b) establish and capacitate WUAs on the constructed 
irrigation schemes with women’s participation and gender equitable leadership; 
and (c) finalize the draft WUA act to be submitted for the HP legislative assembly’s 
enactment. 
(xiv) 
Output 2:  Subtropical horticulture production technology and marketing 
systems demonstrated. This output will be managed by DOH. Output 2 will: (a) 
develop 17 subtropical horticulture plots covering 168 hectares, engaging 
approximately 600 male and female farmers for irrigated high- and ultra-high 
density production of citrus, guava, litchi and pomegranate (PRF pilot); (b) fence 
all horticulture plots to protect from animal predation (PRF pilot); (c) form CHPMA 
in the PRF areas and build their capacities for business/marketing; and (d) 
facilitate the development of CHPMA investment plans for subtropical horticulture 
value addition and market development.  
(xv) 
Output 3: Enabling environment, tools and capacity for promoting irrigated 
subtropical horticulture provided. This output focuses on developing capacity 
building tools and creating an enabling environment for the implementation of the 
ensuing project. Specifically, the project will: (a) support DOH to prepare the 
Himachal Pradesh Horticulture Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan 
72 
2023-2030; (b) provide technical training and experimental study tours, as well as 
investment project management including safeguards, procurement, gender, 
financial management and institutional strengthening for DOH and DIPH staff; (c) 
train CHPMA members on orchard management through preparing the packages 
of practice for key subtropical horticulture crops and providing on-site training; (d) 
provide technical support to subtropical horticulture nurseries; and (e) establish 
scientific and project monitoring system in the Project Management Unit (PMU).    
(xvi) 
Output 4: Ensuing investment project and its implementation readiness 
prepared. This output will support DOH and DIPH to prepare the feasibility studies, 
detailed engineering design and surveys, due diligence assessment, safeguards 
preparation work and bid documents for the ensuing loan, supported by PRF 
consultants. Possible public-private partnership pathways will be explored in 
collaboration with the Private Sector Operations Department as part of the ensuing 
loan preparation.  
A. Background  
4. 
These terms of reference (ToR) outline the scope of works, deliverables and 
work project for the Internal Audit Firm. The Firm will support the Himachal Pradesh 
(HP) Department of Horticulture (DoH) and Department of Irrigation and Public Health 
(DIPH) in the implementation of the HP Sub-tropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value 
Addition Project (HP-SHIVA) Project Readiness Facility (PRF) Loan. The expected 
outcome is improved subtropical horticulture production. The project comprises four 
outputs: (i) Irrigation infrastructure development established and farmer management 
systems established; (ii) Subtropical horticulture production technology and marketing 
systems demonstrated; (iii) Enabling environment, tools and capacity for promoting 
intensive irrigated subtropical horticulture provided; and (iv) Ensuing investment project 
and its implementation readiness prepared. 
B. The Project  
Output 1: Irrigation infrastructure development and farmer management 
Output 2:  Subtropical horticulture production technology and marketing 
5. 
systems established. This output will be management by DIPH. Output 1 will (a) 
construct or rehabilitate 16 irrigation schemes introducing innovative technologies for 
water extraction, distribution and storage, and enhanced climate and disaster resilience 
(PRF pilot); and (b) establish and capacitate water user associations on the constructed 
irrigation schemes with women’s participation and gender equitable leadership.  
6. 
systems demonstrated. This output will be managed by DOH. Output 2 will: (a) 
develop 17 subtropical horticulture plots covering 168 hectares, engaging 480 male and 
female farmers for irrigated high- and ultra-high density production of citrus, guava, litchi 
and pomegranate; (b) fence all horticulture plots to protect from animal predation; (c) 
form community horticulture production and marketing associations (CHPMA) in the 
PRF areas and build their capacities for business/marketing; and (d) facilitate the 
development of CHPMA investment plans for subtropical horticulture value addition and 
market development. (removed primary processing equipment and infrastructure – 
assuming no budget)   
73 
Output 3: Enabling environment, tools and capacity for promoting irrigated 
7. 
subtropical horticulture provided. This output focuses on developing capacity 
building tools and creating an enabling environment for the implementation of the 
ensuing project. Specifically, the project will: (a) support DOH to prepare the Himachal 
Pradesh Horticulture Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan 2023-2030; (b) 
provide technical training and experimental study tours, as well as investment project 
management including safeguards, procurement, gender, financial management and 
institutional strengthening for DOH and DIPH staff; (c) capacitate CHPMA members on 
orchard management through preparing the packages of practice for key subtropical 
horticulture crops and providing on-site training; (d) provide technical support to 
subtropical horticulture nurseries; and (e) establish scientific and project monitoring 
system in the Project Management Unit (PMU).    
8. 
Output 4: Ensuing investment project and its implementation readiness 
prepared. This output will support DOH and DIPH to prepare the feasibility studies, 
detailed engineering design and surveys, due diligence assessment, safeguards 
preparation work and bid documents for the ensuing loan, supported by PRF 
consultants. Possible public-private partnership pathways will be explored in 
collaboration with the Private Sector Operations Department as part of the ensuing loan 
preparation.C. Implementation & Financial Management Arrangements  
9. 
The Executing Agency (EA) is the DoH. A Project Management Unit (PMU) has 
been established headed by a full time Project Director. The PMU will be supported by 
national consultants for social and environment safeguards, gender and data 
management. The PMU will coordinate the work of three international consultant-led 
activities including: (i) the preparation of a HP Horticulture Sector Development Strategy 
and Investment Plan 2023-2030; (ii) capacity building in DIPH; and (iii) the design of the 
HP-SHIVA project. Both DoH and DIPH are Implementing Agencies (IA). 
The financial management arrangements within the project are largely 
10. 
mainstreamed using the regular budgeting, funds flow and the state government 
treasury accounting and financial rules being applicable to the project. The project, 
through the PMU, submits regular reports including quarterly progress reports and 
annual audited project financial reports to the bank (ADB).  
D. Minimum Qualification required for the Firm  
The firm shall be a firm of Chartered Accountants fulfilling the following eligibility 
11. 
criteria:  
a)  It  shall  be  a  firm  of  Chartered  Accountants  registered  with  the  Institute  of 
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI);  
b) It must be in continuous practice as Chartered Accountants for at least fifteen 
(15) years in India and having at least three (3) Chartered Accountants as partners 
(out of them two must be holding the FCA degree);  
c) It must have its registered head office or a branch office in HP;  
d)  Names  of  all  Chartered  Accountant  team  members  (partners  and  salaried 
employees)  must  be  verified  from  the  latest  Certificate  of  Constitution;  [the 
applicant must attach the latest Certificate of Constitution available from ICAI];  
74 
e) It must be empaneled with Comptroller and Auditor General for the last three (3) 
financial  years;  [the  applicant  must  attach  the  latest  Letter  of  Empanelment 
available from C&AG];  
f) It should be in the audit profession and have carried out internal audit services 
of  companies/corporate,  of  government  departments/government  schemes,  and 
preferably of programs/schemes financed by multilateral development banks like 
World Bank, ADB, etc.  
E. Objective  
The firm engaged shall provide outsourced internal audit services to DoH and 
12. 
DIPH. The purpose of the engagement is to provide additional level of control and 
oversight over the accounting, internal controls and financial management procedures 
of DoH and DIPH, with particular focus over the ADB-funded project. The internal 
auditors shall be appointed by the project Executive Committee (EC), and shall report 
directly to the EC. The internal auditors so appointed are expected to be, and maintain, 
their independence throughout the engagement, and shall not provide any additional 
services to DoH or DIPH, which may impair their independence.  
The auditor will be given access to all project documents including the loan 
13. 
agreements, correspondence, financial records and financial manuals, notices from the 
Project Management/ Project Implementing Units and any other information associated 
with the project as deemed necessary by the auditor. 
F. Services/Scope of Work  
The internal audit should be carried out in accordance with standards and the 
14. 
guiding principles of the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA); will follow a risk-based 
approach; and will include such tests and controls, as the Internal Auditor considers 
necessary under the circumstances.  
The internal auditor must familiarize itself with the procedures laid down in at 
15. 
least the following: ADB loan/project agreement, Project Administration Manual and 
ADB loan disbursement handbook. 
16. 
The internal audit should be carried out in accordance with  
a) the Public Sector Internal Auditing Standards (PSIAS) issued by the Chartered 
Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA);  
b) guiding principles of the IIA;  
c) the guidance provided by the Internal Audit Division of the Controller General of 
Accounts (CGA) under its Generic Internal Audit Manual. These guidelines require 
that  the  internal  audit  follow  a  risk-based  approach,  by  (i)  determining  a  risk–
universe and understanding their key control points, (ii) prioritizing higher risk areas 
through a cogent and approved annual and 3–yearly audit planning cycle, (iii) focus 
on processes, systems and related controls, and not on financial transactions.  
17.  An annual audit plan should be prepared, based on a risk assessment, and 
submitted to the project steering committee for their concurrence. Specific areas of 
coverage of the internal audit could include the following:  
75 
a) An assessment of the adequacy of the project financial management systems, 
including  internal  controls.  This  would  include  aspects  such  as  adequacy  and 
effectiveness of accounting, financial and operational control, level  of compliance 
with general financial rules and treasury rules of the state government. Identify areas 
of significant inefficiencies and high risk in existing systems and suggest necessary 
remedial measures; b) An assessment of compliance with provisions of financing 
agreements  (ADB  Loan  Agreement  and  Project  Agreement)  especially  those 
relating to accounting and financial matters;  
c) That all external funds received under the project have been used in accordance 
with the financing agreement, with due attention to economy and efficiency and only 
for the purposes for which the financing was provided; that civil works, goods and 
services,  including  consultancy  services,  financed  have  been  procured  in 
accordance with the financing agreements and procurement guidelines of the bank;  
d) The budgets are allocated to subprojects in a timely manner and expenditure is 
as per approved budget and proper budget controls are in place;  
e) Funds flows are adequate and timely and with respect to DoH and DIPH and not 
used  for  non-project  activities,  reconciliation  of  all  project  bank  accounts  is 
conducted on monthly basis and any reconciliations items are followed up on in a 
timely  manner  f)  all  expenditures  including  all  procurement  of  works,  goods  and 
services funded by ADB, have the necessary supporting documents as outlined in 
the ADB disbursement handbook and have been incurred in accordance with the 
national rules and ADB financing agreement; 
f) That all necessary supporting documents, contracts, records, and accounts have 
been:  (i) kept  in  respect  of  all  project  expenditures  reported  by  the  implementing 
units and that these include all supporting documentation as required by the ADB 
loan  disbursement  handbook;  (ii) systematically  filed  in  a  secure  location;  and 
(iii)  clear linkages exist between accounting records and accounts books and the 
monthly/quarterly financial reports submitted by such implementing units to PMU;  
g)  Status  of  reconciliation  of  the  accounts  maintained  by  the  Treasury  and 
Accountant General (Accounts & Entitlements) [AG (A&E)] as applicable;  
h)  That  adequate  records  are  maintained  regarding  assets  created  and  assets 
acquired by the project, including details of cost, identification and location of assets; 
and that the physical verification of assets is being done;  
i) With respect to civil works executed, check to ensure that contract registers have 
been maintained and updated; running bills are properly approved and in agreement 
with  the  Measurement  Book;  advances  are  properly  adjusted  and  statutory 
deductions have been made; and 
j)  Follow-up  on  the  status  of  past  audit  observations  and  recommendations  to 
ensure timely implementation. 
18. 
The internal auditor will prepare semiannual reports and share it with the project 
management for their comments before finalization. The report is to include at least the 
following parts (a) executive summary; (b) audit observations; (c) implications of the 
observations; (d) suggested recommendations; (e) management’s comments/agreed 
actions and (f) status of actions on the previous recommendations with a detailed table 
76 
provided as an annex. The final internal audit report must be submitted to the steering 
committee no later than 30 days after the end of each six-month period. 
In addition, the outsourced internal audit firm will prepare an Internal Audit 
19. 
Manual for use by DoH and DIPH, and provide training workshops to the senior 
management of DoH and DIPH, and relevant accounting staff, to explain the scope and 
objectives of Internal Audit function, such that DoH and DIPH may consider 
subsequently co-sourcing, and then allocating resources for an in-house internal audit 
department. If necessary, the team will also train selected DoH and DIPH staff for 
potential future co-sourcing or in-house internal audit department.  
a)  The internal audit firm will be engaged for an initial period of 36 months (2020-23) 
and  depending  upon  the  performance  the  contract,  may  be  renewed  for  further 
period/(s) i.e. until the completion of project. The audit period would cover systems 
in place commencing from the first disbursement i.e. May 2020.  
b)   Recruitment will be undertaken in accordance with ADB’s Guidelines on the Use 
of Consultants (2013, as amended from time to time).1 Firms will be recruited using 
quality-and cost- based selection (QCBS) method with a 90:10 quality to cost 
ratio.  A  bio-data  technical  proposal  (BTP)  will  be  required.  The  team  will 
comprise:  
Position  
Person Months  
(over a two-year initial contract)  
Key Experts  
Partner  
Audit Manager/Team Leader  
Audit Assistants  
Non-Key Experts  
Article/Audit  Clerks  (at  least  two 
numbers)  
6 
9  
18  
24  
Version 2 December 2020 
Attachment B HP-SHIVA: Draft Procurement Plan 
A.  Basic Data 
Basic Data 
Project Name: Himachal Pradesh Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Readiness 
Project  
Project Number: 53189-001 
Approval Number: XXXX 
Country: India 
Executing Agency: Department of Horticulture (DoH) 
Project Procurement Classification: N/A 
Procurement Risk: Medium 
Implementing Agency: Department of Irrigation and 
Public Health (DIPH) and Department of Horticulture 
(DoH) 
Project Financing Amount: $ 12.5 Million 
ADB Financing:  
▪  Loan $ 10.00 Million 
Non-ADB Financing:  
▪  Government: $ 2.5 Million 
Project Closing Date: 31/12/2022  
Date of First Procurement Plan 27/05/2020  Date of this Procurement Plan: 19/11/2020 
Procurement Plan Duration: 24 months 
Advance contracting: Yes  
e-Procurement: Yes 
B.  Methods, Review and Procurement Plan 
Except as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) may otherwise agree, the following methods shall apply to 
procurement of goods, works, non-consulting services, and consulting services.  
Procurement of Goods, Works and Nonconsulting Services  
Method 
Open Competitive Bidding with 
national advertising for works 
Local contractors are experienced, and the local market is 
competitive. 
Comments 
DOH and DIPH to procure OCB works using e-Procurement 
system. The e-Procurement system only allows the bidding 
procedure of 1S2E as per the state procurement guidelines.  
The first draft English version of the procurement documents should 
be submitted for ADB review and approval regardless of the 
estimated contract amount. ADB-approved documents to be used 
as a model for subsequent OCB with national advertising for works 
with post review.  
Plant materials and equipment, agriculture input, furniture, office 
and agriculture testing equipment are readily available in local 
market. 
The first draft English version of the procurement documents should 
be submitted for ADB review and approval regardless of the 
estimated contract amount. ADB-approved documents to be used 
as a model for subsequent RFQ for goods and non-consulting 
services.  
Under special circumstances that are detailed in the Procurement 
Regulations for ADB Borrowers, direct contracting may be 
Request for quotations (RFQ) 
for goods and non-consulting 
services 
Direct Contracting  
Version 2 December 2020 
Procurement of Goods, Works and Nonconsulting Services  
Method 
Comments 
considered. Proposal for direct contracting needs ADB approval 
with sufficient justification.1 
Method 
OCB - National advertisement, 
Quality and Cost Based 
Selection (QCBS) 
Individual Consultant Selection 
(ICS) 
Least-cost Selection (LCS) 
Single source selection (SSS)  
Consulting Services 
Comments 
To be used for National/International and for Firm/Individual 
Consultants. 
Evaluation methodology – Quality:Cost Ratio 90:10 
DOH and DIPH will recruit all consultants.  
DOH and DIPH will recruit all consultants.  
Well-established practices and standards exist for auditing and 
construction supervision.   
Under special circumstances that are detailed in the Procurement 
Regulations for ADB Borrowers, single source selection or direct 
contracting may be considered. Proposal for single source selection 
needs ADB approval with sufficient justification. 
C.  Lists of Active Procurement Packages (Contracts) 
The following table lists goods, works, nonconsulting, and consulting services contracts for which the 
procurement activity is either ongoing or expected to commence within the procurement plan’s duration. 
Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
800,000 
OCB-
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Advertisement 
Date (Quarter, 
year) 
Q3 2020 
Package 
Number 
CW1 
CW2 
Irrigation Scheme 
Mandi - Intake 
Works, Pump 
House, Pumping 
Machinery, 
Collection Tank, 
Sump Well, Main 
Delivery Tank, 
HDPE Distribution 
System, Supply of 
Power (Including 
Solar Power), 
Metering System 
Irrigation Scheme 
Hamirpur - 
Approach Path, 
Duckbill Headweir, 
Main Storage Tank, 
Sump well, Main 
Delivery Tank, 
Office for WUA, 
230,000 
OCB-
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Q3 2020 
1 Procurement Regulations for ADB Borrowers: Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Servies is accessible 
at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/procurement-regulations-adb-borrowers.pdf  
Comments 
- DIPH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DIPH website 
and e-
procurement 
website 
- 1 contract 
- Advance 
contracting 
- DIPH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DIPH website 
and e-
procurement 
website 
Version 2 December 2020 
Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date (Quarter, 
year) 
500,000 
OCB-
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Q3 2020 
670,000 
OCB-
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Q3 2020 
CW3 
CW4 
Rising Main, 
Pumping Machinery, 
HDPE Distribution 
System, Supply of 
Power 
Irrigation Scheme 
Bilaspur - Intake 
Works, Headweir, 
Sedimentation Tank,  
Reinforcement 
Cement Concrete 
Box Chamber, 
Office for WUA, 
Pump House, 
Pumping Machinery, 
Main Storage Tank, 
Sump Well, Main 
Delivery Tank, 
HDPE Distribution 
System, Providing & 
Fixing Automatic 
Rope Pulley 
arrangement with 
water sensor, 
Clarifloccculator,    
Reinforcement 
Cement Concrete 
Dyke 
Irrigation Scheme 
Kangra - Approach 
Path, Storage Tank, 
Desilting Tank, 
Sedimentation Tank, 
Main Delivery Tank, 
Reinforcement 
Cement Concrete 
Main Channel, Road 
Crossing, HDPE 
Distribution System, 
Supply of Power 
(Including Solar 
Power, Rising Main, 
Pumping Machinery 
CW6   Water storage 
tanks and drip 
irrigation systems 
690,000 
OCB-
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Q3 2020 
CW7  
Field Preparation 
including layout 
planning, land 
levelling, pit 
650,000 
OCB- 
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Q3 2020 
Comments 
- 1 contract 
- Advance 
contracting 
- DIPH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DIPH website 
and e-
procurement 
website 
- 1 contract 
- Advance 
contracting 
- DIPH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DIPH website 
and e-
procurement 
website 
- 1 contract  
- Advance 
contracting 
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- 1 contract 
- Advance 
contracting 
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
Version 2 December 2020 
Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date (Quarter, 
year) 
digging, plastic 
mulch application 
CW8  
Animal proof 
fencing and 
installation  
700,000 
OCB- 
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Q3 2020 
G1 
Horticulture Planting 
Materials – Guava, 
Litchi, Pomegranate, 
Citrus 
350,000   
RFQ-
National 
Prior 
RFQ 
Q2 2020 
G2 
Computing Software  63,000 
RFQ-
National 
Prior 
RFQ 
Q3 2020 
G3 
Horticulture input -
fertilizer, fungicides, 
biopesticides, other 
chemicals 
280,000 
RFQ-
National 
Prior 
RFQ 
Q3 2020 
G4 
Farm equipment  
85,000 
RFQ- 
National 
Prior 
RFQ 
Q3 2020 
Comments 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- 1 contract 
- Advance 
contracting 
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- 1 contract 
- Advance 
contracting 
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- Advance 
contracting 
- Multiple 
contracts  
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- 1 contract 
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- Multiple 
contracts 
- Advance 
contracting  
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- 1 contract 
G5 
Office furniture, 
equipment and 
420,000 
RFQ-
National 
Prior 
RFQ 
Q3 2020 
-DOH to procure 
Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date (Quarter, 
year) 
Comments 
Version 2 December 2020 
G6 
materials, PMU 
Field Equipment 
(including tablets for 
Project field level 
M&E recording, 
GPS devise) 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- 4 contracts 
- DOH to procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
DOH website and 
e-procurement 
website 
- 2 contracts  
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CHDMA = Community horticulture production and marketing association, CMS = Consultant 
Management Service, CS = consulting services, DIPH = Department of Irrigation and Public health, DOH = Department of 
Horticulture, OCB = open competitive bidding, PMU = Project Management Unit, Q = quarter, QCBS = Quality and Cost Based 
Selection, RFQ = request for quotation 
Vehicle - Sedan 
(qty=1) and seven-
seater four-wheel 
drive vehicle 
(qty=11) 
RFQ-
National 
Q3 2020 
190,000 
Prior 
RFQ 
Consulting Services 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Selection 
Method 
Review 
Type of 
Proposal 
150,000 
LCS 
Prior 
BTP 
Advertisement 
Date (Quarter, 
year) 
Q3 2020 
Package 
Number 
CS1 
CS2 
Construction 
Supervision –
National 
PMU consultants 
(7 positions) – 
National, individual  
CS3 
CS4 
CS5 
Horticulture sector 
strategy and 
investment plan 
2023-2030 
preparation – 
International and 
National 
Packages of 
Practice (PoPs) 
development and 
testing  
DOH capacity 
building  – 
Subtropical 
horticulture 
production 
specialist,  
International  
DIPH capacity 
building (hydrology, 
irrigation, natural 
resource 
management) – 2 
International and 1 
National 
CS7  WUA facilitation - 
CS6 
800,000 
ICS 
Prior 
EOI 
Q3 2020 
380,000 
QCBS 
Prior 
STP 
Q3 2020 
80,000 
SSS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q3 2020 
73,000 
ICS 
Prior 
EOI 
Q3 2020 
350,000 
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q3 2020 
Comments 
- DIPH to 
recruit 
- DOH to 
recruit 
- Multiple 
contracts 
- DOH to 
contract 
(selection 
assisted by 
ADB)  
- 90:10 ratio  
- DOH to 
contract 
- University to 
be contracted  
- DOH to 
recruit 
- 90:10 ratio 
- DIPH to 
recruit 
- 90:10 ratio 
800,000 
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q3 2020 
- DIPH to 
Version 2 December 2020 
CS8 
National  (PRF + 
40% areasof the 
ensuing loan) (PRF 
including each 
facilitator at the 
district level)  
CHPMA facilitation 
– marketing and 
production- group 
and horticulture 
commodity cluster 
development and 
marketing/PoP 
training – National 
(PRF + 40% areas 
of the ensuing loan) 
840,000 
QCBS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q3 2020 
CS9 
HP-SHIVA 
(ensuing loan) 
preparation for 
DOH and DIPH 
1,200,000 
QCBS 
Prior 
STP 
Q3 2021 
CS10 
Internal auditing- 
National 
20,000 
LCS 
Prior 
BTP 
Q4 2020 
recruit 
- 90:10 ratio 
- DOH to 
recruit 
- 90:10 ratio 
- Multiple 
contracts 
(including at 
least 40% of 
the ensuing 
loan area)  
- in the PRF 
areas, 2-3 
clusters per 
facilitator 
(due to 
COVID and 
distance 
between 
clusters)  
- in the 
ensuing loan, 
3 clusters per 
facilitator 
- DOH to 
contract  
- 90:10 ratio 
- Firm, 
International/ 
National 
-DOH to 
contract 
-Chartered 
accounting 
firm 
BTP = Biodata technical proposal, CHDMA = Community horticulture production and marketing association, DIPH = Department of 
Irrigation and Public Health, DOH = Department of Horticulture, EOI = expression of interest, HP-SHIVA = Himachal Pradesh Sub-
tropical Horticulture, Irrigation and Value Addition Project, ICS = individual consultant selection, PMU = project management unit, Q 
= quarter, QCBS = quality- and cost-based selection; RFQ = request for quotation, SSS = single source selection, STP = simplified 
technical proposal. 
D.  List of Indicative Packages (Contracts) Required Under the Project 
The following table lists goods, works, nonconsulting, and consulting services contracts for which 
procurement activity is expected to commence beyond the procurement plan duration and over the life of 
the project (i.e., those expected beyond the current procurement plan’s duration). 
Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Nursery technical 
development 
300,000 
OCB-
National 
Prior 
1S2E 
Advertisement 
Date (Quarter, 
year) 
Q2 2021 
Package 
Number 
CW5 
(remove
d from 
the 
earlier 
Comments 
- DOH to 
procure 
- Advertising: 
national 
newspapers, 
Version 2 December 2020 
PP) 
Consulting Services 
Package 
Number 
CS11 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Selection 
Method 
Review 
Various 
government 
studies for loan 
design  
100,000 
(depending 
on needs)   
ICS 
Prior 
Type of 
Proposa
l 
EOI 
Advertisement 
Date (Quarter, 
year) 
Q3 2021 
DOH website 
and e-
procurement 
website 
- Multiple 
contracts 
Comments 
-DOH to 
contract 
- 1 TORs 
identified and 
more 
consultant 
needs-based  
E.  Lists of Awarded and Completed Contracts 
The following table lists the awarded and completed contracts for goods, works, nonconsulting, and 
consulting services. 
Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Procurement 
Method 
Review 
Bidding 
Procedure 
Advertisement 
Date 
(Quarter, year) 
Comments 
Package 
Number 
-NA- 
Consulting Services 
General Description 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Selection 
Method 
Review 
Type of 
Proposal 
Advertisement 
Date  
(Quarter, year) 
Comments 
Package 
Number 
-NA- 
F.  Non-ADB Financing 
The following table lists goods, works, nonconsulting, and consulting services contracts over the life of the 
project, financed by non-ADB sources. 
Goods, Works, and Non-consulting Services 
General Description 
-NA- 
Estimated 
Value ($) 
Estimated 
Number of 
Contracts 
Procurement Method 
Comments 
Loan: xx 
Quarterly Progress Report  
(January–March 20xxx) 
Executing and Implementing Agency 
Contents 
Chapter 1 
Project at A Glance 
Chapter 2 
Status of the Executing Agency and Consultant(s) Staffing 
Chapter 3 
Status of Input(s) (Procurement and Consultant Recruitment) 
Chapter 4 
Progress on Project Output(s) 
Chapter 5 
Status of Last Action Plan  
(Previous ADB Review Mission/TPRM / last Progress Report) 
Chapter 6 
States of Major Loan Covenants 
Chapter 7 
Key Implementation Challenges and Proposed Actions 
Chapter 8  
Financial Management 
Attachment 1: Status of Ongoing Contract Packages 
Attachment 2: Status Consultants Staffing  
Attachment 3: Consultants’ Performance Evaluation Report 
Attachment 4: Detailed reconciliation (by Withdrawal application) of project records and ADB disbursement 
records (LFIS/GFIS) for the fiscal year to date and cumulative 
Attachment 5: Status of Financial Management action plan (completed/ongoing) 
Attachment 6: Status of past audit observations (resolved/ pending) 
CHAPTER 1 
PROJECT AT A GLANCE 
Brief project description to be filled by project team (one-time entry; to be update only in case of change) 
LOAN MILESTONE 
1. 
Milestone 
Dates 
Extensions (Nos)     
Approval 
Signing 
Effective  
Orig. Closing  
Rev. Closing  
Time Remaining   
2. 
LOAN UTILIZATION STATUS ($MILLION) 
Allocation 
Contracts 
Cat.  Description 
(a) 
(b) 
Unutilized 
loan 
balance 
(c) =(a-b) 
Disburse
d 
(d) 
Undisb. 
Contract 
balance 
(e)=(b-d) 
Overall 
Undisbursed 
(f)=(a-d) 
3. 
4. 
POTENTIAL LOAN SAVINGS (IF ANY) AND LIKELY CANCELLATION DATE.  
STATUS OF COUNTERPART FUNDS ($ MILLION) 
Required Counterpart Expenditure by 
the Executing Agency 
Budgeted by State Govt.  
in Current Financial Year 
Shortfall /Excess 
Actual 
Amount 
Released 
1.Non-reimbursables  Activities  fully  funded 
by the executing agency (LA/R&R etc) 
2. Reimbursable  
(from loan) 
5. 
STATUS OF CONTRACT AWARDS AND DISBURSEMENTS ($ MILLION) IN CY XXXX 
I  
II  
III  
IV 
Total 
Indicator 
Contract 
Award 
Quarter 
Target  
Achieved 
Balance 
Disbursement  Target  
Achieved 
Balance 
[Targets – for the ADB financing compare the actual disbursement with the disbursement projections as per the S 
curve included in the PAM), Include an analysis of significant variances between planned and actual disbursements; 
and] 
6. 
STATUS OF PROJECT REPORTS TO BE SUBMITTED TO ADB 
Due Date  
Frequency 
Type of Reports  
Environmental Monitoring Report 
Social Monitoring Report  
Audited Project Accounts  
Gender Action Monitoring Report  
Status 
CHAPTER 2 
STAFFING 
STATUS OF PMU/PIU STAFFING  
Is the Project Director (PD) 
currently posted? 
Current PD is posted since 
when? 
No. of PMU staff as agreed 
with  ADB  or  as  per  Org 
Structure 
in 
PAM/FAM/RRP. 
Details  of  PMU  Positions 
which are currently vacant. 
Are  PIUs  required  to  be 
established in the Project?  
No.  of  PIUs  required  as 
agreed  with  ADB  in  Org 
Structure 
in 
PAM/FAM/RRP 
Yes/
No 
xx 
xx 
-  
Yes/
No 
Nature of PD posting 
Part Time/Full Time 
Actual no. of PMU staff in 
place at present. 
Full Time 
Additional Charge 
Are PIUs fully staffed 
11 
Actual no. of PIUs 
MOBILIZATION STATUS OF CONSULTANT’S STAFFING (KEY EXPERT POSITIONS) 
AND THEIR PERFORMANCE  
A. 
1 a 
1 b 
2 a 
2 b 
3 a 
3 b 
B. 
(Please provide your overall feedback in narrative statement e.g. key issues overall performance 
etc.  and  attach  staffing  status  and  Consultant’s  Performance  Evaluation  Report  (PER): 
Attachment 2 & 3) 
CHAPTER 3 
STATUS OF PROCUREMENT & CONTRACT MANAGEMENT 
A. 
Status of Contracts Awarded  
Cost Category 
under which 
Procurement is 
carried out 
Civil Works 
Equipment 
Consultants  
Total 
ADB 
Financing 
$......... million 
$......... million 
$......... million 
$..... million 
Cumulative 
Contract 
Awards 
Uncontracted 
Loan 
Balance 
Cumulative 
Disbursements 
$......... million 
(xx Pkgs 
awarded) 
$......... million 
(xx Pkgs 
awarded) 
$......... million 
(xx Pkgs 
awarded) 
$.......... million 
$......... million 
$........ million 
$......... million 
$........ million 
$......... million 
$........ million 
$......... 
million 
$......... million 
(Please attach Contract Monitoring Sheet indicating status of each of the awarded contracts in 
Attachment 1) 
B. 
Status of Remaining Procurement 
Remaining Contract Packages 
Current Stage 
Brief Scope 
km of road 
rehabilitation/ 
house service 
connections in 
xx towns 
- IFB to be issued 
- Under Tech Evaluation 
- Under Fin. Evaluation 
- 
Negotiation 
- Under Contract Signing 
Under 
Contract 
S
N 
1 
2 
3 
Component 
Civil Works 
No of pkgs 
with cost 
xx 
($... million) 
Equipment 
Consultants  
Total xx 
Packages 
xx 
($...million) 
xx 
($...million) 
$xx million 
Target  Date  of 
Award 
MM/YYYY 
MM/YYYY 
MM/YYYY 
(Target date of 
the latest 
procurement) 
CHAPTER 4 
PROGRESS ON PROJECT OUTPUTS (AS IN DMF) 
Output 
Monitoring 
Indicators/Targets 
Progress 
Remarks 
Last Quarter  
Current Quarter 
Detailed status of ongoing contracts is in Attachment 1.  
CHAPTER 5 
STATUS OF ACTION PLAN 
(Please include issues previously discussed during previous 
ADB Review Missions/TPRM/Progress Report and their compliance/status) 
SN 
Issues/ Action Plan 
Responsibility 
Time Frame 
Status 
CHAPTER 6 
COMPLIANCE WITH MAJOR COVENANTS 
S.N. 
Covenants  
Compliance 
(Y/N) * 
Remarks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
*In case of any exceptions, deviations, non-adherence identified, please provide details as an “Annexure” to 
the Quarterly Project Report highlighting the shortcomings and proposed time-bound corrective action plans 
to achieve compliance. 
CHAPTER 7 
(KEY IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES/ CHALLENGES 
AFFECTING PROJECT PROGRESS AND PRPOSED ACTIONS) 
MAJOR ISSUES* 
Actions  
Responsibility  
Time Frame 
Planning Issues.  
(Change 
design/scope/implementation 
arrangement/cost 
overrun/staffing……….) 
in 
Contract  and  Construction 
Issues.  
Mobilization  of  Contractor(s)/ 
Issuance 
for 
construction  drawings/  Utility 
/Handing  over  site/ 
Sifting 
variations  order  etc.  /Pending 
Payments  
Good 
of 
issues 
Safeguard 
Construction 
(Land acquisition / Resettlement 
/tree cutting/ to the contractor(s)) 
during 
S.N. 
1 
2 
3.  
4.  
Other Issues. 
*In case issue identified, please provide details e.g. details of change in design/ implementation arrangements, 
pending safeguards actions, encumbrance free sites to be handed over to the contractor (numbers/kilometer) 
with targeted date by which the same could be handed over to the contractor; If all Drawings/Design are not 
issued/approved, name of such Drawings/Design and targeted date by which the same could be handed over 
to  the  contractor;  Decision  pending  with  employer  and  consultants  (such  decision  could  be  approval  of, 
variations, extra item rate, etc.) 
CHAPTER 8 
(FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND RECONCILIATION WITH ADB DISBURSMENT 
RECORDS) 
A. 
Reconciliation of Project records and ADB’s disbursement records. 
1. 
[Include here a summary reconciliation of project records and ADB disbursement records 
(LFIS) for the reporting period and cumulative from project inception to end of the reporting period.  
Explain reasons for discrepancies and outline follow-up actions required (if any). Attach a 
2. 
detailed reconciliation by withdrawal application as per Attachment 4]. 
B. 
3. 
Status of the project’s Financial management arrangements  
Here include the following:  
(i) 
Describe  any  problems  in  the  existing  financial  management  arrangements  and 
/or flow of funds and any significant changes occurred during the reporting period 
(e.g.,  financial  management  staff  turnover,  implementation  of  new  financial 
systems, emerging financial management related risks etc..). 
Summarize the status of each agreed action in the financial management action 
plan outlined in the PAM. Attach a detailed log as per Attachment 5]. 
Outline the status of recommendations and immediate actions provided by ADB 
as  part  of  the  APFS/AEFS  review  (if  any)  and  financial  management  related 
recommendations agreed during ADB review missions (if any). 
Summarize  the  status  of  Status  of  past  audit  observations  (if  any).  Attach  a 
detailed log as per Attachment 6. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Attachments: 
Attachment 4. Detailed reconciliation (by Withdrawal application) of project records and ADB disbursement records (LFIS/GFIS) for the fiscal year 
to date and cumulative. 
WA details 
Per project records/APFS                    
(Amount recorded in the project Financial 
statements as reimbursement, direct 
payment, etc..) 
Per ABD 
disbursement 
records LFIS/GFIS 
(actual Paid) 
Disburseme
nt method 
(reimbursem
ent, direct 
payment, 
etc..) 
Time period 
covered in 
the WA  
  1-31.3.2020 
In local currency 
(as recorded in 
project records/ 
financial 
statements) 
exchan
ge rate 
Date  
XX 
XX 
XX 
 XX 
XX 
USD 
equival
ent (A) 
XX 
XX 
XX 
 XX 
XX 
Withdrawal 
application No (WA) 
1 
2 
3 
etc.. 
Total  in  Fiscal  year 
to date 
Total  Cumulative  to 
date 
Reason 
for 
differenc
e (i.e. 
timing 
forex. 
Pending 
rejected) 
Value date 
In USD 
(B) 
Difference 
(A-B) 
XX 
XX 
XX 
 XX 
XX 
Attachment 5: Status of Financial Management Action Plan  
Key Risk  
Risk 
Mitigating 
Activity  
Timeline  
Responsible 
Entity 
Current status 
(implemented/Pending) 
Remarks 
(including 
planned actions 
and timeline in 
case of 
noncompliance) 
Attachment 6: Status of external audit observations – Cumulative from inception to end of 
reporting period 
Recommendatio
n/audit 
observation 
external 
audit 
recommend
ation 
 Date of the 
recommend
ation 
Planned 
action to 
address the 
recommend
ation  
Responsi
bility 
Curren
t 
Status 
of the 
planne
d 
action 
(pendi
ng 
/resolv
ed) 
Rema
rks   
Annex XX. Indicative Project Financial statements 
1. Statement of Receipts and Payments for the year ended DD/MM/YYYY 
Current year 
Previous year 
Cumulative (from 
inception to the end of 
current year) 
Cash 
Receipts/Paym
ents controlled 
by the entity 
Direct/th
ird  party 
payment
s 
Cash 
Receipts/Paym
ents controlled 
by the entity 
Direct/ 
third 
party  
payme
nts 
Cash 
Receipts/Paym
ents controlled 
by the entity 
Direct/ 
third 
party 
payme
nts 
Not
es 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
 3.4 
3.5 
4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
(loan 
grant 
(grant 
Cash receipts 
ADB 
loan 
number)  
ADB 
number 
ADB  Additional  loan 
(loan number) 
ADB  additional  Grant 
(grant number) 
Government 
Bhutan 
of 
etc.. 
Total receipts 
Payments 
Expenditure  category 
1 
Expenditure  category 
2 
Expenditure  category 
3 
Expenditure  category 
4 
etc.. 
Total payments 
Cash  balance  at  the 
beginning of the year 
 6 .1 
Cash  balance  at  the 
end of the year 
 6.2 
Project 
[Signature] 
Director: 
Finance 
[signature] 
Manager: 
2. Statement of Budget vs. Actual for the year ended DD/MM/YYYY 
Note
s* 
For the current year 
ended 20xx 
For the Prior year 
ended 20xx 
Expenditure 
Categories 
Budget
ed 
Actu
al 
Varian
ce 
Budget
ed 
Actu
al 
Varian
ce 
Cumulative (from 
inception to the end of 
current year) 
Project 
Budget
ed as 
per the 
PAM  
Actu
al 
Varian
ce 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
Expenditure category 
1 
Expenditure category 
2 
Expenditure category 
3 
Expenditure category 
4 
Etc. 
Total Payments 
Total Project Cost 
*any significant variances are to be explained in the notes 
Project 
[Signature] 
Director: 
Finance 
[signature] 
Manager: 
3. Statement of Disbursement By Financing Source for the year ended DD/MM/YYYY 
Statement of Disbursement 
Note 
Current Year 
Prior Year 
Cumulative 
Project to 
Date 
ADB grant - Funds claimed during the year 
7.1 
Reimbursement3 
Imprest Fund3 
Direct Payment 
Subtotal 
ADB Loan - Funds claimed during the year  7.2 
Reimbursement3 
Imprest Fund3 
Direct Payment 
Subtotal 
ADB  additional  Loan  -  Funds  claimed 
during the year 
7.3 
Reimbursement3 
Imprest Fund3 
Direct Payment 
Subtotal 
ADB  additional  Grant  Funds  claimed 
during the year 
7.4 
Reimbursement3 
Imprest Fund3 
Direct Payment 
Subtotal 
*list of WAs/claims submitted to be disclosed in the notes 
Project Director: [Signature] 
Finance 
Manager: 
[signature] 
4. Statement of Imprest/Advance account for the year/period ended DD/MM/YYYY (for each 
advance account separately) 
Account details: XXXX 
Balance brought forward from previous period 
Add: 
Advance1 
Replenishment received during the year/period1 
Interest Earned 
Subtotal (A) 
Deduct: 
Payments made during the year/period 
Replenishment /Liquidation1 
Expenditure yet to be claimed 
Amount refunded during the year/period 
Closing Balance (B) 
As per bank statement (copy attached) 
Project Director: [Signature] 
Notes 
Current Year 
Prior Year 
Finance Manager: [signature] 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED [YEAR END DATE] 
1.Project Information 
1.1 Key highlights: 
Project title 
Funded by: 
Management: 
Executing Agency 
Implementing agencies 
Start Date: 
Closing date: 
Project Duration: 
Funding Sources/modality/amount 
1.2 Impact and Outcome 
2.   Summary of Significant Accounting policies. 
2.1 Basis of preparation 
2.2.   Cash Basis of accounting 
2.3.   Recognition of Receipts and payments 
2.4. Third party payments 
2.5. Presentation currency 
2.6 Foreign Currency Translation 
2.7.   Changes in Accounting policies 
2.8 Reporting period 
2.9 Comparatives 
3. Funds received 
3.1 -3.4 Funds received from ADB /List of WAs by financing source 
3.5 Funds received from the Government  
3.6. funds received from Other 
etc.. 
4.     Payments 
List of Payments from the advance account/sub-advance account. 
List of third-party payments/direct payments. 
5. Variances 
List and explain any significant variances between budget and actual expenditures 
6. Opening and closing balances 
List details of the opening balances 
List details of the closing balances 
7. Disbursements/Withdrawal Applications 
Include detailed list of WAs claimed from  ADB  with the following breakdown :  i) funding source 
(ADB loan, ADB grant, ADB additional loan, ADB additional grant), ii)) WA number, iii) time period 
in which expenditures were incurred iv) the amount claimed and currency, v) date submitted, vi) 
disbursement method, vii) the amount disbursed by ADB and vii) used exchange rate. 
8. Special notes for the FY 
 Disclose a break down Interest Expenses/ Financial Charges incurred as part of the project for 
the current year, past year and cumulatively. 
Terms of Reference for Audit of ADB assisted projects by Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India 
Background: 
ADB provides assistance in the form of Loan and/or Grant for the implementation of project 
and/or program by the executing agencies (EA) identified by the central/state government. In 
order  to  facilitate  the  same,  a  loan/grant  agreement  is  executed  between  ADB  and  central 
government  for  each  individual  loan/grant  and  a  project  agreement  is  executed  between 
ADB  and  the  executing  agency  for  each  project/sub-project.  The  disbursement  of  loan  is 
for  various 
the  ADB  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook  which  provides 
governed  by 
disbursement  procedures  viz,  Direct  payment  procedure,  Reimbursement  procedure, 
Commitment  Letter  procedure  and  Imprest  Account  procedure.  The  project  agreement 
stipulates that the executing agency shall (i) maintain separate accounts for the project and if 
the  executing  agency  is revenue  earning, then for  its  overall  operations  also  (ii)  have such 
accounts  and  related  financial  statements1  (balance  sheet,  statement  of  income  and 
expenses and related statements) audited annually, in accordance with appropriate auditing 
standards  consistently  applied,  by  independent  auditors  whose  qualifications,  experience 
and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB; and (iii) furnish to ADB, promptly after their 
preparation  but  in  any  event  not  later  than  six  (6)  months  (or  9  months  if  specifically 
approved) after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate as applicable, certified copies 
of  such  audited  accounts  and  financial  statements  and  the  report  of  the  auditor  relating 
thereto (including the auditor's opinion on the use of loan proceeds and compliance with the 
covenants of the loan/grant agreement as  well as on the use of the procedures for Imprest 
Account,  Second  Generation  Imprest  Account  (SGIA),  Statement  of  expenditures  (SOE), 
Force  Account  Works  and  Simultaneous  Application  for  sub-loan  approval  and  Withdrawal 
(SAW)), where applicable, all in the English language. 
The  executing  agencies for  all  sovereign  loans  are  subject  to  audit  by the  Comptroller  and 
Auditor  General  of  India  (Supreme  Audit  Institution  of  the  country).  In  order  to  comply  with 
the requirement  of  audit  as  referred  in  above  para,  the following  terms  of reference  should 
be pursued with respect to the loan/grant/project agreement executed for availing the ADB's 
assistance. 
Objective: 
Article  14(xi)  of  the  Agreement  establishing  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (The  Charter) 
States that  'Proceeds  of  any  loan  made,  guaranteed,  or  participated  by  the  Bank  are  used 
only for the purposes for which the loan was granted and with due attention to consideration 
of  economy  and  efficiency'.  In  addition,  Article  14(xiv)  of  the  Charter  requires  ADB  to  be 
guided by sound banking principles in its operations. To fulfill the requirements of Article 14 
(xi)  and  (xiv)  of  the  Charter,  ADB  requires  borrowers/project  executing  agencies  to  submit 
audited Project accounts (APA) and audited financial statements (AFS). 
ADB requires the borrower and the project EA to have the required financial statements for 
each  year  audited  by  an  independent  auditor  acceptable  to  ADS,  and  in  accordance  with 
standards  on  auditing  that  are  acceptable  to  ADB.  An  audit  of  such  financial  'statements 
includes: (i) an assessment of the adequacy of accounting and internal control systems with 
respect to project expenditures and other financial transactions, and to ensure safe custody 
of  project  financed  assets,  (ii)  a  determination  as  to  whether  the  borrower  and  project 
implementing entities have maintained adequate documentation on all relevant transactions, 
including  statement  of  expenditures  (SOE),  Force  Account  Works  and  Simultaneous 
Application for sub-loan approval and Withdrawal (SAW)) where applicable, (iii) confirmation 
that  expenditures  submitted  to  ADB  are  eligible  for  financing  and  identification  of  any 
ineligible  expenditures,  (iv)  compliance  with  loan/grant  covenants  and  ADB's  requirements 
for project management and (v) compliance with the use of procedures for Imprest Account 
1  Preparation  of  balance  sheet,  statement  of  income  and  expenditure  shall  depend  on  the  legal  status  of  the  project 
executing/implementing  agency  and  shall  apply  to  autonomous  bodies  or  corporation  until  extended  legally  to  other  types  of 
organization such as government departments. 
(IA)/Second  Generation  Imprest  Account  (SGIA)/SOE/force  account  works/SAW,  where 
applicable. 
The objective of the audit of the Project Financial Statement (PES) is to enable the auditor to 
express  a  professional  opinion  as  to  whether  (i)  the  PFS  present  fairly,  in  all  material 
respects,  the  sources  and  applications  of  project  funds  for  the  period  under  audit 
examination,  (ii) the funds  were  utilized  for  the purposes for  which  they  were  provided,  (iii) 
loan covenants have been complied with and (iv) expenditures shown in the PFS are eligible 
for  financing  under  the  relevant  loan/grant  agreement.  In  addition,  where  applicable,  the 
auditor will express a professional opinion on the use of the procedures for IA, SGIA, SOE, 
Force Account Works and SAW and whether adequate supporting documentation has been 
maintained  to  support  claims  made  by  project  management  for  reimbursement  of 
expenditures  incurred  under  the  SOE,  Force  Account  Works  and  SAW  method  of 
reimbursement where applicable. 
The  books  of  account  that  provide  the  basis  for  preparation  of  the  PFS  are  established  to 
reflect  the  financial  transactions  of  the  project  and  are  maintained  by  the  project 
executing/implementing agency – [            ] Project Implementation unit and the participating 
divisions. 
Standards: 
The audit will be carried out in accordance with the Auditing Standards promulgated by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India The auditor should accordingly consider materiality 
when  planning  and  performing  the  audit  to  reduce  audit  risk  to  an  acceptable  level  that  is 
consistent  with  the  objective  of  the  audit.  Although  the  responsibility  for  preventing 
irregularity, fraud, or the use of loan/grant proceeds for purposes other than as defined in the 
legal  agreements  remain  with  the  borrower,  the  audit  should  be  planned  so  as  to  have  a 
reasonable assurance of detecting material misstatements in the PFS. 
Scope:2 
In conducting the audit, special attention should be paid to the following: 
(a)  All  external  funds  have  been  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  relevant  legal 
agreements and only for the purposes for which the financing was provided. Relevant legal 
agreements include the Loan/Grant Agreement, the Project Agreement, and the Minutes of 
Negotiations; 
(b)  Counterpart  funds  have  been  provided  and  used  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  legal 
agreements and only for the purposes for which they were provided; 
(c)  Financial covenants of the loan agreement have been complied with 
(d)  All necessary supporting documents, records, and accounts have been kept in respect of all 
project  transactions  including  expenditures  reported  via  SOEs/lAs/SGIAs/Force  Account 
Works/SAW  where  applicable.  Clear  linkages  should  exist  between  the  books  of  account 
and reports presented to the ADB; and 
(e)  The  project  accounts  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  consistently  applied 
Government  Accounting  Standards3  and  present  fairly,  in  all  material  aspects,  the  financial 
situation of the project at the year end and of resources and expenditures for the year ended 
2  In response to identified project risks, the scope may be expanded to include a report or the expression of an opinion on specific 
aspects of the operation such as internal controls, compliance with Bank procurement policies, or efficiency and effectiveness in 
the use of loan/grant proceeds. 
3  Until such time as the pronouncements of the Government Accounting Standards Advisory Board are accepted and prescribed 
by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Accounting  Standards  followed  by  the  Government  of  India  will  be  defined  by  the  General 
Financial  Rules,  PWD  codes;  Treasury  codes  and  similar  financial  rules  and  codes  as  are  in  effect  and  applicable  to  the 
operations of the project. 
on that date. 
Project Financial Statements: 
The  contents  of  Project  Financial  Statements  (PFS)  are  specific  to  the  sector,  the  project 
design and the type of implementing entity. These formats therefore vary from one project to 
another. The formats of PFS are prepared in consultation with the implementing entity during 
the preparation of the project. 
The Project Financial Statements should include: 
A. 
In  a  nonrevenue-earning  entity,  or  for  the  audit  of  project  accounts,  the  annual  financial 
statement may consist of the Statement of Receipts and Payments on project transactions. 
Other  schedules  of  value  or  cumulative  expenditures  by  category  such  as  civil  works, 
equipment,  consultancy  services,  training  and  capacity  building,  administrative  costs, 
expenditure by financier, statement of disbursement under SOE procedure, imprest account, 
cumulative  work-in-progress,  assets  and  inventories  and  a  summarized  reconciled  bank 
statement are to be attached. See Annexure 1-8 for examples of reporting formats that could 
be prepared for a project implemented by core government departments. 
B.  For  a  revenue-earning  entity,  a  balance  sheet,  income  statement  and  cash  flow  statement 
accompanied  by  supplementary  statements  or  schedules  supporting  the  basic  statement 
(e.g., inventories, schedule of assets, outstanding loans, aging of receivables, etc:). 
C.  Statement of Disbursement: The PFS include a reconciliation between expenditure reported 
as per the statement of sources and application of funds and expenditure claimed from ADB 
through  SOE,  documented  claims  (direct  payment  and  reimbursement),  commitment  letter 
procedure,  force  account  works  or  SAW  where  applicable.  An  example  is  shown  at 
Annexure 3. 
D.  Other  statements  or  schedules  as  may  be  applicable  in  particular  circumstances  and  as 
specified in the relevant loan/grant agreements. In particular, Statement of Appropriation Vs. 
Actual  (Annexure  9)  and  Statement  of  Expenditure  by  Output  (Annexure  10)  shall  be 
prepared  and  prepared  to  the  project  financial  statements.  These  statements  shall  not  be 
subject to audit. 
E.  Management  Assertion:  Management  should  sign 
the  PFS  and  provide  a  written 
acknowledgement of its responsibility for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial 
statements and an assertion that project funds have been expended in accordance with the 
intended  purposes  as  reflected  in  the  financial  statements.  An  example  of  a  management 
assertion letter is shown at Annexure 11. 
Statement  of  Expenditure  (SOE),  Imprest  Account  (IA),  Second  Generation  Imprest 
Account  (SGIA),  Force  Account  Works,  Simultaneous  Application  for  Sub-Loan 
Approval and Withdrawal (SAW): 
During the course of the audit of the PFS, the auditor is required to audit all SOE, IA, SGIA, 
Force  Account  Works  and  SAW  for  withdrawal  applications  made  during  the  period  under 
audit  examination.  The auditor  should  apply  such  tests  as the  auditor  considers  necessary 
under  the  circumstances  to  satisfy  the  audit  objective.  In  particular,  these  expenditures 
should  be  carefully  examined  for  project  eligibility  by  reference  to  the  relevant  financing 
agreements.  Where  ineligible  expenditures4  are  identified  as  having  been  included  in 
withdrawal  applications  and  reimbursed  against,  these  should  be  separately  noted  by  the 
auditor. 
4 Refer to ADB's Operation Manual (OM) Section H3 and Safeguard Policy Statement 
Audit Report 
An  audit  report  on the  PFS  should  be  prepared in  accordance  with the  Auditing  Standards 
promulgated  by  the  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  of  India.  Those  standards  require  an 
audit opinion to be rendered related to the financial statements taken as a whole, indicating 
"unambiguously whether it is unqualified or qualified and if the latter, whether it is qualified in 
certain  respects  or  is  adverse  or  a  disclaimer  of  opinion".  In  addition,  the  audit  opinion 
paragraph will specify whether, in the auditor's opinion, (a) loan proceeds have been used as 
covenanted  in  ADB  Loan  /  Project  Agreement  (b)  financial  covenants  of  loans  have  been 
complied with (c) with respect to SOEs, Force Account Works and SAW, where applicable, 
adequate  supporting  documentation  has  been  maintained  to  support  claims  to  ADB  for 
reimbursement  of  expenditures  incurred;  and  (d)  except  for  ineligible  expenditures  as 
detailed  in  the  audit  observations,  if  any,  appended  to  the  audit  report,  expenditures  are 
eligible  for  financing  under  the  Loan/Grant  Agreement.  Relevant  CAG  Auditing  Standards 
are  reproduced  in  Annexure  12.  A  sample  audit  report  wordings  for  unqualified  opinion  in 
shown at Annexure 13. 
The PFS and the audit report should be received by ADB not later than six (6) months (or 9 
months  if  specifically  approved)  after  the  close  of  the  fiscal  year  to  which  they  relate  as 
specified  in  the  loan/project  agreement.  The  auditor  should  also  submit  two  copies  of  the 
audited accounts and audit report to the Implementing Agency. 
The  audit  report  is  issued  without  prejudice  to  CAG's  right  to  incorporate  the  audit 
observations  in  the  Report  of  CAG  of  India  for  being  laid  before  Parliament  /  State  or  UT 
Legislature.  
Management Letter 
In  addition  to  the  audit  report  on  the  PFS,  the  auditor  may  prepare  a  management  letter 
containing recommendations for improvements in internal control and other matters coming 
to the attention of the auditor during the audit examination. Where such a management letter 
is prepared by the auditor, a copy of the same will be supplied to ADB. Else, a written advice 
may be made that no management letter was prepared together with the audit report on the 
PFS.  
General 
The  auditor  should  be  given  access  to  any  information  relevant  for  the  purposes  of 
conducting the audit. This would normally include all legal documents, correspondence, and 
any other information associated with the project and deemed necessary by the auditor. The 
information  made  available  by  the  auditor  should  include,  but  not  be  limited  to,  copies  of 
ADB's project appraisal document, the relevant legal agreements, a copy of these guidelines 
and  a  copy  of  ADB's  financial  management  assessment  of  the  project  entity.  It  is  highly 
desirable  that  the  auditor  become  familiar  with  other  ADB  policy  document  such  as  ADB 
guidelines  on  financial  management  and  analysis  of  projects  chapter  5  title  reporting  and 
auditing, PAI 5.07 on submission of audited project accounts and financial statements, OM 
section J7/BP on project accounting, financial reporting and auditing. The auditor should also 
be familiar with ADB's Loan Disbursement Handbook – July 2012 (or as amended from time 
to time). 
Annexure 1 
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
Name of the Project 
Loan/Grant No. 
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS 
REPORT FOR THE YEAR/PERIOD ENDED XX, XXXX 
Particulars 
Opening balance1 (A) 
Receipts 
Funds received from Government2 
ADB Loan3 
ADB Grant3 
Co-financier 1 
Co-financier 2 
Beneficiary contribution (if any) 
Other receipts such as interest income, sale from disposals of fixed 
assets, etc. 
Total Receipts (B) 
Total (C = A + B) 
Payments 
Investment Costs 4 
Civil Works 
Mechanical and Equipment 
Environment and Social Mitigation 
Consultants 
a. Project Management 
b. Capacity Development 
Others 
Subtotal (D) 
Recurrent Costs 
Salaries 
Accommodation 
Equipment Operation and Maintenance 
Others 
Subtotal (E) 
Total Payments 
Financing Charges During Implementation (F) 
Total Project Cost (G = D + E + F) 
Closing Balance (C – G) 
Note 
Reference 
During the 
Current Year 
for 12 month 
period 
During the 
Previous Year 
for 12 month 
period 
in (INR) ‘000 
Cumulative 
Project to Date 
As at [end of 
CURRENT year] 
4 
6 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
1 If cash balance are controlled by the entity, indicating cash balance, imprest account and SGIA balance separately 
2 These will include external assistance received by Government for the project. 
3 This shall include amounts received in the Bank Account as well as amounts deemed to be received against direct payments made by ADB to the 
suppliers of goods and services under Direct Payment procedure and Commitment Letter procedure 
4 Expenditure categories are based on the cost allocation table as per Loan/Grant Agreement 
Notes 1 to x of the financial statements form an integral part of these financial statements
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
Name of the Project 
Loan/Grant No. 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE BY CATEGORY AND FINANCIER 
REPORT FOR THE YEAR/PERIOD ENDED XX, XXXX 
Annexure 2 
Percentage 
of financing1 
1 
ADB4 
Actual Expenditure 
% 
3 
Amount 
2 
Co-Financier 
Government 
Actual Expenditure  Actual Expenditure 
Amount 
4 
% 
5 
Amount 
6 
% 
7 
Total 
Expenditure 
8 
in (INR) ‘000 
Particulars 
Investment Costs2 
Civil Works 
Mechanical and Equipment 
Environment and Social Mitigation 
Consultants 
a.  Project Management 
b.  Capacity Development 
c.  Others 
Subtotal (A) 
Recurrent Costs 
Salaries 
Accommodations 
Equipment Operations and Maintenance 
Others 
Subtotal (B) 
Total Cost (C=A+B)3 
%Total Project Cost 
Total Project Cost for [insert prior year period] 
1 The financing percentages for ADB funds should directly correlate to the financing percentages in the allocation table(s) of the financing agreement(s). 
2 Expenditure categories are based on the cost allocation table as per Loan/Grant Agreement 
3  The figures shown against various categories of expenditure should agree with the current year's payment in Annexure 1, Statement of Receipts and Payments. 
4 This shall include total expenditure claimed from ADB under various disbursement procedures, i.e. direct payment, reimbursement, imprest account and commitment letter. 
Notes 1 to x of the financial statements form an integral part of these financial statements 
Annexure 3 
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
[NAME OF THE ENTITY/PROJECT] 
Loan/Grant No. 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED [YEAR END DATE] 
Details of the disbursement by method are given below: 
Statement of Disbursement 
Statement of Disbursement 
ADB Fund claimed during the year 
Reimbursement3 
Imprest Fund3 
Direct Payment 
Commitment Letter 
Subtotal 
Total Expenditure made during the year1 
    Less: 
 Expenditure not yet claimed 
Borrower’s share2 
Total Eligible Expenditure claimed (B – C – D = E = A) 
Note 
Current 
Year 
Prior 
Year 
Cumulative 
Project to Date 
in (INR) ‘000 
10 
10 
10 
10 
40 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
(A) 
(B) 
(C) 
(D) 
(E) 
1 The total expenditure as per Statement of Receipts and Payments. 
2 This should tally with the Government share included in Statement of Expenditure by category and financier (Column 6) 
3 Includes both claims using SOE and full supporting documentation 
Notes 1 to x of the financial statements form an integral part of these financial statements 
Annexure 4 
Page 1 of 3 
[NAME OF THE COUNTRY/IMPLEMENTING AND EXECUTING AGENCY] 
[NAME OF THE ENTITY/PROJECT] 
[ADB LOAN REFERENCE] 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED [YEAR END DATE] 
1. 
Project Nature and Activities 
1.1 
Description of the Project, the nature of activities, commencement and expected completion 
dates.  Mention  location,  domicile,  legal  form,  controlling  IA/  EA,  brief  nature  of  the  project 
outputs, 
1.2 
Give legislative framework 
Insert as relevant 
2. 
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE 
These  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  approved  accounting 
standards, as applicable in India. This refers to the cash basis of accounting applied with due 
regard  to  the  General  Financial  Rules,  PWD  Codes,  Treasury  Codes,  and  similar  financial 
rules and codes as are in effect and applicable to the operations of the Project. 
3. 
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
3.1 
Financial Statements 
This comprises of the Statement of Receipts and Payments, the Statements of Expenditure 
by  Category  and  Financier,  the  Statement  of  Disbursement  and  related  notes  and 
appendices to the financial statements 
3.2 
Basis of measurement 
Financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention and on [cash/ 
accrual] basis of accounting 
3.3 
Changes in Accounting policies 
Describe changes in accounting policies, if any 
3.4 
Fund Flow mechanism 
Describe the fund flow mechanism, in particular, whether the IA/EA control funds or whether 
all payments are centralized 
3.5 
Advances and other receivables 
Describe treatment of advances against expenditures 
Annexure 4 
Page 2 of 3 
3.6 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Cash  equivalents  comprise  [define  components  of  cash].  Explain  if  the  entity  controls 
unspent advances, only petty cash, or has a nil balance, as applicable 
3.7 
Accrued and other liabilities 
Disclose any major liabilities which have not been accrued under the cash basis policy 
3.8 
Income  
i)  Describe  nature  of  different  types  of  income  and  how  they  are  recognised.  For  example 
grants, sale of proceeds of fixed assets, interest income on bank accounts etc. 
ii) 
[Include if applicable] Free of cost office space, electricity and certain other services provided 
by  {insert  name]  are  not  valued  and  accordingly,  are  not  recognized  in  these  financial 
statements as income of the Project. 
3.9 
Foreign currency transactions and translation 
(a) 
Functional and presentation currency 
Items included in the financial statements of the Project are measured using the currency of 
the  primary  economic  environment  in  which  the  entity  operates  (the  functional  currency), 
which is the Indian Rupee (INR). 
(b) 
Transactions and balances 
Transactions in foreign currency are converted at the exchange rate prevailing at the date of 
transaction.  Foreign  currency  bank  balances  are  re-stated  at  the  year  end  rate,  and  the 
resulting  gains/losses  are  recognized  in  the  statement  of  receipts  and  payments  account. 
Conversion Rate: USD $ 1 = INR ___ as of 31 March ____ 
3.10 
Allocation of Common Costs 
Describe how common costs are allocated to different output/activities 
3.11 
Interest Expenses and Financial Charges 
Describe  how  financial  charges  are  treated  and  recorded.  For  example  if  these  are  not 
allocated to the Project by the CAA. 
4. 
Funds Received from the Government 
Give details of the government budgeting and funding mechanism 
Annexure 4 
Page 3 of 3 
in (INR) ‘000 
Current 
Year 
Prior 
Year 
Cumulative 
Year to date 
Government Counterpart funding 
Amount Reimbursable to Government 
Total 
          ============================== 
          _________________________________ 
5. 
DATE OF AUTHORIZATION 
These  financial  statements  have  been  authorized  for  issue  by  the  _________________  of 
_________________ on ……………………….. 
Annexure 5 
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
[NAME OF THE ENTITY/PROJECT] 
Loan/Grant No. 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED [YEAR END DATE] 
6. 
Funds Received from ADB 
Give key terms and conditions of the loan, including date of loan agreement, loan 
effectiveness date, key terms and conditions, disbursement schedule, commitment fee and 
interest rates etc. 
ADB Source of Funds – Method of Withdrawal 
ADB Loan 
- By Reimbursement Method 
- By Imprest Account1 
- By Direct Payment 
- By Commitment Procedure 
ADB Loan Total 
ADB Grant 
ADB Loan and Grant Total 
Note 
Reference 
During the 
Current 
Year 
During the 
Previous 
Year 
Cumulative 
Project to  
Date 
in (INR) ‘000 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
1 This should agree with the advances/replenishments net of refunds in Statement 6.2. 
6.1 
Funds Received from ADB through Reimbursement Method 
Give details, if necessary 
Annexure 6 
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
[NAME OF THE ENTITY/PROJECT] 
Loan/Grant No. 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED [YEAR END DATE] 
6.2 
Reconciliation of the Imprest Account and the Bank Statement is given below 
STATEMENT OF IMPREST ACCOUNT 
FOR THE YEAR/PERIOD ENDED XX, XXXX. 
Balance brought forward from previous period 
Prior Year  Current Year 
140 
100 
in (INR) ‘000 
Add: 
Advance1 
Replenishment received during the year/period1 
Interest Earned 
Subtotal (A) 
Deduct: 
Payments made during the year/period 
Replenishment /Liquidation1 
Expenditure yet to be claimed 
Amount refunded during the year/period 
Closing Balance (B) 
200 
10 
310 
150 
20 
140 
200 
10 
350 
150 
20 
180 
50 
100 
As per bank statement (copy attached) 
140 
180 
1  Withdrawal application-wise references required 
6.2.1  The US $ equivalent notational amount held at the RBI in respect of the above Imprest 
Account balance is __________ US $ (bank statement attached) 
Annexure 6 
6.3 
Details of Payments made directly by ADB are given below 
(Add relevant details here) 
6.4 
Details of payments made through commitment procedure 
(Add relevant details here) 
6.5 
 Details of Grants 
(Give relevant details for grants)
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
Annexure 7 
[NAME OF THE ENTITY/PROJECT] 
Loan/Grant No. 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED [YEAR TO DATE] 
6.6 
Details of disbursement claimed under the Statement of Expenditure (SOE) Procedure are given below 
DISBURSEMENT CLAIMED UNDER STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE (SOE) PROCEDURE 
FOR THE YEAR/PERIOD ENDED XX, XXXX 
Total 
Amount 
Paid 
4 
ADB 
Financing 
 %1 
5 
Net Eligible 
Expense 
6 (4x5) 
Amount 
Reimbursed 
7 
Imprest 
Fund 
Replenished/ 
Liquidated 
8 
in (INR) ‘000 
Total  
Disbursement 
Using SOE 
Procedure 
7 + 8 = 9 
100 
80% 
80 
60 
20 
80 
W/A No. 
00001 
00002 
00005 
SOE 
Sheet No. 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
Category 
3 
Civil Works 
Mechanical and Equipment 
Consultants 
Salaries 
Accommodation 
Environment and Social Mitigation 
Equipment Operation and Maintenance 
Total 
Total for [prior year] 
1 The financing percentages within the table for ADB funds are as per loan agreement Schedule 3. 
Annexure 8 
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
[NAME OF THE ENTITY/PROJECT] 
Loan/Grant No. 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED [YEAR END DATE] 
     in (INR) ‘000 
Current  
Year 
Prior  
Year 
Cumulative 
Project to 
Date 
7 – 13 
If any of the amounts given on the Statements of 
Receipts and Payments require further detail or 
Break-down, provide this here against relevant 
Note 
Annexure 9 
Cumulative from [beginning of Project] to  year to date 
Variance 
Program Budgeted 
Expenditures 
INR ‘000 
Actual 
Expenditures 
INR ‘000 
Utilization 
Percentage 
% 
INR ‘000 
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
Name of the Project 
Loan/Grant No. 
STATEMENT OF APPROPRIATION VS. ACTUAL 
For the current year ended 20xx 
For the Prior year ended 20xx 
Budgeted 
Expenditures 
INR ‘000 
Actual 
Expenditures 
INR “000 
Utilization 
Percentage 
% 
Variance 
INR ‘000 
Budgeted 
Expenditures 
INR ‘000 
Actual 
Expenditures 
INR ‘000 
Utilization 
Percentage 
% 
Variance 
INR ‘000 
Cost Categories 
Investment Costs 
Civil Works 
Mechanical and Equipment 
Environment and Social Mitigation 
Consultants 
a.  Project Management 
b.  Capacity Devleopment 
Others 
Subtotal 
Recurrent Costs 
Salaries 
Accommodation 
Equipment Operation and Maintenance 
Others 
Subtotal 
Total Payments 
Financing Charges During Implementation 
Total Project Cost 
Grand total of expenditures in USD 
Name of the Executing Agency 
Name of the Implementing Agency 
Name of the Project 
Loan/Grant No. 
EXPENDITURE BY OUTPUT COMPONENTS 
Annexure 10 
Unallocable common costs 
Prior Year 
Current Year 
Cum to 
Date 
Prior Year 
Output 1 1 
Current 
Year 
Cum to 
Date 
Prior Year 
Output 2 
Current 
Year 
Cum to 
Date 
Prior Year 
Output 3 
Current 
Year 
             In INR ‘000 
Total Expenditure 
Cum to 
Date 
Prior Year 
Current 
Year 
Cum to 
Date 
 Project Management 
Investment Costs 
Civil Works 
Mechanical Equipment 
Environment and Social Mitigation 
Consultants 
a. 
b.  Capacity Development 
Others 
Subtotal (A) 
Recurrent Costs 
Salaries 
Accommodation 
Equipment Operation and 
Maintenance 
Others 
Subtotal (B) 
Total Cost (C=A+B) 
% Total Project Cost 
1 Allocate the expenditure to the different Project Output Components as per the Loan Agreement.  Add as many columns as required. For common costs allocated, specify the sharing ratios in the note 3.10
Annexure 11 
Example of a Management Assertion Letter 
(To Author) 
(Date) 
(Project Letterhead) 
This assertion letter is provided in connection with your audit of the financial statement of the 
_________________  Project  for  the  year  ended  __________.  We  acknowledge  our 
responsibility for the fair presentation of the financial statements in accordance with the cash 
basis of accounting followed by the Government of India, and we confirm, to the best of our 
knowledge and belief, the following representations made to you during your audit: 
▪  The project financial statements are free of material misstatements, including omissions. 
▪  Project funds have been used for the purposes for which they were provided. 
▪  Project expenditures are eligible for financing under the Loan/Credit agreement. 
▪  There  have  been  no  irregularities  involving  management  or  employees  who  have  a 
significant role in internal control or that could have a material effect on the project financial 
statements. 
▪  We have made available to you all books of account and supporting documentation relation 
to the project. 
▪  The project has complied with the conditions of all relevant legal agreements, including the 
Financing Agreement, the Project Agreement, the Project Appraisal Document, the Minutes 
of Negotiations, and the Borrower’s Project Implementation Plan. 
(Project Director / Chief Executive Officer) 
(Chief Finance Officer / Senior Finance Officer)
Annexure 12 
Excerpt  from  CAG  Auditing  Standards  (2nd  Edition,  2002)  Chapter  IV,  Reporting 
Standards 
12. 
The form and content of audit option and report. 
12.1  The form  and content of  all  audit  opinions  and  reports  are founded on  the following 
general principles: 
(a)  Title.  The opinion or report should be preceeded by a suitable title or heading, helping the 
reader to distinguish it from statements and information issued by others. 
(b)  Signature  and  date.    The  opinion  or  report  should  be  properly  signed.  The  inclusion  of  a 
date  informs  the  reader  that  consideration  has  been  given  to  the  effect  of  events  or 
transactions  about  which  the  auditor  became  aware  up  to  that  date  (which,  in  the  case  of 
regularity (financial) audits, may be beyond the period of the financial statement). 
(c)  Objectives and scope.  The opinion or report should include reference to the objectives and 
scope of the audit.  This information establishes the purpose and boundaries of the audit. 
(d)  Completeness.    Opinions  should  be  appended  to  and  published  with  the  financial 
statements to which they relate, but performance reports may be free standing. The auditor’s 
opinions  and  reports  should  be  presented  as  prepared  by  the  auditor.  In  exercising  its 
independence CAG may acquire information from time to time, which in the national interest 
cannot  be  freely  disclosed.  This  can  affect  the  completeness  of  the  audit  report.  In  this 
situation  the  auditor  should  consider  the  need  to  make  a  report,  possibly  including 
confidential or sensitive material in a separate, unpublished report. 
(e)  Addressee.  The opinion or report should identify those to whom it is addressed, as required 
by  the  circumstances  of  the  audit  engagement  and  local  regulations  or  practice.  This  is 
unnecessary where formal procedures exist for its delivery. 
(f)  Identification  of  subject  matter.  The  opinion  or  report  should  identify  the  financial 
statements  (in  the  case  of  regularity  (financial)  audits)  or  area  (in  the  case  of  performance 
audits) to which it relates. This includes information such as the name of the audited entity, 
the  date  and  period  covered  by  the  financial  statements  and  the  subject  matter  that  has 
been audited. 
(g)  Legal  basis.    Audit  opinions  and  reports  should  identify  the  legislation  or  other  authority 
providing for the audit. 
(h)  Compliance  with  standards.    Audit  opinions  and  reports  should  indicate  the  auditing 
standards  or  practices  followed  in  conducting  the  audit,  thus  providing  the  reader  with  an 
assurance  that  the  audit  has  been  carried  out  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted 
procedures. 
(i)  Timeliness.  The audit opinion or report should be available promptly to be of greatest use 
to readers and users, particularly those who have to take necessary action. 
Annexure 13 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
To 
(Project Implementing Authority) 
Report on the Project Financial Statements 
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  financial  statements  of  the  __________  Project 
financed under Asian Development Bank Loan No.  _____, which comprise the Statement of 
Receipts  and  Payments,  the  Statement  of  Expenditure  by  Category  and  Financier,  the 
Statement of Disbursement1 and related notes for the year ended _______. 
OR 
In  case  of  PIA  maintaining  Balance  Sheet  balance  sheet  and  statement  of  income  and 
expenditure following part may be substituted: 
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  financial  statements  along  with  Balance  Sheet 
balance  sheet,  income  and  expenditure  statement  and  Cash  Flow  Statement  and  related 
statements  of  the  _________    Project  financed  under  Asian  Development  Bank  Loan 
No.________  , for the year ended _________, 
These  statements  are 
the  Project's  management.  Our 
responsibility is to express an opinion on the accompanying financial statements based on our 
audit. 
the  responsibility  of 
We  conducted  our  audit  in  accordance  with  the  Auditing  Standards  promulgated  by 
the  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  of  India.  Those  Standards  require  that  we  plan  and 
perform the audit to  obtain reasonable assurance about  whether the financial statements are 
free  of  material  misstatement.  Our  audit  examines,  on  a  test  basis,  evidence  supporting  the 
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. It also includes assessing the accounting 
principles  used  and  significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the 
overall statement presentation. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our 
opinion. 
In  our  opinion,  the  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the 
sources  and  applications  of  funds  of  Project  for  the  year  ended  [insert  date]  in  accordance 
with Government of India accounting standards.2 
1  Insert  titles  of  other  required  statements  and  schedules  included  in  or  annexed  to  the  project 
financial statements, if any. 
2  Until the Ministry of Finance prescribes adoption of the accounting standards pronounced by GASAB or other 
body such as IPSAS, the accounting standards followed by the Government of India shall be the cash basis of 
accounting applied with due regard to the General Financial Rules, PWD codes, Treasury codes and similar 
Annexure 13 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
In addition, in our opinion; 
Proceeds of the loan from ADB have been utilized for the purposes as per ADB 
Loan / Project Agreement 
Financial covenants in the loan agreement [name and number of loan] dated [date 
of loan] have been complied with 
(i)(a)With  respect  to  SOEs,  adequate  supporting  documentation  has  been 
maintained  to  support  claims  to  the  Asian  Development  Bank  for  reimbursements  of 
expenditures  incurred;  and  (b)  except  for  ineligible  expenditures  as  detailed  in  the  audit 
observations,  if  any,  appended  to  this  audit  report,  expenditures  are  eligible  for  financing 
under the Loan Agreement. 
true  and  fair  view  of  the  receipts  collected 
(ii)(a)The  Imprest  Accounts  give  a 
and  payments  made  during  the  year  ended---;  and  (b)  these  receipts  and  payments  support 
Imprest Account liquidations/replenishments during the year. 
This  report  is  issued  without  prejudice  to  CAG's  right  to  incorporate  the  audit 
observations  in  the  Report  of  CAG  of  India  for  being  laid  before  Parliament/State  or  UT 
Legislature. 
[Auditor's Signature]  
[Auditor's Address]  
[Date3] 
financial rules and codes as are in effect and applicable to the operations of the project. 
3  The report should be dated as of the date to which the auditor has became aware of and considered the effects 
of events and transactions. This is generally the final date of fieldwork, as opposed to the date of signing the 
audit report. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Attachment E 
By  loan  effectiveness,  DOH-PMU  will  ensure  that  a  grievance  redress  mechanism 
1. 
(GRM) to support the social and environmental safeguards of the project is established. The 
GRM  will  receive,  evaluate  and  facilitate  the  resolution  of  impacted  people’s  feedback, 
including  concerns,  complaints  and  grievances  about  the  social  and  environmental 
performance  at  the  level  of  the  Project.  The  GRM  will  aim  to  provide  a  time-bound  and 
transparent  mechanism  to  voice  suggestions  and  appreciations  and  to  resolve  social  and 
environmental  concerns  linked  to  the  project.  The  project-specific  GRM  is  not  intended  to 
bypass the government’s own redress process, rather it is intended to address stakeholders's 
concerns  and  complaints  promptly,  making  it  readily  accessible  to  all  segments  of  the 
community, and is scaled to the risks and impacts of the project. Complainant may access the 
formal legal system at any time.  
During project preparation, information regarding the GRM will be disclosed as part of 
2. 
the public consultation process. Feedbacks related to the implementation of the project will be 
acknowledged, evaluated, and responded to the complainant with corrective action proposed. 
The outcome shall also form part of the semi-annual monitoring report that will be submitted 
to ADB.  
Principles 
Based on Stakeholder Rights. Project stakeholders are those likely to be directly or 
3. 
indirectly  affected,  positively  or  negatively,  by  project  activities.  Stakeholders  have  the 
following rights under the project: 
(i)  Right to information;  
(ii)  Right against inappropriate intervention by an outside party;  
(iii)  Right to a project free of fraud and corruption. 
4. 
Open and Inclusive. Any stakeholders (including villagers, contractors, project staff, 
authorities, and other involved parties) may file a feedback and/or a grievance if s/he believes 
his/her rights, or if any of the project’s principles and procedures, has been violated. Anyone 
may give comments or suggestions about any aspect of the project.  Comments, suggestions, 
appreciation, or questions should be recorded and submitted to the feedback handling focal 
points at community, district, and state level. 
5. 
Transparency.  Information  about  the  GRM,  including  contact  details,  will  be 
distributed to all participating communities, at public meetings, through brochures/pamphlets 
in local languages, posted at WUA and CHPMA boards and, to the extent possible, advertised 
on local radio and TV.   
6. 
Accessibility. Different channels can be used for filing feedback, including by letter 
(using  locked  mailboxes  and  pre-addressed  envelopes  available  at  WUA  and  CHPMA 
signboards  in  each  project  community),  by  phone,  email,  social  media,  and  in  person.  
Community members and stakeholders themselves decide on the best ways to file complaints. 
7. 
Free. There is no charge for filing an inquiry and/or a feedback. 
Anonymity, Confidentiality, and Security. All feedback, and especially grievances, 
8. 
are treated confidentially. Feedback is disclosed publicly, but the identity of the feedback giver 
is treated as confidential and is withheld unless they self-identify.  Feedback focal points, and 
members of FHCs violating this confidentiality are subject to sanctions.   
Quick Action. A grievance is answered within 15 days from the time the feedback is 
9. 
received.  Grievances should be resolved within 60 days of receipt. 
Subsidiarity. Any feedbacks and grievances are addressed and resolved locally, and 
10. 
at the lowest level, if possible.  If a grievance cannot be resolved locally, it is sent to a higher 
level, within 15 days of receipt.   
11. 
Objective and Independent. The greivance focal point assigned to handle feedback 
or resolve a grievance interviews the person who filed the feedback or grievance, documents 
the actions taken at the location where the complaint originated, and discloses the response 
or  the  resolution  taken  for  the  case.    Serious  feedback  and  grievances,  including  any 
allegations  related  to  the  misuse  of  funds,  must  be  reported  to  the  State-level  FHC 
immediately.  Designated PMU staff enter agreed feedback action in the project management 
information system (MIS), and when and by whom action to resolve any grievance was taken. 
The State-level feedback committee reviews the feedback MIS data monthly. 
Process 
A FHM will be established with the formation of Grievance Redress Committees (GRC) 
12. 
at three levels: i.e. WUA/CHPMA level, District level and PMU level.  
13. 
The WUA/ (community) level GRC will comprise of the:  
(iv)  Presidents of the WUA and CHPMA;1 (Joint chairpersons) 
(v)  CHPMAWUA  and  CHPMA  feedback  handling  officers  (elected  by  respective 
groups) 
(vi)  A Panchayat representative; 
(vii)  A representative from Affected Person;  
(viii)  Horticulture Extension Officer, Block Level; 
(ix)  DIPH irrigation officer, Block Level. 
14. 
15. 
The District level GRC will comprise of the:  
(i)  Designated representative of District Collector (Chairperson) 
(ii)  Deputy Director of Horticulture (feedback handling focal point); 
(iii)  Deputy Director of Irrigation and Public Health (feedback handling focal point); 
(iv)  A representative from local NGOs or a local person of repute and standing in the 
society or an elected representative. 
(v)  A representative from the Affected Person  
The PMU level GRC will comprise of the:  
(i)  Project Director, Department of Horticulture (Chairperson) 
(ii)  Project Deputy Director, Department of Irrigation and Public Health 
(iii)  Project Deputy Director, Department of Horticulture 
(iv)  PMU Level Environmental Officer 
(v)  PMU Social Safeguards Officer (PMU Feedback handling focal point) 
All persons involved in project implementation will be trained on how to receive and 
16. 
handle feedback, and how to keep it confidential 
The  grievance  handling  process  will  involve  five  steps:  (1) intake;  (2) sorting; 
17. 
(3) verification; (4) action; and (5) follow-up and monitoring.  
18. 
Step 1: Intake.  A grievance can be filed by anyone, and through different means: 
(i)  Verbal communication to a WUA or CHPMA feedback focal point, and/or designated 
and trained block or district DOH and DIPH feedback handling officers;  
1 One FHC representatives of both the WUA and CHPMA will be a woman. 
(ii)  Using a feedback envelope and the suggestion box placed at each WUA and 
CHPMA meeting place/office.  The elected WUA and CHPMA feedback handling 
officers  open the feedback box at least every week. Each box is equipped with two 
locks, with one key each held by the WUA and CHPMA  Chairpersons and the 
feedback handling officers respectively .  Feedback/grievance envelopes from the 
box must be opened in front of at least two people – e.g. CHPMA or WUA grievance 
redress officers and Secretaries;   
(iii) Letters to the DOH and DIPH state, district and block offices, and the PMU at state 
level; 
(iv) At meetings and monitoring visits;  
(v)  E-mails to dedicated e-mail addresses of the DOH and DIPH state offices and the 
PMU;  
(vi) A dedicated phone line for the DOH and DIPH state offices and the PMU; or 
(vii)  On the Government Portal titled "E-Samadhan" that enables a citizen to lodge a 
complaint and keep its track online through the website 
http://admis.hp.nic.in/esamadhan. 
19. 
Feedback or complaints can be sent at any time to any level (e.g. a grievance can be 
directed  to  the  community,  block,  district  or  state  level).  If  a  grievance  is  related  to  a 
community,  the  complainant  is  encouraged  to  report  to  the  district  level.  If  a  grievance  is 
related to a block or district, or the state, it is suggested to report to the PMU level.  
At the community level, the elected WUA or CHPMA feedback handling officers 2 are 
20. 
the regular primary contact for anyone who wishes to file a feedback/grievance.  If an individual 
prefers,  feedback or grievances can be sent to others involved in the project implementation, 
such as DOH or DIPH block, district or State staff or PMU officers. 
21. 
Block  and  district  level  DOH  or  DIPH  staff  receiving  grievances  must  complete  the 
project  grievance  form,  and  submit  it  without  delay  to  the  assigned  district  DOH  or  DIPH 
feedback handling focal point. 
State level DOH, DIPH or PMU staff receiving grievances must complete the project 
22. 
grievance form and submit it without delay to the grievance-handling officer of the PMU. 
Step  2:  Sorting.  The  PMU  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (M&E)  officer  will  maintain  a 
23. 
feedback recording system in the project Management Information System (MIS). Feedback 
will be divided into eight categories: : 
•  Category 1: General inquiries 
•  Category 2: Feedback regarding violations of policies, guidelines and 
procedures  
•  Category 3: Feedback regarding contract violations/breach of 
contract 
•  Category 4: Feedback regarding the misuse of project funds 
•  Category 5: Feedback regarding abuse of power/intervention 
•  Category 6: Reports of force majeure 
•  Category 7: Suggestion 
•  Category 8: Appreciation   
2 Elected annually by the members of the respective associations 
The  PMU  Social  Safeguards  officer  will  be  responsible  for  categorizing  feedback 
24. 
received  at  the  State  level  and  entering  it  into the  project MIS,  The  District  level  DOH  and 
DIPH feedback focal points will categorize feedback received at the District and Block level, 
and any feedback referred upwards by WUA or CHPMA chairpersons, and enter it into the 
project MIS. Feedback received at WUA or CHPMA level that can be managed locally will be 
maintained  in  association  records  and  periodically  entered  into  the  MIS  by  the  PMU  M&E 
team.  
Once  a  grievance  has  been  received,  the  relevant  feedback  handling  focal  points 
25. 
decide how to handle it, including the timeframe within which the case should be resolved, 
with a timeframe not exceeding 60 days. Feedback relating to: 
(i)  a community issue will be handled by the WUA and CHPMA chairpersons. To the 
extent possible, community feedback/complaints should be addressed at the 
community GRC level, however, the community FHC chairpersons can refer 
grievances upward to the district GRC; 
(ii)  a block issue will be handled by the district feedback  focal points; 
(iii) a district issue will be handled by PMU feedback focal point; and 
(iv)  grievances that are of a serious nature (e.g. all allegations of fraud or corruption, and 
potentially any grievance in categories 2 through 5), the district feedback focal point 
officers consult with the PMU feedback focal point for advice on the appropriate 
action. 
If  the  person  filing  the  grievance  is  known,  the  relevant  feedback  focal  point 
26. 
communicates  the  timeframe  and  course  of  action  to  the  complainant  within  one  week  of 
receipt of the grievance. 
Step 3: Verification. The responsible feedback focal point(s) handling the grievance 
27. 
gather  facts  and  clarify  information  to  generate  a  clear  picture  of  the  circumstances 
surrounding  the  grievance.  At  community  level,  WUA  and  CHPMA  chairpersons,  deputy 
chairpersons  or  secretaries  will  assist  their  respective  focal  points  to  verify  grievances. 
Verification  normally  includes  site  visits,  a  review  of  documents,  a  meeting  with  the 
complainant (if known and willing to engage), WUA and CHPMA Committee members, and 
meetings  with  those  who  could  resolve the  issue  (including  formal  and  informal  community 
leaders). Feedback related to the misuse of funds may also require meetings with suppliers 
and contractors.  
28. 
For serious grievances received at the state level by phone or letter, the PMU GRC 
decides  whether  (i) to  launch  its  own  investigation;  or  (ii) instruct  the  district  DOH  or  DIPH 
feedback  focal  points  to  conduct  an  initial  investigation  at  the  location  where  the 
grievance/problem  occurred.  If  the  district-level  feedback  focal  points  cannot  resolve  the 
grievance, it will, within 15 days, be reported back to the PMU GRC for further action.  
29.  Within the allotted period, the results of the verification are presented by the respective 
feedback focal points to the respective GRCs (dependent on the nature of the complaint) for 
action. 
At State and district levels, the respective grievance handler fills in the grievance form 
30. 
and submits it to the PMU M&E officer who enters it into the project MIS. 
31. 
Step 4: Action. Feedback from the community level should be handled and recorded 
in the village, if possible. For issues that cannot be resolved within 21 days at the community 
level,  the  district  GRC’s  review  these  grievances  and  the  results  of  the  verification  and 
determine the  action to be taken.  If referred to  district  level,  once the  needed  action(s)  are 
carried out, the district grievance handler fills in a grievance report and enters it into the MIS. 
If the actions cannot be carried out, or the grievance cannot be satisfactorily resolved 
32. 
in a reasonable period of time (less than 30 days), the district GRC refers the matter back to 
the PMU feedback focal point (Social Safeguards specialist) to review the case and determine 
the action to be taken.  
33. 
If  the  complainant  is known, the  feedback focal point  with  whom the grievance  was 
filed  communicates  the  action  to  the  complainant.  The  feedback  focal  point  must  seek 
feedback from the complainant as to whether the action(s) are deemed to be satisfactory. If 
the  action  is  considered  unsatisfactory,  the  complainant  may  file  a  new  grievance.  A  new 
grievance on an existing case is handled at the next higher level from the initial case. 
The  Community GRC  communicates the  action taken  as  a result  of  a  grievance,  to 
34. 
villagers at the next WUA/CHPMA meeting. 
Step 5:  Follow-up and Monitoring. In its regular supervision visits, the PMU assess 
35. 
the functioning of the district and community GRMs and undertakes spot checks. 
36. 
The  PMU  uses  the  MIS  to  provide  a  monthly  snapshot  of  the  GRM  (number  and 
category  of  comments  received,  and  grievances/suggestions  resolved),  including  any 
suggestions received and acted on. 
37. 
The  PMU  uses  the  MIS  to  report  on  grievances  and  FHM  feedback  in  its  quarterly 
implementation  progress  reports,  safeguard  monitoring  reports,  and  its  annual  reports.  
Reports  include  information  on  grievance  resolution  and  trends  (number  of  grievances 
received, cause of grievance, number resolved, average time taken to resolve a grievance, 
percentage  of  individuals  having  filed  a  grievance  who  are  satisfied  with  the  action  taken, 
number of grievances resolved at the lowest applicable level, etc.). 
The  PMU  and  the  ADB  review  grievance  monitoring  data  as  part  of  regular 
38. 
implementation support missions. 
39. 
A review of the grievance handling system (including the grievance of those who have 
used it) is undertaken during every second year to assess the efficacy of the mechanism and 
introduce improvements. 
40. 
The decision of the GRCs is binding, unless vacated by the court of law. The affected 
person, however, is free to access the country’s legal system at any time and stage although 
the project GRM is the preferred route. The GRC will continue to function, for the benefit of 
the stakeholders, during the entire life of the project.  
The affected people can also register their grievances on the Government Portal titled 
41. 
"E-Samadhan" that enables a citizen to lodge a complaint and keep its track online through 
the  website  http://admis.hp.nic.in/esamadhan.  The  departmental  interface  allows  officers  to 
mark, reply, seek additional information and take other necessary action in workflow manner 
by escalating the same. The Chief Minister, Chief Secretary, Ministers and Secretaries can 
monitor the overall status of functioning of the system. The project GRM would be supported 
through this portal.  
People who are, or may in the future be, adversely affected by the project may submit 
42. 
complaints to ADB’s Accountability Mechanism. The Accountability Mechanism provides an 
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects 
can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s 
operational  policies  and  procedures.  Before  submitting  a  complaint  to  the  Accountability 
Mechanism, affected people should make a good faith effort to solve their problems by working 
with  the  concerned  ADB  operations  department.  Only  after  doing  that,  and  if  they  are  still 
dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism 3. 
3 For further information see: http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp.  
2 December 2020 
Attachment F 
Environment Protection Guidelines for Project Readiness Financing 
I. 
INTRODUCTION ……….……………………………………………..………..………  1 
Project Description ……………………………………………………………………………..   2 
PRF Outputs and Activities ……………………………………………………………………   2 
Pilot Project Areas ………………………………………………………………………………   3 
Objective of the Guideline ……………………………………………………………….…….   4 
II.  KEY LESSONS LEARNED FROM PREVIOUS PROJECTS IN INDIA …………..  4 
III.  RELEVANT LAWS, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES ……………………………..  5 
IV.  ENVIRONMENT IMPACT AND CORRESPONDING MEASURES …………..……  5 
V.  SITE SELECTION FOR IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT …………………..……….. 7 
VI.  MINOR IMPACTS AND MITIGATION MEASURES ……………………….………..  8 
1 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
Himachal Pradesh is one of the smaller states in India and identified as high-hills areas and 
less than 10% of the total area is under cultivation.1 Majority of the state’s population live in rural areas 
and nearly 62% of the state population relies on the agriculture and its allied sector for a significant part 
of  their  income.  Since  agriculture  remains  an  important  employer  affecting  a  large  number  of  state 
population in rural areas, there is a sizable role of agriculture in development. The state government of 
Himachal Pradesh aims to double farmers’ income for rural livelihood development and enhance the 
agriculture sector’s contribution to GSDP. 
2. 
The state government of Himachal Pradesh recognizes horticulture as an integral component 
to enhance farmers’ income. The potential for the growth of horticulture is shown in various parameters. 
The consumption of selected fruits and vegetables has grown at a rate of 18-23% and 10-20% in rural 
areas  of  India  between  1992-1994  and  2000-2001,  still  less  than  the  recommended  dietary 
requirements. In addition to the growth of domestic demands, horticultural sector accounts for about 
54%  of  the  total  exports  of  agricultural  commodities  in  India.  Over  the  last  decade  this  sector  has 
recorded a rising trend at the average growth rate of 3-6%. 
3. 
Himachal Pradesh features four agro-climatic zones (Figure 1) – sub-montane subtropical low 
hills zone, mid-hills sub humid zone, high-hills temperate wet zone, and a high-hills temperate dry zone.2 
There  is  a  distinctive  agricultural  development  gap  among  the  agro-climatic  zones.  Temperate 
horticulture  is  dominated  by  apple  production,  which  is  the  most  important  fruit  crop  for  the  state 
comprising  85%  of  the  state’s  fruit  production  and  contributing  4%  to  GSDP  in  2012-13.  While  crop 
diversification  is  increasing  in  Himachal  Pradesh,  a  significant  increase  in  fruit  and  vegetable  crop 
production  is  mostly  concentrated  in  districts  of  the  mid-hills  sub-humid  zone,  leaving  a  substantial 
income gap between temperate and subtropical horticultural farmers. Farmers of temperate horticulture 
earn,  on  average,  $1,550  per  month  while  horticulture  farmers  in  the  subtropical  low  hills  zone  and 
some mid-hills subhumid zones earn, on average only $116 month or 7.4% of temperate horticultural 
farmers’ income. 
Figure 1. Map showing the climatic distribution over Himachal Pradesh3 
Even  when  farmers  producing  subtropical  fruits  overcome  these  challenges,  access  to  high 
4. 
value markets is limited and farming is unprofitable. According to the 2010-2011 agricultural consensus, 
1 According to the directorate of land record Himachal Pradesh 2009-2010, land use pattern of HP is: forest cover 
(19.87%), land not available for cultivation (20.33%), non-cultivated land (30.54%  - waste (2.3%), permanent 
pasture (27%), fallow land (1.47%). 
2 Himachal Pradesh features four agro-climatic zones – sub-montane subtropical low hills zone (16.4% of state 
land; 38% of total cropping areas); mid-hills sub humid zone (21.3% of state land; 41% of total cropping areas); 
high-hills temperate wet zone (23% of state land; 18.4% of total cropping areas); and high-hills temperate dry 
zone (39% of state land; 2.6% cropping areas). 
3 https://himachalpradesh.pscnotes.com/himachal-pradesh-geography/climate-himachal-pradesh/ 
2 
87.95%  of  the  total  landholdings  are  small  (1-2 ha)  and  marginal  (below  1 ha)  making  the  state’s 
average  landholding  size  just  1.07 ha.  Moreover,  between  1990/91  and  2014/15,  the  percentage  of 
marginal farmers with less than 1.0 ha of land has increased from 63.8% to 69.78%, while medium, 
large  and  extra-large  sized  landholdings  have  decreased4.  Failing  to  meet  marketable  scale  of 
production, Indian farmers receive 10-23% of the consumer price while farmers in developed countries 
receive about 65-80%. 
Project Description 
5. 
The  Himachal  Pradesh  Sub-tropical  Horticulture,  Irrigation,  and  Value  Addition  Readiness 
(HPSHIVA-R) project is proposed to (i) establish high level of project readiness of the ensuing loan; 
(ii) build  capacities  of  the  project  executing  and  implementing  agencies  which  have  not  previously 
implemented  an  ADB-financed  project;  and  (iii) test  and  demonstrate  new  subtropical  horticultural 
farming  practices  including  water  use  management,  and  establish  new  production  technologies  and 
marketing systems.  
6. 
The PRF’s pilot activities will comprise  new irrigation systems to service the new subtropical 
horticultural farming practices, and  the  establishment  of new production technologies and  marketing 
systems.  The  PRF  will  pilot  subprojects  in  selected  blocks  from  four  of  these  districts  (Bilaspur, 
Hamipur, Kangra and Mandi) where land for the pilot horticulture production plots is already identified 
and the participation of the farmers is agreed.  
PRF Outputs and Activities.  
The PRF will have the following four outputs:  
(i)  Output 1: 
Irrigation 
infrastructure  development  and 
farmer  management  systems 
established.  This  output  will  be  management  by  DIPH.  Output 1  will  (a) construct  or 
rehabilitate 16 irrigation schemes introducing innovative technologies for water extraction, 
distribution  and  storage,  and  enhanced  climate  and  disaster  resilience  (PRF  pilot);  and 
(b) establish and capacitate water user associations on the constructed irrigation schemes 
with women’s participation and gender equitable leadership.  
(ii)  Output 2:    Subtropical  horticulture  production  technology  and  marketing  systems 
demonstrated.  This  output  will  be  managed  by  DOH.  Output 2  will:  (a) develop 
17 subtropical  horticulture  plots  covering  168 hectares,  engaging  480 male  and  female 
farmers  for  irrigated  high-  and  ultra-high  density  production  of  citrus,  guava,  litchi  and 
pomegranate;  (b) fence  all  horticulture  plots  to  protect  from  animal  predation;  (c) form 
community horticulture production and marketing associations (CHPMA) in the PRF areas 
and  build  their  capacities  for  business/marketing;  and  (d) facilitate  the  development  of 
CHPMA  investment  plans  for  subtropical  horticulture  value  addition  and  market 
development.  
(iii)  Output 3:  Enabling  environment,  tools  and  capacity  for  promoting  irrigated  subtropical 
horticulture  provided.  This  output  focuses  on  developing  capacity  building  tools  and 
creating an enabling environment for the implementation of the ensuing project.   
(iv)  Output  4:  Ensuing  investment  project  and  its  implementation  readiness  prepared.  This 
output will support DOH and DIPH to prepare the feasibility studies, detailed engineering 
design  and  surveys,  due  diligence  assessment,  safeguards  preparation  work  and  bid 
documents for the ensuing loan, supported by PRF consultants.  
4  2014-2015  data  –  Economic  Survey  of  Himachal  Pradesh,  Economics  and  Statistics  Department  (from  WB 
HPHDP  PD).  1990-1991  data  –  Annual  Admin  Report,  Department  of  Agriculture,  2001-2002  (from  doubling 
farmers income in HP)  
3 
Pilot Project Areas  
7.  Out of the seven districts of Bilaspur, Hamipur, Kangra, Mandi, Solan, Sirmour and Una targeted 
under the ensuing loan project, the PRF prioritized four districts of Bilaspur, Hamipur, Kangra and Mandi 
(Figure 2) where land for horticulture production plots was already identified and agreed by farmers. 
The  PRF  will  finance:  (i) the  construction  of  16  irrigation  systems  in  4 districts  of  Himachal  Pradesh 
(HP); (ii) the pilot development of drip irrigated high and ultra-high density subtropical horticulture crops 
on 168 ha of  irrigated  land involving  408  male and female farmers, including  20% poor households; 
(iii) the development of an HP horticulture sector development strategy; and (iv) the preparation of the 
full HP-SHIVA loan project. 
Figure 2. Map5 of the priority districts for the PRF’s pilot areas 
8.  The  pilot  test  areas  (See  Figure  3)  will  have  simple  construction  activities.  Generally,  the 
implementation  will  be  done  manually  such  as  trenching  for  laying  pipes  and  distribution  system, 
transportation of material from main road to project areas and manual perpetration and application of 
concrete. There is no need for blasting and road construction. The construction materials will be brought 
from local market and transported through existing roads and followed by manual shifting to sites. No 
material  will  be  sourced  directly  from  mines  or  quarries.  Also,  water  requirement  for  construction  is 
limited and sourced from local perennial water sources with due permission from concerned authorities, 
as applicable. 
5 Source: https://d-maps.com/carte.php?num_car=8674&lang=en 
4 
Figure. 3 Locations of the proposed pilot projects. 
9.  The dug soil during pipe laying process will be spread in the field under cluster area and used for 
small construction work involved. Some construction debris may generate during construction of small 
weir  across  Khud  or  water  channels  and  will  be  used  for  other  construction  activities.  In  the  Dulet 
scheme, no construction debris because only distribution work is proposed in the cluster area, but some 
debris may generate during the placement of storage tanks. In Bilaspur District, small quantity of about 
50  m3  excavated  material  is  expected  and  disposed  at  a  site  located  at  pump  house  at  Khasra  No. 
863/460. 
Objective of the Guideline 
10. 
The  purpose  of  the  Environment  Protection  Guidelines  (EPGs)  is  to  further  improve  the 
ecological  outcomes  and  to  reduce  further  and/or  eliminate  the  potential  environmental  impacts  on 
environment  due  to  the  pilot-test  activities  of  HPSHIVA:  PRF.  These  guidelines  are  used  for  PRF’s 
selection  of  pilot-test  sites,  designing  appropriate  schemes,  and  providing  safeguard  mitigation 
measures for the irrigated high-density subtropical horticulture production, so as to attain the expected 
environmental targets of the project.  
II. 
 KEY LESSONS LEARNED FROM PREVIOUS PROJECTS IN INDIA 
Agriculture, horticulture and forestry development projects in India have paid high attention to 
11. 
environmental  management  through  the  identification  and  implementation  of  mitigation  measure  to 
avoid  or  minimize  potential  negative  impacts  from  project  activities  on  natural  resources  and 
ecosystems in the project areas. Measures have also been taken to conserve soil and water, reduce 
soil  fertility  decline,  control  pest  and  disease  and  promote  sustainable  development.  Major 
environmental measures adopted in related development projects include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
development  and  execution  of  “Environmental  Protection  Guidelines”  which  included 
explicit  environmental  protection  measures  regarding  sites  selection  and  layout, 
selection of planting species (varieties) and their distribution; 
Development and  execution of “Pest and Disease Management Plans”, which  include 
specific stipulations for pest/disease prevention and control, monitoring as well as the 
chemical  pesticide  safety  during  project  implementation.  These  management  plans 
advocate physical and biological prevention and control methods, and the use of high-
efficiency and low-toxicity for chemical pesticide for pest management; 
5 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Integration  of  the  aforementioned  plans  into  Packages  of  Practice  (PoPs)  for  specific 
crops. 
Baseline evaluation and close monitoring of soil and water conservation, soil fertility, and 
pests and disease; 
Training of project management and technical staff at all levels as well as project entities 
and households to promote their environmental protection awareness and to understand 
and  learn  the  proposed  technologies  and  measures  stipulated  in  Environmental 
Protection Guidelines and Pest and Disease Management Plan. 
III.  RELEVANT LAWS, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES  
The  PRF  would  be  implemented  in  line  with  following  key  applicable  acts,  notifications,  and 
12. 
policies:  
(National:  (i) Environment  (Protection)  Act  and  amendments  (1986);  (ii) Notification  on 
Environment Impact Assessment of Development projects (and amendments) (referred to as the 
Notification on Environmental Clearance) (2006); (iii) Forest Conservation Act (1980); (iv) Water 
(Prevention  and  Control  of  Pollution)  Act  (and  subsequent  amendments)  (1970);  (v) Air 
(Prevention  and  Control  of  Pollution)  Act  (and  subsequent  amendments)  (1981);  (vi) Plant 
Quarantine  (Regulation  of  Import  into  India)  Order  (2003);  (vii) Post-entry  Quarantine  (2003); 
(viii) Quarantine Treatments and Application Procedures (2005); (ix) Protection of Plant Varieties 
and Farmers' Rights Act (2001); (x) National Forest Policy (1988); (xi) National Agriculture Policy 
(2000); (xii) National Water Policy (2002); (xiii) National Horticulture Mission (2005); (xiv) Building 
and  Other  Construction  Workers  (Regulation  of  Employment  and  conditions  of  Service)  Act 
(1996); (xv) National Policy for farmers (2007), (xvi) Hazardous Waste (Management, Handling, 
Trans-boundary Movement) Rules, 2008, (xvii) Construction and Demolition Waste Management 
Rules 2016; (xviii)Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 and Amendment 2002 
and 2006. 
State:  (i) Himachal  Pradesh  Fruit  Plant  Nurseries  Regulation  and  Amendment  Act  (2015); 
(ii) Environment  Master  Plan,  Himachal  Pradesh  (2013);  (iii) Himachal  Pradesh  Non-
Biodegradable  Garbage  (Control)  Act  (1995);  (iv) The  Himachal  Pradesh  Transfer  of  Land 
(Regulation)  Act  (1968);  and  (v) The  Himachal  Pradesh  Agricultural  &  Horticultural  Produce 
Marketing (Development &Regulation) Act, 2005. 
ADB: Safeguard Policy Statement of 2009. 
IV.  PRF INTERVENTIONS AND PRACTICES 
13. 
PRF  interventions  may  be  categorized,  in  general,  as  having  a  “low”  level  impact  on  the 
environment. The classification of activities in Table 1 below is largely subjective and may be overruled 
by new site-specific issues or information and detailed project activities not captured in this guideline. 
The  PRF  is  not  expected  to  engage  in  significant  post-harvest  pack  houses,  market  yards  or  agro- 
processing  infrastructure  or  associated  waste  disposal,  which  would  have  moderate  or  major 
environmental  impacts  requiring  sub  project  specific  standalone  environment  assessments  and  
Environment Management Plans (EMP). PRF marketing infrastructure is expected to be limited to small 
CHPMA-managed sorting/grading/packing buildings at panchayat/block level. 
With  regard  to  impacts  of  the  PRF  activities  that  are  not  expected  to  cause  any  significant 
14. 
impact  in  such  cases,  best  practice  measures  (Table  1)  during  the  pilot-test  designing  are 
recommended where appropriate to improve the environmental and social performance of the project. 
6 
Table 1: Practices to improve environment safeguards of the PRF 
PRF 
interventions 
Practices  
•  16 irrigation systems 
including water 
storage 
•  Conduct  detailed  hydrological  and  ecological  assessments  of 
irrigation 
proposed  water  capture/extraction  and  associated 
schemes; 
•  Conduct due diligence analysis of each irrigation scheme covering 
design, construction specification, downstream water availability 
impacts and climate and disaster risk assessments; 
•  Preparation of catchment management plans where required; 
•  Prepare contractors’ requirement that will reflect environment 
• 
safeguard measures  
Independent monitoring of irrigation scheme construction in relation 
to environment safeguard measures; 
•  Fair and transparent approach in the siting of community scale 
irrigation infrastructure, distributed across a large area and based 
on existing crop land holdings of each beneficiary farm household; 
•  Legislatively based user organization management of irrigation 
systems including fees for maintenance. 
•  Post-entry quarantine 
(PEQ) and nurseries 
•  Strict application of national and State quarantine, post-quarantine 
and varietal rights legislation; 
•  Train horticulture officers in the legislation and its application; 
•  Firm DOH regulation nurseries. 
•  Pesticides and 
•  Develop PoPs for the relevant crops, which will include integrated 
Fertilizers- application, 
use and storage 
(follow IPM) 
pest management practices (IPM); 
•  Provide experiential training for horticulture officers and farmers in 
their application; 
•  Circulate list of banned pesticides and insecticides and provide 
relevant guidelines and training in storing, handling, applying and 
disposing of fertilizers and pesticides. Prohibit purchase/use of 
WHO Class 1 & 2 pesticides 
(https://www.who.int/ipcs/publications/pesticides_hazard/en/); 
•  Provide, as required, available bio-control agents. 
•  Unsustainable farming 
of irrigated land 
•  PoPs will define sustainable environmental soil and water 
conservation, soil health management and agriculture and 
horticulture measures to be applied. 
•  Pest and Disease 
Surveillance 
•  Conduct bench-mark survey and prepare checklist of 
pests/pathogens; 
•  Management of 
Pollinators 
•  Training of DOH staff (project and line department) in IPM; 
•  Awareness camps for farmers as part of the IPM process. 
•  Build capacity for sustainably managing pollinators; 
•  Giving consideration to the season long resources needed by 
pollinators, both before and after crop flowering; 
•  Ensuring connectivity of natural habitats in farming areas, so that 
pollinators can more easily disperse and make needed shifts in 
response to changing climates. 
7 
PRF 
interventions 
•  Management of wild 
and stray animal 
menace 
Practices  
•  Work with Forests Department on humane wild animal control 
programs in project areas; 
•  Closely monitor the animal control effectiveness of alternative 
electric fence designs. 
• 
Interventions related to 
climate change and 
disaster resilience 
•  Estimated Block climate change vulnerability index and District-level 
natural disaster vulnerability matrix to guide project climate change 
and disaster resilience action; 
•  Dependent on location, stakeholder driven water catchment 
management schemes, including and natural disaster planning, 
prepared up to Block level; 
•  Design standards for hydraulic structures, irrigation systems and 
water availability to integrate climate and disaster risk reduction 
strategies; 
•  Energy and water efficient irrigation systems prioritized; 
•  Agricultural production technology and management practices to 
incorporate climate resilient water, soil, fertility and pest and 
disease management systems (detailed in PoPs).  
•  CHDMA storage & 
marketing of inputs 
and produce 
•  Any infrastructure subproject will require a Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) to identify and evaluate potential environmental impacts for 
the proposed activities, evaluate alternatives, and design mitigation 
measures; 
•  Sites should be suitable for construction activity, with proper 
drainage and space for traffic movement; 
•  Maximize natural light and ventilation systems to minimize needs 
for artificial light and air conditioning; use large windows for bright 
and well-ventilated rooms; 
Include separate male and female sanitary toilets and basins for 
hand-washing; 
• 
•  Use of asbestos cement tiles as roofing prohibited; 
•  Provision would be made for sustainable organic and inorganic 
waste management including the composting of bio-degradable 
waste. 
•  Where required a separate EIA/EMP wherein the provisions for 
mitigation and compliance would be clearly detailed. 
V.  SITE SELECTION FOR IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT 
15. 
The following steps are the procedures for the selection of suitable irrigation areas of the PRF 
pilot-testing.  The  selected  irrigation  areas  will  have  innovative  technologies  for  water  extraction, 
distribution and storage, and for enhanced climate and disaster resilience. If the answer to all of the 
step 3 questions is “YES”, then the subproject can be shortlisted. The long list of compliant schemes 
will be ranked based on a series of indicators to identify a priority shortlist of subprojects for detailed 
engineering design. Indicators for subproject ranking are detailed in Table 2. 
16. 
Step 1: Present status of the proposed water storage sites: 
a.  Are the proposed water storage area(s) free of cultural relics or other protected areas, 
and is the distance of any relics or resources from the water storage area(s) greater 
than the rules stipulated by the local authority 
b.  Can the water offtake/storage site reliably meet the crop water demand of the target 
area including consideration of climate change induced water supply variability? 
8 
c. 
Is  the  site  free  of  risk  of  a  natural  disaster  that  could  render  the  water  storage  and 
delivery system unusable: e.g. earthquake, landslide, flood?  
d.  Will  soil  and  water  management  investments  required  to  stabilize  the  catchment  be 
commensurate with the scale/cost of the water storage investment? 
Is the site free of unresolved conflicts with other users of the identified water supply? 
e. 
If the answer to all of the Step 1 questions is “YES”, proceed to Step 2. 
17. 
Step 2: Irrigated area and beneficiary community 
b. 
a.  Are the proposed irrigation area(s) free of cultural relics or other protected areas, and 
is the distance of any relics or resources from the irrigated area(s) greater than the 
rules stipulated by the local authority? 
Is the proposed irrigation area free of any existing intensive agriculture, horticulture of 
livestock activity? (the project should not replace existing high value production) 
Is the proposed irrigation area classified for agriculture use and are the soils and 
topography suitable for irrigated intensive subtropical horticulture production? 
Is the beneficiary community committed to develop intensive irrigated subtropical 
horticulture production? 
Is the beneficiary community committed to establishing a Water User Association with 
a view to its management of the irrigation system, including cost recovery? 
d. 
e. 
c. 
If the answer to all of the step 2 questions is “YES”, proceed to Step 3. 
18. 
Step 3: Social, economic and financial viability 
a.  Can  the  irrigation  system  be  established  on  land  that  is  privately  used  for  farming, 
residence,  grazing  or  other  purposes  without  compulsory  acquisition  or  the 
implementation of involuntary resettlement?  
Is the proposed horticulture investment economically and financially viable? 
b. 
If the answer to all of the step 3 questions is “YES” then the subproject can be shortlisted. The 
19. 
long list of compliant schemes will be ranked based on a series of indicators to identify a priority shortlist 
of subprojects for detailed engineering design. Indicators for subproject ranking are detailed in Annex 1. 
VI.  MINOR IMPACTS AND MITIGATION MEASURES 
20. 
The project is categorized as “C” because there will be minimal environmental impacts of the 
PRF  to  the  pilot  project  areas.  The  PRF  consists  of  small  construction  and  installation  activities  of 
storage tanks, intake structures, distribution pipes and conveyance system, and mostly rehabilitation. 
The PRF locations are within agricultural lands and not proximate to any protected and sensitive areas. 
During the screening stage, potential environmental risks are increase of dust and occupational health 
and safety issues during project implementation. 
21. 
occur during the implementation of the pilot-test irrigations schemes. These are: 
The following  environmental risks are identified during the screening  pahse  ,  and potentially 
(i) 
Occupational health and safety risk from the excavation of drains/ channels, construction 
of channels and overhead water storage tanks, material handling, and electrical fittings.  
(ii) 
Potential accidents/incidents- falls, slip, trip, electrocution, fire in paints, etc. 
(iii) 
Air pollution (dust generation risk) for transportation, deposition of excavated earth and 
use of diesel generator (DG) sets.  
(iv) 
Noise pollution due to use of DG sets and concrete mixers 
(v) 
Potential water pollution due to indiscriminate disposal of waste to water bodies 
(vi) 
Soil Contamination from paint wastes  
9 
(vii) 
Damage to vegetation due to proximity to forest or thick land covered areas 
(viii) 
Sanitation issue (domestic waste generation) due to involvement of many labour 
involvement 
(ix) 
Tree cutting at horticulture land if any required in the field 
(i) 
Land use issues such as indiscriminate dumping of wastes 
22. 
To mitigate the potential impacts shown above, the DOH and DIPH will take necessary steps 
to execute mitigation measures. The table below shows the potential risks and impacts of the project, 
and corresponding measures to mitigate them.  
Table 2. Environment safeguard measures to mitigate the risks and impacts.  
Mitigation Measures. 
Potential environmental risks and 
impacts 
Occupational health and safety risk 
from the excavation of drains/ 
channels, construction of channels 
and overhead water storage tanks, 
material handling, and electrical 
fittings.  
Potential accidents/incidents- falls, 
slip, trip, electrocution, fire in paints, 
etc. 
Potential accidents/incidents- falls, 
slip, trip, electrocution, fire in paints, 
etc. 
Air pollution (dust generation risk) for 
transportation, deposition of excavated 
earth and use of diesel generator (DG) 
sets.  
Noise pollution due to use of DG sets 
and concrete mixers 
Create awareness for adopting safe working practices like 
use  of  safety  belts,  boots,  gloves,  and  use  of  fire 
extinguishers. The contractor will provide first aid kit at every 
construction site. 
the  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE) 
to 
Provide 
workers.  Provide  signage  and  barricading  to  construction 
area.  Take  extra  precautions 
for  man  and  material 
movement to weir construction sites 
Heavy  equipment  and  machinery  shall  be  fitted  with  air 
pollution  control  and  noise  dampening  devices  that  are 
operating  correctly.   Stockpiled  sand  and  soil  shall  be 
slightly  wetted  before  loading,  particularly  during  windy 
weather.  Vehicles  transporting  sand  and  soil  shall  be 
covered with tarpaulin. Stockpiled sand should be sprinkled 
regularly  with  water,  and  dust  suppression  measures  be 
taken  to  contain  air  pollution.  All  heavy  equipment  shall 
strictly follow the noise regulations. 
Diesel Power Generating set shall conform to stack height 
criteria and will be fitted with acoustic enclosures. 
Provide barricade for noise attenuations and PPE (e.g. ear 
plugs) to workers.  
Concrete mixers shall be used in daytime only. 
Potential water pollution due to 
indiscriminate disposal of waste to 
water bodies 
 No waste construction will be allowed to be disposed in any 
of water resources. 
Soil Contamination from paint waste   All hazardous substance as defined by Central Pollution 
Control Board shall be purchased, transported, stored, 
used and disposed as per established Hazardous Waste 
Management Rules 1989.  
Paint mixing shall be done only at concrete floor. Empty 
containers to be disposed as per above rules. 
Ensure that no damage is made to vegetation of such 
areas including for any temporary need like fuel wood.  
Damage to vegetation due to proximity 
to forest or thick land covered areas 
Sanitation issue (domestic waste 
generation) due to involvement of 
many labour involvement 
Tree cutting at horticulture land if any 
required in the field 
Land use issues such as 
indiscriminate dumping of wastes 
10 
Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) for food preparation to workers 
The contractor shall make provision of supply of safe 
drinking water for workers. Mobile toilets will be provided 
for workers fitted with water tank and anerobic digestion 
system  
Ensure  that  there  is  no  tree  cutting  during  construction.  If 
unavoidable, the project should obtain prior permission from 
concerned  authority  for  cutting  of  any  tree  at   weir  site  or 
horticulture field when required.  
Re-use the excess materials from the construction work. All 
other  excess  materials  should  be  disposed  of 
in 
depressions and land fields that will not promote instability 
and  result  in  destruction  of  property,  vegetation,  irrigation 
and drinking water supply system.  
Extreme care should be taken to avoid disposal, whether on 
the  land  or  for  the  area  that  will  cause  inconvenience  or 
deprive local residents of their livelihood. 
Ensure that waste disposal happens to designated disposal 
location only.  
Since the project is category C for environment based on  ADB SPS 2009 classification, the 
23. 
PRF  is  not  required  to  prepare  an  environmental  assessment  and  environmental  management  plan 
(EMP). Due to the pilot-test irrigation schemes, DOH and DIPH need to mitigate these minor impacts 
as  shown  previously.  To  execute  environment  safeguard  activities,  the  PRF  will  have  bidding 
documents that will instruct contractors to perform actions in mitigating the potential risks and impacts. 
24. 
As  part  of  the  institutional  support  during  PRF  implementation,  construction  supervision 
engineers  will  be  recruited  for  monitoring  the  construction  of  irrigation  works  packages.  Aside  from 
monitoring the construction progress and ensuring quality construction, the engineers will ensure the 
contractors to meet safeguard requirements for the protection of the environment, and adherence to 
the  employer’s  requirements  relevant  to  environment  mitigation  measures.  Based  on  ADB  SPS, 
category C projects are not required to submit environment monitoring reports. However, the Mission 
suggested  to  the  PMU  to  include  updates  of  the  contractors’  compliance  to  environment  safeguard 
mitigation measures as part of the quarterly progress reports (QPRs) 
11 
Annex 1: Criteria and ranking to be applied to the prioritization of irrigation scheme investments. 
Criteria 
A  
Water availability and demand 
Adequacy of monthly river flows to satisfy the proposed demands based on rainfall 
runoff  models  supported  by  river  flow  measurements  from  the  catchment  or 
transposition from a nearby gauged catchment. 
Likelihood of conflict with other water users on the river based on a water balance. 
Adequacy of river flows based on an evaluation of future climate change risk models 
over a 30 year planning horizon. 
B 
Irrigation infrastructure and readiness criteria 
Availability of usable existing irrigation infrastructure already on site. 
Availability of existing surveys, planning studies and detailed design. 
Cost-reducing  subproject  features  including  gravity  distribution,  lack  of  engineering 
difficulty, suitable slopes in the distribution area to facilitate irrigation, etc. 
Extent of infrastructure risk due to factors such as flood damage, boulder impact, river 
sediment loads, river morphology uncertainty at the intake, soil and slope conditions 
for the pipe systems and difficulties of access during construction and operation. 
C.  
Horticulture and farming motivation 
Evaluation of soil suitability for growing the target horticulture crops. 
Are the target horticulture crops are being successfully grown on adjacent lands? 
Assessment  of  the  motivation  of  the  farmers  towards  high  density  horticulture  and 
whether  they  have  proposed  a  sensible  plan  for  supporting  themselves  until  crop 
maturation. 
Assessment, due to farmer age, of whether there are succession plans for sustainable 
farm handover during the project planning horizon 
D. 
Marketing indicators 
Financial and economic returns from planned crop interventions. 
Current production of project-planned crops in the block/district. 
Preparedness of farmers to collaborate to add value to crops and gain greater market 
share 
Preparedness  of  value  chain  “gatekeepers”,  with  project  support,  to  partner  with 
farmer producer organizations to develop integrated value chains. 
E.  
Institutional aspects 
Current manpower in the DOH and DIPH organisations to manage the subproject with 
regard to current and expected workloads. 
Likely support from local government to support the subproject in helping to resolve 
any local issues. 
Capability  of  the  DOH  and  DIPH  in  the  proposed  scheme  management  following 
construction based on current management of existing schemes. 
Willingness of farmers to form WUAs to manage the scheme distribution systems and 
stage of development of such an organization at present. 
F. 
Social safeguards and other aspects 
Extent of permissions needed to ensure infrastructure can be placed on or through 
private property. 
Response of the local community towards granting such permissions. 
Current participation of women in community farming and irrigation organisations. 
Ratio of young people to older people to guarantee sustainable farming in the future. 
Percentage 
Score 
20% 
10 
5 
5 
20% 
5 
2 
5 
8 
15% 
8 
2 
3 
2 
15% 
7 
2 
3 
3 
10% 
2 
2 
2 
4 
10% 
3 
2 
3 
2 
Criteria 
G. 
Other environmental safeguards 
12 
Percentage 
Score 
10% 
Existence of an environmental impact analysis (EIA) or other environmental evaluation 
of the subproject. 
Extent of animal menace to the proposed subproject.  
Whether  there  is  a  risk  to  the  irrigation  infrastructure  crossing  steep  slopes  due  to 
landslips or earthquakes. 
Total 
2 
3 
5 
100% 
Attachment G. Sample Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for Donation of Farmers’ 
Land under the Himachal Pradesh Subtropical Horticulture, Irrigation, Value Addition and 
Readiness (HPSHIVA-R) project 
Memorandum of Understanding for Land Donation 
(On Stamp Paper) 
This  memorandum  of  understanding  is  made  on  _____________  day  of  ___________  2020  between 
Sri/Srimati______________________________________resident of ___________ (hereinafter referred to 
as  “the  First  Party”)  and  the  HP  Department  of  Horticulture/  Department  of  Irrigation  and  Public  Health 
through Sri/Srimati ________________________ (designation) _________________ (hereinafter referred 
to as “the Second Party”). 
THESE PRESENT WITNESS AS FOLLOW: 
1.  That the First Party is landowner(s) with transferable right of __________________ hectare  of land 
bearing  khasra  No/s.  ____________________  in  village  __________________________  Block 
_______________, tehsil ________________________, district _________________.state_______ 
2.  That  the  First  Party  has  taken  part  in  the  transect  walk  conducted  under  the  requirement  of  the 
__________________________under  Himachal  Pradesh  Sub-tropical  Horticulture,  Irrigation  and 
Value Addition (HP-SHIVA) Project and has understood the benefits of obtaining irrigation water for 
my land and the village. 
3.  That  the  First  Party  hereby  grants  his/her  consent  to  the  Second  Party,  out  of  its  free  will,  for 
construction and development of irrigation facilities under HP-SHIVA in the cluster ___________ under 
_______________ Panchayat for personal gain and the benefit of the villagers and the public at large. 
4.  That  the  Second  Party  disseminated  all  the  benefits  including  financial  assistance  entitled  for  the 
5. 
temporary acquisition (use of) said land as per the project entitlement matrix. 
 That  the  First  Party  declines  to  receive  their  compensation  entitlement,  amounting  to      Rs. 
_____________ for which the First Party is eligible and entitled as mentioned in Clause 4 of this MOU 
and would not claim any compensation for the purposes mentioned in Clause 3.  
6.  That the Second Party shall construct and develop the irrigation facilities under HP-SHIVA Project and 
take all possible precautions to avoid damage to the adjacent land. 
7.  That the First Party also assures the Second Party that the first party will not indulge in any willful act 
of damaging the irrigation facilities under HP-SHIVA or obstructing the use thereof. 
8.  That both the Parties hereto agree that the irrigation facilities so constructed/ developed under  HP-
SHIVA shall be public property. 
9.  That the provisions of the MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING will come into force and effect from 
the date of signing of this deed. 
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF  the  Parties  hereto  have  signed  this  deed  on  the  day  and  the  year  as  written 
above. 
Signatures of the First Party  
____________________________  
Signature for and on behalf of the Second Party 
_________________________________________ 
Witnesses:  
1. 
 _________________________  
Witnesses: 
1.  
___________________________________ 
2. 
(Signature, name and address)   
 _________________________  
2.  
(Signature, name and address) 
___________________________________ 
Note: The witnesses will include the President of WUA. More witnesses can be added  –including NGOs, 
village elders etc. 
Attachment H. Involuntary Resettlement Impact Categorization Checklist 
Probable Involuntary Resettlement 
Effects 
Yes  No  Not Known 
Remarks 
Involuntary Acquisition of Land 
1.  Will there be land acquisition? 
2.  Is the site for land acquisition known? 
3.  Is the ownership status and current 
usage of land to be acquired known? 
4. Will easement be utilized within an 
existing Right of Way (ROW)? 
5. Will there be loss of shelter and 
residential land due to land acquisition? 
6. Will there be loss of agricultural and 
other productive assets due to land 
acquisition? 
7. Will there be losses of crops, trees, 
and fixed assets due to land acquisition? 
8. Will there be loss of businesses or 
enterprises due to land acquisition? 
9. Will there be loss of income sources 
and means of livelihoods due to land 
acquisition? 
Involuntary restrictions on land use or on access to legally designated parks and 
protected areas 
10.  Will people lose access to natural 
resources, communal facilities and 
services? 
11.  If land use is changed, will it have 
an adverse impact on social and 
economic activities? 
12.  Will access to land and resources 
owned communally or by the state be 
restricted? 
Information on Displaced Persons: 
Any estimate of the likely number of persons that will be displaced by the Project?    [  ]   
No   [  ] Yes    
If yes, approximately how many? ______________________ 
Are any of them poor, female-heads of households, or vulnerable to poverty risks?   [  ]   
No   [  ] Yes 
Are any displaced persons from indigenous or ethnic minority groups?        [  ]   No       [  ]   
Yes    
Note:  The project team may attach additional information on the project, as necessary. 
